( see fig . comparing eeo - 1 data at three points in time for 2007 , 2011 , and 2015 , we found women's representation in management positions as well as among professionals and technicians at companies within the technology sector remained at about the same level , and decreased for “all other jobs” ( see table 1 ) . while ofccp has offered an option — the functional affirmative action program ( faap ) — for companies to move away from establishment - based reviews and which may be more appropriate for some multi – establishment contractors , uptake has been low and the agency has not conducted an evaluation of this program . since 2002 , ofccp has allowed companies to create faaps , with ofccp approval , which are based on a business function or unit that may exist at multiple establishments . as of may 2017 , 73 companies across all industries had faaps in place . further , some of the companies we interviewed were unaware that the faap was an option or believed it was cumbersome to establish given the complexity of their workforce . asked why the faap has not been more broadly adopted , ofccp officials hypothesized it could have to do with a requirement intended to ensure that companies with faaps would be reviewed at least as often as others , but that may result in these companies being reviewed more often than most . standards for internal control for government agencies state that management should periodically review policies , procedures , and related control activities for continued relevance and effectiveness in achieving the entity's objectives . reviewing and refining the faap program could help ofccp improve its ability to achieve its objectives and may provide broader insight for ofccp's overall enforcement approach . jobs in the high paying technology sector are projected to grow in coming years . female , black , and hispanic workers , however , comprised a smaller proportion of technology workers compared to their representation in the general workforce from 2005 through 2015 , and have also been less represented among technology workers inside the technology sector than outside it . both eeoc's and ofccp's mission is to combat discrimination and support equal employment opportunity for u.s. workers ; however , weaknesses in their processes impact the effectiveness of their efforts . when conducting investigations , eeoc has not been consistently capturing information on industry codes . this impedes its ability to conduct industry sector analysis that could be used to more effectively focus its limited enforcement resources and outreach activities . similarly , ofccp faces delays in its compliance review process but it has not analyzed its closed evaluations to understand the causes of these delays and whether its processes need to be modified to reduce them . in addition , as part of their affirmative action programs federal contractors are only required to set placement goals for all minorities in general . by not requiring contractors to disaggregate demographic data for the purpose of establishing placement goals , ofccp has limited assurance that these contractors are setting goals that will address potential underrepresentation in certain minority groups .