appendix iii provides a discussion of these challenges . nasa officials stated they used the aas study , which concentrated solely on logistics support missions , as the foundation for its 2004 informal assessment . in a summary of that study , nasa reported that the aas contractors projected the cost to develop an alternate launch capability would be approximately $1 billion , take 3 to 5 years to develop , and require $2 to $3 billion per year for operations . we held discussions with commercial industry representatives who concurred with this time frame to develop an alternate capability to support space station operation . since a majority of the space station assembly missions are scheduled within the next 3 years , these types of missions could preclude the use of an alternative vehicle . however , nasa did not have sufficient knowledge to conclude that the shuttle was the best option for logistics missions prior to its retirement of the shuttle in 2010 . nasa officials stated that the technical challenges for developing an alternative vehicle could be overcome , but probably not before the 28 missions scheduled through 2010 , of which 8 are for logistics , including 5 of the last 7 missions . however , we found no evidence of analyses performed by nasa to compare the cost and schedule impact of using alternate launch systems with the scheduled space shuttle program costs , to include the cost of returning the space shuttle to flight . we recently reported that the majority of nasa's budget estimates for returning the space shuttle to flight had not been fully developed . in fact , nasa officials stated that they did not compare estimated costs for developing alternative launch vehicles against budget estimates for the 28 space shuttle flights currently planned to support the space station , which total more than $22 billion between fiscal year 2005 and fiscal year 2010 . in addition , nasa has also requested $1.8 billion for crew and cargo services over the same time frame to purchase commercial services using existing and emerging capabilities , both domestic and foreign . in its fiscal year 2006 budget request , nasa indicated that such commercial services are expected to be available not later than 2009 and that these services are a key element in the future of the space station program . in addition to lacking sufficient knowledge with regard to the use of alternatives for logistics missions , nasa did not document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment . specifically , the agency did not record the processes it followed and therefore did not capture the basis of the decisions reached . when asked about the details of the assessment , nasa officials indicated that the informal assessment was based primarily on the expertise within the headquarters and they did not formally document the decision paths . while we recognize that the extensive experience of its senior managers is an important element in evaluating alternatives , the existence of any formal assessment of alternatives covering the entire range of missions for space station support cannot be verified , and the agency's position on the space shuttle being the best option cannot be validated .