omb had no comments on our draft report . the comments we received from sba are in appendix iii . to identify procurement changes that could affect small business contractors , we reviewed fasa , the clinger - cohen act , the small business reauthorization act of 1997 , and the federal acquisition regulation . we also identified other changes that occurred during the 1990s that might have an effect on small businesses by interviewing agency officials and representatives of industry associations , and by reviewing agency documents . we met with officials from gsa , sba , omb's office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) , and the procurement executives council . we also met with representatives of the u.s. chamber of commerce , small business legislative council , and independent office products and furniture dealers association . to determine the trends in federal procurement from small businesses , we analyzed data from the federal procurement data center's ( fpdc ) federal procurement report for fiscal years 1993 through 1999 and other data we requested from fpdc and sba for those same years . fpdc administers the federal procurement data system ( fpds ) within gsa . since fpdc relies on federal agencies to report their procurement information , these data are only as reliable , accurate , and complete as the agencies report . in 1998 , fpdc conducted an accuracy audit and reported that the average rate of accurate reporting in the fpds database was 96 percent . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . orders by mail: u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 orders by visiting: room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . figure 4 shows the results of our analysis . in calculating the share of total expenditures on new contracts going to small businesses from fiscal years 1993 to 1999 , we used fpdc data on expenditures for new contracts worth more than $25,000 and did not exclude the types of expenditures that sba excludes to calculate the small business procurement goal . as noted in figure 2 , the federal government has been spending less money on goods and services since fiscal year 1993 . the only categories of goods and services that experienced increases in governmentwide purchases on new contracts worth more than $25,000 between fiscal years 1993 and 1999 were real property and other services . despite this overall decline in contract purchases , small businesses received a higher share in fiscal year 1999 than in fiscal year 1993 of expenditures on new contracts worth $25,000 or more than for 5 of the 8 categories of goods and services of government procurement: equipment , research and development , architect and engineering , automatic data processing services , and other services . appendix i provides a description of these contract vehicles . we analyzed fpds data on the governmentwide use of certain contract vehicles for contracts over $25,000 , including those that became popular during the 1990s . we found that these vehicles represent a small but growing share of federal procurement expenditures .