academy preparatory schools . gao / nsiad - 94-56r . washington , d.c.: october 5 , 1993 . air force academy: gender and racial disparities . ( 2 ) are applicants granted waivers from academic criteria for admissions ? ( 3 ) do various groups of students differ in admissions scores and academy performance ? in addition to reviewing documents and interviewing officials at all three academies , the service headquarters , the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness ( ousd / p&r ) , and the academies' boards of visitors , we reviewed admissions policies and procedures and observed their use by academy officials in evaluating applications being considered for the incoming class of 2007 . we also obtained and analyzed admissions and performance data for the student class that graduated in 2002 . to compare student admissions qualifications and performance at the academies , we identified six major groups of students common to all academies: females , minorities , academy preparatory school graduates , recruited athletes , prior enlisted personnel , and students whose academic admission scores fell in the lower 30 percent of the entering class . data on student performance included academic grade point average ; military performance average , which is similar to a performance evaluation for commissioned officers ; and class rank . it also included graduation rate . other issues , such as recent controversies associated with alleged sexual assault , did not fall within the scope of this review . further details on our scope and methodology are in appendix i . we conducted our work from october 2002 through may 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the departments of the army , the navy , and the air force each have their own educational institutions ( academies ) to produce a portion of each branch's officer corps: u.s. military academy ( west point , n.y. ) , established in 1802 ; u.s . naval academy ( annapolis , md .

 ) , established in 1845 ; and u.s. air force academy ( colorado springs , colo. ) , established in 1954 . the academies are structured to provide a curriculum critical to the development of successful future officers in academic , military , and physical areas of achievement . additionally , the academies emphasize the moral and ethical development of students through their respective honor codes and concepts . there are approximately 4,000 students enrolled at each of the three service academies at any given time , each comprising four classes . in december 2002 , congress authorized an annual increase of up to 100 students until the total number reaches 4,400 for each academy . in 2002 the military academy graduated 968 students ; the naval academy 977 students ; and the air force academy 894 students . faculty at the u.s. military academy and the u.s. air force academy are comprised predominantly of military officers ( 79 and 75 percent , respectively ) , while at the u.s . naval academy 59 percent of the faculty are civilians . table 1 shows the composition of the faculty at the service academies . dod reports that the total cost to operate all three academies in fiscal year 2002 was $990.7 million .