it management . issues with fda's it management have been found in several areas , including human capital , enterprise architecture , governance , and information security . in assessing it human capital , the science board stated that the agency did not have sufficient it staff with skills in such areas as capital planning / investment control and enterprise architecture , that processes for recruitment and retention of it staff were inadequate , and that the agency did not invest sufficiently in professional development . deloitte's study also commented on it management , stating that fda needed to develop both a common enterprise information management architecture and an it architecture to facilitate both short - term operational gains such as improved information access , as well as long - term gains in strategic flexibility . in another study , the breckenridge institute examined the process being used to develop requirements for the agency's adverse event reporting system and found that fda's management of requirements development did not follow proper it methodology , such as documenting the reasons for changes to system requirements . finally , in october 2008 , an hhs inspector general report concluded that fda had made progress implementing an infrastructure to support the security management program . however , the inspector general also noted that the agency had not fully implemented a security program infrastructure and was not performing all the activities required to integrate security into applications . driven in part by the various studies that the agency has performed or sponsored ( as discussed previously ) , as well as legislative requirements , fda has been transitioning to an enterprisewide approach to it management . for example , in february 2006 the agency created the bioinformatics board to replace center - specific investment review boards , in order to better coordinate its it investment decisions from an agencywide perspective . according to the agency's chief information officer ( cio ) , this broader perspective led to an increased emphasis on the need for fda to treat its information as a strategic corporate asset and manage it accordingly . among the steps taken to help achieve this goal were centralizing the it organization and consolidating it infrastructure . in may 2008 , the agency transferred responsibility for managing it from individual components ( centers and the office of regulatory affairs ) to a new centralized office of information management ( oim ) , headed by the cio . the cio reports to the agency's chief operating officer . as head of oim , the cio is responsible for managing it , creating a foundation to enhance the interoperability of its systems , and managing more than 400 staff assigned to this office . oim has five divisions to carry out its responsibilities: division of business partnership and support . acts as liaison and provides management and technical consultation resources regarding it to fda offices , centers , and other stakeholders , including parties outside the agency . systems division . manages design , development , implementation , and maintenance of agency software applications and systems , as well as their integration with other entities .