however , that system was never developed . we confirmed that this information was not in the manual or guidance provided by vba . rating specialists in the majority ( 7 of 11 ) of the discussion groups specifically noted that they could come to an opposite decision when reviewing the same evidence due to the fact that they weighted certain factors differently . for example , a rating specialist told us that a medical opinion was always weighted more heavily than all other evidence in the veteran's file while another specialist expressed a hesitancy to rely too much on the examiner's opinion . third , the guidance does not provide instruction on how to separate extraneous factors from allowable ones . findings from our case file review illustrates this issue: one file described a 77- year - old veteran claiming tdiu benefits for blindness that was caused by ( 1 ) a service - connected disability , ( 2 ) glaucoma , and ( 3 ) macular degeneration . however , because all three conditions related to the veteran's quality of vision , the rating specialist noted in the file her difficulty separating the effect of the service - connected disability from the non - service - connected glaucoma and macular degeneration due to the man's age . in light of these challenges , in our june 2015 report , we recommended that va instruct vba to update the guidance to clarify how rating specialists should determine unemployability when making tdiu benefit decisions . this update could clarify if factors such as enrollment in school , education level , and prior work history should be used and if so , how to consider them , and whether to assign more weight to certain factors than others . va concurred with this recommendation and stated that vba will review and identify improvements to tdiu policies and procedures to provide clearer guidance including the extent to which age , education , work history , and enrollment in training programs are factors claims processors must address . va anticipates that its compensation service will complete this review and provide options to vba for a decision by the end of january 2016 . format and delivery of guidance is inefficient: rating specialists in the majority ( 7 of 11 ) of our discussion groups at five regional offices reported that vba's guidance for reviewing tdiu claims is formatted and delivered in ways that make it difficult for them to efficiently complete their decision - making responsibilities . for example , tdiu guidance is delivered using multiple formats , including — but not limited to — manuals , policy and procedure letters , monthly bulletins , and e - mails . thus , rating specialists lack a definitive source for tdiu benefit decision guidance . in addition , vba officials acknowledged the manual for tdiu benefit decisions is outdated and stated they issue interim guidance in many forms between manual updates because such updates are time - consuming and difficult to do on a regular basis .