we do not agree . according to section 2.4.2 of the program manual , eac is to review completed registration applications for sufficiency . however , as our report states , the manual does not define criteria as to what constitutes sufficiency and what this sufficiency review should entail , and eac officials stated this determination is left up to the individual reviewer's judgment . concerning our point that criteria and procedures have not been adequately defined for reviewing the information in the system certification application package , eac stated that a technical review of the package is not required . rather , it said that the package simply requires a determination that all necessary information is present , adding that it has a checklist to assist a reviewer in determining this . we do not agree with this comment for two reasons . first , our report does not state that the package review is technical in nature , but rather is a review to determine a package's completeness and accuracy . second , the checklist does not include any criteria upon which to base a completeness and accuracy determination . as eac's comments confirm , this is important because the information in the package is to be used by technical reviewers as they review test plans and test reports to ensure that the testing covers all aspects of the voting system . for example , eac requires certification applications to include a functional diagram depicting how the components for the voting system function and interact , as well as a system overview that includes a description of the functional and physical interfaces between components . although the checklist provides for determining whether these items are part of the application package , it does not provide for checking them for completeness and consistency . we have clarified this finding in our report by including this example . as to our point that eac has not defined how technical reviewers are to determine the adequacy of system test plans and reports , the commission stated that our report does not take into account what it described as a certification requirements traceability matrix that its technical reviewers use to assess the completeness and adequacy of the plans and reports . however , eac also acknowledged in its comments that procedures have yet to be established relative to the use of the matrix . further , we reviewed this matrix , which we refer to in our report as a checklist , and as we state in our report , this checklist does not provide for capturing how decisions were reached , including steps performed and criteria applied . for example , the vvsg requires that systems permit authorized access and prevent unauthorized access , and lists examples of measures to accomplish this , such as computer - generated password keys and controlled access security . while the checklist cites this requirement and provides for the reviewer to indicate whether the test plan satisfies it , it does not provide specific guidance on how to determine whether the access control measures are adequate , and it does not provide for documenting how the reviewer made such a decision .