let me elaborate . after all , not all earmarks are bad but many are highly questionable . it is not surprising that in times of tight resources , the tension between earmarks and flexibility will likely rise . although mandatory spending is not amenable to caps , such spending need not — and should not — be permitted to be on autopilot and grow to an unlimited extent . since the spending for any given entitlement or other mandatory program is a function of the interaction between eligibility rules and the benefit formula — either or both of which may incorporate exogenous factors such as economic downturns — the way to change the path of spending for any of these programs is to change their rules or formulas . we recently issued a report on “triggers” — some measure that when reached or exceeded , would prompt a response connected to that program . by identifying significant increases in the spending path of a mandatory program relatively early and acting to constrain it , congress may avert much larger and potentially disruptive financial challenges and program changes in the future . a trigger is a measure and a signal mechanism — like an alarm clock . it could trigger a “soft” response — one that calls attention to the growth rate of the level of spending and prompts special consideration when the threshold or target is breached . the medicare program already contains a “soft” response trigger: the president is required to submit a proposal for action to congress if the medicare trustees determine in 2 consecutive years that the general revenue share of medicare spending is projected to exceed 45 percent during a 7-fiscal - year period . the most recent trustees' report to congress for the first time found that the general revenue share of financing is projected to exceed that threshold in 2012 . by definition , earmarks specify how some funds will be used . how will the process manage them ? thus , if next year's report again concludes that it will exceed the threshold during the 7- fiscal - year period , the trigger will have been tripped and the president will be required to submit his proposal for action . soft responses can help in alerting decision makers of potential problems , but they do not ensure that action to decrease spending or increase revenue is taken . in contrast , a trigger could lead to “hard” responses under which a predetermined , program - specific action would take place , such as changes in eligibility criteria and benefit formulas , automatic revenue increases , or automatic spending cuts . with hard responses , spending is automatically constrained , revenue is automatically increased , or both , unless congress takes action to override — the default is the constraining action . for example , this year the president's budget proposes to change the medicare trigger from solely “soft” to providing a “hard” ( automatic ) response if congress fails to enact the president's proposal . any discussion to create triggered responses and their design must recognize that unlike controls on discretionary spending , there is some tension between the idea of triggers and the nature of entitlement and other mandatory spending programs .