we disagree . while we respect that state would like its officials in the field to seek guidance on whether an activity is permitted under the siljander amendment by presenting specific facts on a case - by - case basis , we do not believe that officials will necessarily know to seek such guidance if they are unaware of the types of activities that may raise compliance concerns . we believe that guidance providing examples of the types of activities that may violate the siljander amendment would help officials in the field better understand how the amendment affects their activities overseas and would help them better recognize those instances when they should seek guidance from the relevant state policy or legal office regarding a proposed activity . usaid agreed with our recommendation and indicated that it would develop additional guidance for usaid and award recipient and subrecipient staff on the siljander amendment . at the same time , usaid took issue with our graphic representation of the development of the right to life article ( fig . 1 on p. 13 ) , expressing the view that it dramatically overstated the importance of idlo's comments in the evolution of that article . in particular , usaid noted that the figure did not reflect the advice and comments coe received from other sources , and that it suggested a causal link between idlo's comments and revisions to the draft constitution . we have revised the title of the figure to more clearly indicate that it focuses on idlo's advice and comments to the coe . this does not mean that idlo was the only entity providing advice . in fact , we state in the text immediately preceding the figure that others also provided advice and comments on the right to life article . the figure appropriately focuses on idlo's advice and comments , because idlo was a usaid award recipient and , thus , a subject of our review . we disagree that the figure suggests a causal link between idlo's advice and comments and the coe's revisions to the draft constitution . the figure shows the text of the right to life article as it appeared in each draft version and idlo's input on that text , and we clearly state in the text preceding the graphic that we were unable to confirm whether coe changed the text based on idlo's input . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of state , the usaid administrator , and interested congressional committees . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3101 or williamsbridgersj@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi .