charging for services . for example , irs provides paid preparers with information on federal debts owed by taxpayers seeking refund anticipation loans . multiple enforcement strategies could help irs reduce the tax gap . given its size , even small or moderate reductions in the net tax gap could yield substantial returns . for example , based on irs's most recent estimate , a 1 percent reduction in the net tax gap would likely yield more than $2.5 billion annually . although reducing the tax gap may be an attractive means to improve the nation's fiscal position , achieving this end will be a challenging task given persistent levels of noncompliance . irs has made efforts to reduce the tax gap since the early 1980s ; yet the tax gap is still large — although without these efforts it could be even larger . also , irs is challenged in reducing the tax gap because the tax gap is spread across the five different types of taxes that irs administers , and a substantial portion of the tax gap is attributed to taxpayers who are not subject to withholding or information reporting requirements . moreover , as we have reported in the past , closing the entire tax gap may not be feasible or desirable , as it could entail more intrusive recordkeeping or reporting than the public is willing to accept or more resources than irs is able to commit . although much of the tax gap that irs currently recovers is through enforcement actions , a sole focus on enforcement will not likely be sufficient to further reduce the net tax gap . rather , the tax gap must be attacked on multiple fronts and with multiple strategies on a sustained basis . for example , efforts to simplify the tax code and otherwise alter current tax policies may help reduce the tax gap by making it easier for individuals and business to understand and voluntarily comply with their tax obligations . for instance , reducing the multiple tax preferences for retirement savings or education assistance might ease taxpayers' burden in understanding and complying with the rules associated with these options . also , simplification may reduce opportunities for tax evasion through vehicles such as abusive tax shelters . for any given set of tax policies , irs's efforts to reduce the tax gap and ensure appropriate levels of compliance will need to be based on a balanced approach of providing service to taxpayers and enforcing the tax laws . furthermore , providing quality services to taxpayers is an important part of any overall strategy to improve compliance and thereby reduce the tax gap . as we have reported in the past , one method of improving compliance through service is to educate taxpayers about confusing or commonly misunderstood tax requirements . for example , if the forms and instructions taxpayers use to prepare their taxes are not clear , taxpayers may be confused and make unintentional errors . one method to ensure that forms and instructions are sufficiently clear is to test them before use .