all decisions can be litigated . in fiscal years 2001 and 2002 , 25 decisions ( about 3 percent ) were litigated . these litigated decisions affected about 111,000 acres ( about 2 percent ) . not surprisingly , decisions with significant environmental impacts were litigated more often . of the 52 decisions where the forest service was required to prepare environmental impact statements , 15 ( 29 percent ) were litigated . table 3 provides a summary of the decisions litigated and the acres affected by the litigation . appendix iii provides information on the number of litigated decisions , by forest service region . of the 197 appealed decisions the forest service reviewed , 144 ( about 73 percent ) were allowed to be implemented without any changes . however , the forest service did not allow 38 decisions ( about 19 percent ) to be implemented . the forest service required the remaining 15 decisions ( about 8 percent ) to be changed prior to implementation . of the 25 litigated decisions , 19 have been resolved and 6 were still ongoing at the time of our review . most of the appellants and plaintiffs were interest groups . there are a few limitations to the acreage data . the 4.8 million acres does not correspond to the number of acres actually treated in fiscal years 2001 and 2002 . once a decision is made and documented , there are many reasons that activities covered by decision may be delayed or not implemented , including funding availability , personnel availability , weather conditions , and administrative appeals or litigation . in addition , the national forests may have submitted more than one decision with activities on the same area of land . therefore , the 4.8 million acres may include overlapping acreage . further , the national forest managers reported decisions involving personal firewood activities , including one large project from the tonto national forest in arizona that could potentially skew the acreage data . under the personal firewood program , forest managers designate areas where the public can obtain a wood cutting permit and gather firewood for personal use . forest managers can identify all of the acreage available for firewood removal under this program as fuels reduction activities . however , it is possible that the public may collect only firewood that is easily accessible , such as near roads and trails , rather than covering the entire designated area . one decision from the tonto national forest in arizona designates 1 million acres as eligible for firewood removal . these 1 million acres are 21 percent of the total acreage reported as treated or planned to be treated for fuels reduction activities for all national forests . according to forest service officials , it is unlikely that the public will remove fuels from all 1 million acres . table 1 shows the number of decisions with forest fuels reduction activities , the amount of acreage affected , and their environmental impact significance . of the 818 decisions involving forest fuels reduction activities , 24 percent were appealed . however , more than half were not subject to appeal because they were categorically excluded from documentation in an environmental impact statement or environmental assessment .