improve preventative maintenance program . remove impediments to broad use of facility and equipment maintenance system . improve maintenance and repair facility project delivery process . provide greater flexibility for implementing workload changes . add surge requirements to infrastructure planning and programming . how likely will key air force initiatives mitigate critical spare parts shortages ? does the air force have the ability to identify the impact on readiness of increased investments for spare parts ? to address these questions , we visited the air force headquarters' logistics directorate and the air force materiel command , and we interviewed officials responsible for strategic planning , initiatives development and implementation , and requirements determination for spare parts funding . we also analyzed the strategic plans and key initiatives identified by the air force that address spare parts shortages and logistics support . we used the government performance and results act of 1993 , prior gao reports , and other key dod documents as criteria to evaluate the air force's strategic plans and initiatives . the air force recognized that reductions in spare parts inventories since the early 1990s have negatively affected aircraft readiness indicators such as mission capable rates , not - mission - capable supply , not - mission - capable maintenance , and cannibalizations . recognizing the need to reverse this trend and that previous attempts to pinpoint specific spare parts shortages were piecemeal , temporary , and lacked adequate personnel to implement , the air force began a 5 to7 year logistics transformation effort in 1999 aimed at improving the efficiency and economy of the entire logistics process to enhance support to the warfighter . rather than focusing on fully eliminating specific spare parts shortages , the air force chose to focus on addressing the process disconnects that caused the shortages . this included an end - to - end look at all aspects of the logistics process including commercial supply chain management , supply , maintenance , transportation , logistics planning , and financial management . the spares campaign initiated in february 2001 and the depot maintenance reengineering and transformation ( dmrt ) effort started in july 2001 were two key parts of the end - to - end review . in total , they identified the need for 84 initiatives , 43 of which related to spare parts . the spares campaign focused on supply process deficiencies , and it was intended to improve parts supportability to weapon systems and reverse declining readiness related to spares management . this was considered a major transformation effort and included five teams that reviewed the processes needed to produce spares and identified disconnects and solutions that would improve mission capability and manage cost ( see table 1 ) . each team developed a flowchart showing how it believed processes related to its focus area should function and be managed to improve weapon system availability and cost management . the teams also identified disconnects or barriers preventing the processes from functioning as they should and recommended solutions to correct these disconnects . twelve major deficiencies were noted , and more than 190 corrective actions were identified , which resulted in 20 initiatives , 19 of which were related to spare parts shortages .