the military services have their own processes . however , they differ from the jfcom laa and jrac processes in that the services' processes focus on service - specific needs , not joint needs . for example , the army rapid equipping force began in fiscal year 2002 and was formalized in march 2005 . following is the basis for our conclusions . the first five projects listed below were approved on or before the date instruction 3470.01 came into existence . change detection work station: jfcom officials told us this laa project would have met jrac's criteria for a project because it clearly was for an immediate warfighter need . command and control on the move: jfcom officials said this laa project would not have met jrac criteria for an immediate warfighter need . however , we believe the project might have been justified under the jrac criterion of preventing mission failure if a regional combatant command had submitted it as an immediate need . for example , if a joint task force commander cannot adequately communicate with the troops while on the move or dismounted from a vehicle , this could lead to mission failure . in this case , the jfcom commander validated the need as an laa project . joint precision air drop system 2,000 pounds: this laa project met jrac's criteria as an immediate warfighter need because once jrac came into existence , jrac obtained funding for the project from the air force on jfcom's behalf . joint task force commander executive command and control: jfcom officials said this project would not have met jrac's criteria of responding to a combat fatality or preventing mission failure . however , we believe it might have been justified under the jrac process to prevent mission failure due to the importance for a joint task force commander to have remote access to classified and unclassified networks while away from the headquarters compound . joint blue force situational awareness: jfcom officials said jrac could have taken on this project because it was to meet a joint , urgent operational need that may have met the criteria as an immediate warfighter need . simultaneous 2-way speech translation: although jrac was in place when jfcom approved this laa project , jfcom officials said jrac provided most of the funding and took over the project after it was approved as an laa project . for background purposes , the jfcom laa and jrac processes are not the only two rapid acquisition processes addressing urgent warfighter needs within dod . its missions include rapidly equipping operational forces to enhance mission capability and soldier safety , inserting promising technologies into the current force , and providing business process feedback to army stakeholders . this process provides commercial and government off - the - shelf solutions for urgent needs , takes an average of 128 days to deliver an initial operational capability from the time the request is received , and funds up to 2 years of sustainment when appropriate . in fiscal year 2006 , the rapid equipping force had a budget of over $135 million and , since inception , has provided 227 types of equipment , totaling over 51,000 individual items , for the war on terror .