ii and app . iii , respectively. ) dod and va stated that high priority will be given to the establishment and use of results - oriented ( i.e. , objective , quantifiable , and measurable ) goals and associated performance measures for the departments' interoperability objectives . if the recommendations are properly implemented , they should better position dod and va to effectively measure and report progress in achieving full interoperability . the departments also provided technical comments on the draft report , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense and veterans affairs , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . to evaluate the department of defense's ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) progress toward developing electronic health record systems or capabilities that allow for full interoperability of personal health care information , we reviewed our previous work on dod and va efforts to develop health information systems , interoperable health records , and interoperability standards to be implemented in federal health care programs . to describe the departments' efforts to ensure that their health records comply with applicable interoperability standards , we analyzed information gathered from dod and va documentation and interviews pertaining to the interoperability standards that the two departments have agreed to for exchanging health information via their health care information systems . we reviewed documentation and interviewed agency officials from the department of health and human services' office of the national coordinator for health information technology to obtain information regarding the defined federal interoperability standards , implementation specifications , and certification criteria . further , we interviewed responsible officials to obtain information regarding the steps taken by the departments to certify their electronic health record products . to evaluate dod and va plans toward developing electronic health record systems or capabilities , we obtained information from agency documentation and interviews with cognizant dod and va officials pertaining to the november 2007 va / dod joint executive council strategic plan for fiscal years 2008-2010 , and the september 2008 dod / va information interoperability plan ( version 1.0 ) which together constitute the departments' overall plans for achieving full interoperability of electronic health information . additionally , we reviewed information gathered from agency documentation to identify interoperability objectives , milestones , and target dates . further , we analyzed objectives and activities from their plans to determine if dod and va had established results - oriented performance measures that enable the departments to assess progress toward achieving increased sharing capabilities and functionality of their electronic health information systems .