continuation training . this stage of pilot training has two components . pilots participate in continuation training to ( 1 ) in some instances upgrade their qualifications to fill certain positions , such as flight lead , instructor , or forward air controller through specialized continuation training ; and ( 2 ) in all instances maintain proficiency and improve their capabilities to perform their units' assigned missions . the ready aircrew program establishes the minimum number of live training events , or “sorties,” and virtual simulator training events , or “simulator missions,” that aircrews of a particular combat aircraft must complete during the annual training cycle to maintain mission readiness . these sorties and simulator missions are aligned with the units' primary missions , for which the units must maintain “proficiency,” and secondary missions , for which they must maintain “familiarity.” the air combat command , as lead command for the ready aircrew program , with the assistance of other major commands ( including the air force global strike command , pacific air forces , and u.s. air forces in europe ) and associated subordinate organizations ( i.e. , air wings and squadron commanders ) , develops tasking memorandums for the ready aircrew program that delineate and specify the annual continuation training requirements for personnel assigned to each of the subordinate combat units . on the basis of our analysis , we found that the rand report addressed each of the three statutory elements required by congress in section 351 . first , the rand report addressed two statutory elements by reviewing and assessing the assumptions underlying annual continuation training requirements for the ready aircrew program and the overall effectiveness of the ready aircrew program in managing aircrew training requirements . these two statutory elements focus on issues raised in our prior report recommendations , which we discuss in more detail later in this report . table 1 provides detailed information about these statutory elements , our assessment of rand's findings , and rand's findings associated with each element . the rand report addressed the third statutory element by making recommendations for the improved management of training requirements . specifically , the rand report made nine recommendations , listed in table 2 . the rand report and its underlying analysis is consistent with generally accepted research standards for design , execution , and presentation . table 3 summarizes our assessment of the extent to which the rand report conformed with these standards . the rand study and our previous audit work identified similar deficiencies in the management and operation of the ready aircrew program . specifically , in september 2016 , we reported that the air force had used the same underlying assumptions to establish its annual training requirements in the ready aircrew program from 2012 through 2016 , which may not reflect current and emerging training needs . we concluded that without fully reassessing the assumptions underlying its training requirements , the air force could not be certain that its annual training plans are aligned with its stated goals to ensure a full - spectrum - capable force that can successfully achieve missions across a broad range of current and emerging threats .