( see app . ii for additional information on the location and description of the facilities ) . all of the facilities that we studied reported that they had provided jobs as a result of the creation or expansion of their facility . as shown in table 1 , the number of full - time jobs ranged from 4 to 103 per facility , with 9 of the facilities having 25 jobs or less . most of the facilities involved waste - related operations , which generally employ small numbers of employees . for four of the facilities , information was available from documents prepared before the facilities began operating on the number of jobs the facilities had estimated they would provide . in each of these cases , the number of jobs estimated was greater than the number of jobs provided . specifically , genesee power station estimated it would provide 30 jobs and provided 25 ; exxonmobil estimated it would provide 50 jobs and provided 40 ; natural resources recovery estimated it would provide between 15 and 40 jobs and provided 6 ; and safety - kleen , inc. , estimated it would provide 50 jobs in westmoreland and provided 22 . officials from a few facilities told us that their facilities , in addition to providing jobs directly , generated additional jobs outside of the facility . for example , a document from exxonmobil indicated that for every job provided at the plant , 4.6 jobs resulted elsewhere in the east baton rouge parish economy . also , chemical waste management officials told us that their landfill increased business in the area and that this enhanced business could result in more jobs . we did not verify the facilities' estimates of jobs generated outside of the facility . in some cases , the number of jobs at these facilities decreased over time . for example , jobs at the chemical waste facility in kettleman city , california , decreased from 200 in 1990 to 103 in 2002 ; and jobs at a similar facility in buttonwillow , california , decreased from 110 in 1987 to 23 in 2002 . in addition , jobs at a fertilizer plant in new york decreased from 80 in 1993 to 39 in 2002 . officials from the two facilities in california told us that the changes resulted from a decreased demand for the facilities due to a reduction in the amount of waste generated by a more environmentally conscious public . we obtained information on the salary ranges and types of jobs provided for 14 of the 15 facilities . according to officials at these facilities , the salaries for the jobs provided varied from about $15,000 to $80,000 per year , depending on factors such as the type of work and the location of the facility . however , the information that the facilities provided was not detailed enough to allow us to determine the numbers for each job type , the salaries for individual jobs , or the number of jobs filled by people from the surrounding communities .