we agree . however , dhs did not provide us with contact information for the sources of unpublished studies by the department of defense and other intelligence community studies that dhs s&t had cited as support for the spot program . without such information , we are unable to verify the contents of these unpublished studies . finally , dhs stated that while we were unable to use the spot referral data to assess whether any behavior or combination of spot behaviors could be used to reliably predict the final outcome of an incident involving the use of spot , it was able to analyze the spot referral database successfully after working with tsa to verify scores assigned to different indicators . to what extent has tsa measured spot's effect on aviation security ? to what extent has tsa incorporated the attributes of an effective training program into the training for spot ? this report is a public version of the restricted report ( gao - 10- - 157su ) that we provided to you on may 14 , 2010 . dhs and tsa deemed some of the information in the restricted report as sensitive security information , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits this information . although the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same questions as the restricted report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine the extent to which tsa determined whether spot had a scientifically validated basis for identifying passengers who may pose a risk to aviation security before deploying it , we reviewed literature on behavior analysis by subject matter experts , and analyzed relevant reports and books on the topic . these included a 2008 study by the national research council of the national academy of sciences that included a discussion section on deception and behavioral surveillance , as well as other issues related to behavioral analysis . we interviewed seven recognized experts in the field , and an expert on emergency responses to terror attacks and mathematical models in operations management . although the views of these experts cannot be generalized across all experts on behavior analysis , because we selected these individuals based on their publications on behavioral analysis or related topics , their recognized accomplishments and expertise , and , in some cases , tsa's use of their work or expertise to design and review the spot program's behaviors , they provided us with an understanding of the fundamentals of behavior analysis , and its use in airports . we also interviewed cognizant officials from other u.s. government agencies that utilize behavior analysis in their work , including u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the u.s. secret service , the federal air marshall service ( fams ) , and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . to better understand how spot incorporated expertise on behavior analysis for aviation security , we also interviewed current and retired officials of israel's el al airlines , whose security processes tsa cites as providing part of the basis of the spot program .