scope of the program . several city officials said concerns arose when cwmd requested that stc cities test toxic compound meters in 2018 , raising questions about the scope of the program . these devices are designed to detect the presence of certain chemical weapons , but the stc program does not include detecting or deterring chemical weapons . therefore , several officials felt that the request to test the devices was outside the scope of their mission . cwmd officials said that although the meters were not connected with the stc program , it made sense to reach out to the stc cities as cwmd already had a relationship with the cities and they were deemed appropriate locations . role of the fbi . some city officials told us that they had heard from cwmd that the fbi could play an expanded role in secondary screening in the future , which they felt could be problematic because of the fbi's limited staff presence in field locations . fbi officials we interviewed said that they did not plan to conduct additional secondary screening in the future ; instead they plan to formalize the secondary screening process that is already in place in stc cities . according to fbi officials , the bureau would always respond to situations requiring a threat assessment . effect on future funding , including for sustainment activities . cwmd recently informed national capitol region officials that they would not receive an expected fifth year of funding because of planned program changes . city officials said that this change came as a surprise to them and now they will only be able to buy approximately 90 percent of the equipment they had originally planned to purchase . in addition , these officials said that they planned to use much of the fifth year funding for sustainment activities , such as training classes , and that this loss would adversely affect their current sustainment plans . cwmd officials said that under the new program , cwmd will take responsibility for sustaining the nuclear or radiological detection equipment distributed to cities , but , as described above , these officials said that no final decisions have been made regarding future support for legacy cities . several city officials said that cwmd had not adequately responded to their concerns and that there has been less communication from cwmd about the stc program since 2017 as a result of the dhs reorganization . further , several city officials said that they expected cwmd to set up quarterly meetings with stc city leadership following the august meeting , but they had not received any notifications about additional meetings . a greater role for other agencies . cwmd officials said that although the stc program would remain a cwmd - only program , cwmd expects to work closely with the fbi , nnsa , and other dhs components , such as the u.s. coast guard and u.s. customs and border protection , to detect and deter nuclear or radiological threats . currently , according to cwmd officials , cwmd is working with the fbi and nnsa on a domestic detection concept of operations to coordinate their capabilities and functions .