ii ) . once agencies have provisional or full certification , opm monitors this criterion by measuring the distributions of agencies' performance ratings and pay . this information helps opm determine if agencies are making meaningful distinctions among the performance of their senior executives . opm has since taken action on our recommendations . in a january 2003 report , we examined opm's progress towards its own transformation , as opm shifts its role from less of a rule maker and enforcer to more of a consultant and strategic partner in leading and supporting agencies' human capital initiatives . we concluded that opm should exert greater leadership to prepare the way for human capital reform . in june 2006 , we testified before the subcommittee that opm has made commendable efforts towards transforming itself to being a more effective leader of governmentwide human capital reform . we noted however , that it could build upon that progress by addressing challenges that remain in four key areas: ( 1 ) leadership ; ( 2 ) talent and resources ; ( 3 ) customer focus , communication , and collaboration ; and ( 4 ) performance culture and accountability . first , in the area of leadership , we reported that information from opm employees based on our analysis of the 2004 fhcs suggests that information from their top leadership does not cascade effectively throughout the organization and that many employees do not feel their senior leaders generate a high level of motivation and commitment in the workforce . these views on leadership were more strongly expressed by employees in opm's human capital leadership and merit system accountability ( hclmsa ) division — one of opm's key divisions and a unit responsible for partnering with agencies and vital to successful human capital reform efforts . in addition to ses employees , many agencies use senior employees with scientific , technical , and professional expertise , commonly known as senior - level ( sl ) and scientific or professional ( st ) positions . sl / st positions have a lower maximum rate of basic pay than ses employees , and unlike the ses , their individual rate of pay does not necessarily have to be based on individual or agency performance . however , an agency may apply to opm and omb for certification of its sl / st performance appraisal system , and if the system is certified as making meaningful distinctions in relative performance , an agency may raise the total annual compensation maximum for sl / st employees to the salary of the vice president . however , certification does not affect the maximum rate of basic pay of sl / st employees . to qualify for these pay flexibilities , opm must certify and omb must concur that an agency's senior executive performance appraisal system meets certification criteria jointly developed by opm and omb . two levels of performance appraisal system certification are available to agencies: full and provisional . to receive full certification , which lasts for 2 calendar years , the design of agency systems must meet nine certification criteria and agencies must provide documentation of prior performance ratings to demonstrate compliance with the criteria .