, the cutter crews . a cutter is deemed mission capable if it operates in either a fully mission capable or partially mission capable status . the frcs have operated in a partially mission capable status 2.3 percent of the time since march 2012 . this is at least partially due to the short duration of the frc's patrol schedule of roughly 5 to 7 days at sea and the capabilities of the cutter . additionally , the smaller size of the frcs as compared to the nscs limits both the crew size and capabilities aboard the cutter making it less likely that the frc will be able to meet the criteria for partially mission capable , which is the ability to fulfill at least one of its designated missions . for example , the frc holds one cutter boat , and coast guard safe - to - sail equipment requirements dictate that this cutter boat must be operational or the frc is deemed not mission capable . while the cumulative average monthly mission capable rate for the frc is above the target since march 2012 , when we eliminated prior years and analyzed the frc's cumulative average monthly mission capable rate over a more recent time period — october 2015 to september 2016 — we found that the average mission capable rate was 42.8 percent , which is below its minimum target ( 48 percent ) . this lower rate can be attributed to increased time spent in depot - level maintenance . figure 4 shows the monthly mission capable rates for the frc from october 2015 to september 2016 as well as the coast guard's target range . according to coast guard officials , the decrease in monthly mission capable rates below the minimum target is primarily because of a phased warranty repair drydock period that was not initially anticipated . these warranty repair drydocks , affecting cutters 1 through 13 , began in january 2016 and are scheduled to conclude in november 2019 . the average drydock period will last approximately 15 weeks , with at least one frc not mission capable due to depot - level maintenance at all times from january 2016 to november 2019 . coast guard officials stated that while these warranty repair drydock periods are scheduled in advance , the repairs were not anticipated when the planned major maintenance schedule was first established for the fleet during the acquisition process . instead , these drydocks were triggered by continuing structural and equipment problems installed during production , including unreliable connectors that provide the structural integrity of the cutter and continued failures with the main diesel engine . while both the frc's and nsc's inability to meet its mission capable target rate is attributable to the increase in depot - level maintenance , the cause differs . unlike the frc's mission capable rates , which are influenced by the warranty repair drydock periods , the nscs mission capable rates are influenced by the roughly 2-year post - delivery period called the post shakedown availability , which is scheduled for each newly delivered nsc . during this time the cutters will undergo depot - level maintenance and other activities to bring the cutter to full operational capability .