arrests . although comprehensive data on the number of tribal law enforcement agency ( lea ) arrests were not available , we obtained and reviewed admission records from three juvenile detention centers in indian country managed by the department of the interior's bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) . based on those records , at least 388 native american tribal youth were admitted to these three facilities in 2016 , as shown in table 1 . in the northern cheyenne facility , for which we obtained records for 5 years , the number of youth admitted increased yearly between 2012 and 2016 , from 14 to 204 . according to bia officials , this growth in the number of youth admitted to the northern cheyenne facility likely reflects an increase in admissions of native american youth from surrounding tribes . specifically , because the northern cheyenne facility is centrally located , the officials said that the facility admits youth from other tribes , which have grown accustomed to sending their youth to the facility . bia officials also noted that the northern cheyenne facility services an area where there is a high rate of delinquency among youth , and because the facility works well with native american youth struggling with delinquency issues , many tribes elect to send their delinquent youth to the facility . further , since 2012 , the northern cheyenne facility increased its bed space and staff , thus increasing its capacity to admit more youth , according to bia officials . even though comprehensive tribal arrest data were not available , we reported in september 2018 that the department of justice's ( doj ) bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) was undertaking an effort to increase collection of arrest data from tribal leas . specifically , this data collection activity is the census of tribal law enforcement agencies . this collection activity , which bjs plans to conduct in 2019 , is to capture information including tribal lea workloads and arrests , tribal lea access to and participation in regional and national justice database systems , and tribal lea reporting of crime data into fbi databases . adjudication . comprehensive data were not available to describe the extent to which tribal courts processed native american youth or found them guilty . however , bjs concluded a tribal court data collection effort — the national survey of tribal court systems — in 2015 . through this survey , bjs gathered information from more than 300 tribal courts and other tribal judicial entities on their criminal , civil , domestic violence , and youth caseloads , and pretrial and probation programs , among other things . doj officials told us that bjs has analyzed the data , and plans to release results in the future . confinement . according to data published by bjs , the number of youth in indian country jails declined from 190 in 2014 to 170 in 2016 ( about an 11 percent decrease ) . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact gretta l. goodwin , director , homeland security and justice at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or goodwing@gao.gov .