( see fig . some stakeholders told us that additional research is needed to help community college officials understand the context in which community colleges and states are using developmental education models and how they are resolving issues , such as helping students transition into regular credit - bearing courses more quickly . community college officials also expressed concerns with promoting some strategies without fully understanding the long - term outcomes , particularly on certain populations . for example , a few community college officials worried about the impact of using accelerated developmental education classes . these officials were concerned that the fast - paced nature of an accelerated program would increase a student's risk of not completing a course or program . for example , part - time students enrolled in an accelerated program may have additional stress when trying to balance personal responsibilities , such as child care or work demands , while enrolled in an accelerated course and may end up dropping out of the college altogether . additionally , another official told us that knowing how to scale up pilot initiatives was a challenge because initiatives that were successful with one population of students may not be successful with other students . obtaining faculty support for unproven reforms was also cited by several community college and state officials as a challenge . officials at one community college told us that it was difficult for staff to buy into changes to developmental education at their community college because there was not much training provided and initiatives were unproven . a literature review conducted by a stakeholder organization on acceleration strategies , for example , noted that faculty may resist working on reforms and that there is limited research to help “quell the skepticism.” recent literature also suggests that faculty support is a key factor to bringing effective practices to scale . officials at one community college explained that new models of learning can be a radical change for some faculty and many find it difficult to change their teaching styles to adapt to the unproven curriculum . officials at this community college also told us that some faculty members at their college are resistant and skeptical because they may have different philosophical views about how courses should be taught . to address these issues , officials in one state we visited created a task force that included community college and k - 12 representatives and sought input from faculty , students , and staff . additionally , they relied on the limited research available to help guide their discussions with faculty and make decisions about the redesign , all of which helped move the statewide redesign forward with little resistance . the department of education is taking steps to address some of the challenges cited by community colleges and states in improving developmental education by funding a new research center on this topic . the community colleges or stakeholders referenced in the indefinite quantifiers were not part of our group interview . the indefinite qualifiers categories are listed in table 3: we conducted this performance audit from august 2012 to august 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .