dod has agreed with most of our recommendations . however , we continue to find little evidence that dod has improved training for military personnel on the use of contractors prior to their deployment . dod provided additional information after we briefed the house appropriations committee's subcommittee on defense . dod advised us that they had established a contingency contracting training program at the defense acquisition university . while this is a good first step , we would note that according to the course description , the course is intended for contracting professionals . as we noted , we believe that there is a need to provide training for those personnel who are not contracting professionals such as commanders and others who are likely to work with contractor employees on a daily bases , but are not contracting professionals . since 2003 , the united states has obligated about $29 billion to help iraq rebuild its infrastructure and develop iraqi security forces to stabilize the country . however , key goals have not been met and the iraqi government has not sustained these efforts , in part because of the lack of management and human resource skills in iraq's key ministries . according to u.s. officials , the inability of the iraqi government to spend its 2006 capital budget also increases the uncertainty that it can sustain the rebuilding effort . moreover , plants are sometimes operated beyond their recommended limits , resulting in longer downtimes for maintenance . many of the operation and maintenance expenses are for services . other u.s. government agencies had reported obligations of $29 billion for iraqi reconstruction and stabilization , as of october 2006 . these funds have been used for , among other things , infrastructure repair of the electricity , oil , water , and health sectors ; training and equipping of the iraqi security forces ; and administrative expenses . my testimony today will focus on ( 1 ) security , ( 2 ) management and reporting of the program to train and equip iraqi security forces , ( 3 ) contracting and contract management activities , and ( 4 ) iraqi capacity and commitment to manage and fund reconstruction and security efforts . in preparing this testimony , we relied on previously issued gao reports and testimonies on the security situation in iraq , the training and equipping of iraqi security forces , capacity of key iraqi ministries , the management of contracts and contractors used to support deployed forces , and issues related to the reconstruction of iraq . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . despite u.s. and iraqi efforts to shift a greater share of the country's defense to the iraqi security forces , the security situation continues to deteriorate , impeding management of the more than $29 billion obligated for reconstruction and stabilization efforts . the desired end - state for u.s. - stabilization operations in iraq is a peaceful , united , stable , and secure iraq , well integrated into the international community , and a full partner in the global war on terrorism .