ice scouring . in addition to ice that can accumulate on the surface of the ocean , in shallow waters , floating ice can scrape along the surface of the seafloor . this has the potential to damage the wellhead and blowout preventer , as well as other well containment equipment on the seafloor . shell representatives told us that shell will place the wellhead and blowout preventer in a hole on the seafloor to prevent damage from ice scouring . however , this does not eliminate the possibility that the capping stack or other equipment placed on or above the seafloor , such as dispersant systems or risers , could be obstructed or damaged by floating ice . logistical challenges include the following: limited infrastructure . shell officials told us that they will have self - sufficient , dedicated subsea well containment capabilities situated on vessels in the arctic seas during drilling operations . nonetheless , these officials told us that additional personnel would be needed to respond to a subsea well blowout . moving personnel to the site could delay a response , since harbors , airstrips , and hotels necessary to support personnel are limited in number and size along alaska's northern shore . the facilities are also generally much farther from the drilling sites than they are in the gulf of mexico , and harbors and airstrips have much less capacity to move and support response personnel . lack of redundant vessels and equipment . according to interior officials , because of the low rate of offshore production in the outer continental shelf off alaska compared with the gulf of mexico , there is not an established industry in alaska to manage subsea oil production or respond to a subsea blowout . therefore , the availability of vessels and equipment to provide additional support to respond to a subsea well blowout may be limited . for example , we reported in october 2010 that u.s. coast guard infrastructure and assets for arctic missions are limited , including by fuel capacity , distance to fuel sources , and crew rest requirements . shell representatives told us that the company plans to have two concurrent drilling operations capable of providing mutual assistance , but there are few additional resources available in the region to respond in the event that shell's capabilities are insufficient . because interior has not seen or evaluated shell's well containment plans and other required documents , it is too early for us to evaluate interior's oversight of oil and gas development and well containment capabilities in alaskan waters . however , the existence of different types of risk and the limited response infrastructure pose additional challenges interior will have to address to conclude that it is providing sufficient oversight . since the deepwater horizon incident , interior has strengthened its oversight of the oil and gas industry's ability to respond to a subsea well blowout , and industry has responded by improving well containment capabilities and creating dedicated well containment organizations . for example , the checklist asks “does the plan adequately address debris removal ?