v ) . ccsp stated that the report presents a fair assessment of how ccsp documents and presents budget information , and agreed with all of our recommendations . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from its issuance . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the director , ccsp ; director , omb ; and other interested officials . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . this report examines federal climate change funding from 1993 through 2004 , as reported by omb and ccsp to determine ( 1 ) how total funding and funding by category changed and the extent to which data on such funding are comparable over time and ( 2 ) how funding by agency changed and the extent to which data on such funding are comparable over time . to answer these objectives we analyzed annual reports and congressional testimony on climate change funding . if changes in the reports were not explained , we asked responsible officials to explain the changes . to examine whether omb and ccsp reports presented the data required by the congress , we reviewed the reporting requirements , the legislative history of the requirements , and the data provided by omb and ccsp in their reports . omb presented federal climate change funding from 1993 through 1998 in testimony before the congress , and from 1999 through 2004 in annual reports . the congress , in the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 , as amended , has defined outlays as being the expenditures and net lending of funds under budget authority . in simplified terms , budget authority precedes obligations , which precede outlays in the process of spending federal funds . as noted above , since 1999 , the congress has required the president to submit a report each year to the senate and house committees on appropriations describing in detail all federal agency obligations and expenditures , domestic and international , for climate change programs and activities . in response , omb has annually published the federal climate change expenditures report to congress that presents budget authority information in summary data tables instead of obligations and expenditures , as the title of the report and the table titles suggest . for example , although the march 2005 report's summary table is entitled in bold as a “summary of federal climate change expenditures,” the table's data are presented in terms of budget authority . the only indication that the table presents budget authority information , rather than expenditures , is a parenthetical statement to that effect in a significantly smaller font . omb officials told us that the term “expenditures” is used in the report title and text because that is the term used most often in the legislative language . they also said that the reports present data in terms of budget authority because omb has always interpreted the bill and report language to request the budget authority levels for each activity in a particular year .