to date , aig has not drawn against this facility . as noted above , some federal assistance was designated for specific purposes , such as reducing the loan outstanding to the federal reserve or for purchasing specific assets , such as cdos and rmbs . other assistance , such as that available through the federal reserve revolving credit facility , is available to meet the general financial needs of the parent company and its subsidiaries . some of the assistance also places restrictions on actions that aig can take while it has loans outstanding to the federal government or as long as the federal government has an ownership interest in aig assets , as well as restrictions on executive compensation . executive compensation restrictions for tarp recipients were also included in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , which was enacted on february 17 , 2009 . if the ultimate goal is avoiding the failure of aig , the federal reserve and treasury have achieved that goal in the short - term . however , maintaining solvency has required federal assistance beyond that provided in september and november 2008 , and rating companies have stated that their current ratings are contingent on continued federal support for aig . aig and federal regulators acknowledge that there may be a need for further assistance given the significant challenges aig continues to face . therefore , more time is required to determine if the goal will be fully achieved in the long - term . we asked treasury and the federal reserve how they were monitoring aig's progress toward reaching the goals of the federal financial assistance and aig's compliance with the restrictions placed upon it as a condition of receiving the assistance . according to treasury and federal reserve officials , the agencies are working together to monitor aig's solvency by reviewing the reports required by the terms of the financial assistance , and the federal reserve is in contact daily with aig officials regarding aig's liquidity needs and their efforts to sell the company's assets . aig regularly files several reports with frbny , including daily cash flow reports , reports identifying risk areas within the company , and daily liquidity requests / cash flow forecasts , allowing the federal reserve to monitor aig's liquidity . also , aig has a divestiture team that meets at least weekly with the federal reserve to discuss potential sales deals , including bids from potential buyers , financing , and other terms of sales agreements , so that the federal reserve can monitor aig's efforts to sell its assets . the federal reserve and treasury said that they are monitoring the various federal agreements with aig , and these agreements place restrictions on aig's use of the funds . for example , the federal reserve monitors restrictions on the revolving credit facility , including whether aig has inappropriately paid dividends or financed extraordinary corporate actions like acquisitions . according to treasury officials , it is in the process of finalizing new executive compensation requirements based on the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , and will begin monitoring aig's compliance with those regulations once they are in place .