gao - 12-747r . washington , d.c.: june 20 , 2012 . defense acquisitions: further actions needed to improve accountability for dod's inventory of contracted services . gao - 12-357 . washington , d.c.: april 6 , 2012 . washington , d.c.: september 27 , 2010 . defense workforce: dod needs to better oversee in - sourcing data and align in - sourcing efforts with strategic workforce plans . gao - 12-319 . the results of this review are expected to be released in september 2012 . in light of the challenges dod has faced in its strategic workforce planning , we support the department's participation in efforts being made across the federal government to address governmentwide critical skills gaps . currently , the office of personnel management and dod are leading a working group comprised of members of the chief human capital officers council tasked with ( 1 ) identifying mission - critical occupations and functional groups , ( 2 ) developing strategies to address gaps in these occupations and groups , and ( 3 ) implementing and monitoring these strategies . our reviews of dod's acquisition , information technology , and financial management workforces — which include a number of dod's identified mission - critical occupations — amplifies some of our overarching observations related to strategic workforce planning . in fiscal year 2011 alone , dod obligated about $375 billion to acquire goods and services to meet its mission and support its operations in the united states and abroad . as noted , our prior work found that the significant reductions to the acquisition workforce in the 1990s produced serious imbalances in the skills and experience of this highly talented and specialized workforce . the lack of an adequate number of trained acquisition and contract oversight personnel has , at times , contributed to unmet expectations and placed dod at risk of potentially paying more than necessary . our february 2011 high - risk report noted that dod needs to ensure that its acquisition workforce is adequately sized , trained , and equipped to meet department needs . we further reported in november 2011 that the department has focused much - needed attention on rebuilding its acquisition workforce and made some progress in terms of growing the workforce , identifying the skills and competencies it needed , and used such information to help update its training curriculum . while dod has acknowledged that rebuilding its acquisition workforce is a strategic priority , our most recent review of the defense acquisition workforce development fund found that dod continues to face challenges in strategic workforce planning for its acquisition workforce . specifically , we found that dod lacks an overarching strategy to clearly align this fund with its acquisition workforce plan . the department has also not developed outcome - related metrics , such as the extent to which the fund is helping dod address its workforce skills and competencies gaps . moreover , we remain concerned that the acquisition workforce continues to face challenges in terms of the age and retirement eligibility of its members .