omb agreed with these recommendations . in july 2017 , omb stated it would include a list of report modification proposals in the president's fiscal year 2019 budget as required by gprama . for all of the unimplemented recommendations described above , we will continue to monitor agencies' actions . in addition to providing access to performance and financial information , federal agencies can directly engage and collaborate with citizens , nonprofits , academic institutions , and other levels of government using open innovation strategies . open innovation involves using various tools and approaches to harness the ideas , expertise , and resources of those outside an organization to address an issue or achieve specific goals . in october 2016 , we found that in recent years agencies had frequently used five open innovation strategies — singularly or in combination — to collaborate with citizens and encourage their participation in agency initiatives . ( see figure 21. ) our october 2016 report found that agencies can use these strategies for a variety of purposes . to develop new ideas , solutions to specific problems , or new products: for example , from april 2015 to november 2016 , the department of energy held a prize competition to create more efficient devices that would double the energy captured from ocean waves . according to the competition's website , the winning team achieved a five - fold improvement . to enhance collaboration and agency capacity by leveraging external resources , knowledge , and expertise: for example , every 2 years since 2009 , the federal highway administration has regularly engaged stakeholders to identify and implement innovative ideas that have measurably improved the execution of highway construction projects . to collect the perspectives and preferences of a broad group of citizens and external stakeholders: for example , the food and drug administration used in - person and online dialogue to engage outside stakeholders in the development of an online platform designed to make key datasets easily accessible to the public . subsequently , in june 2017 , we found that omb , the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) , and the general services administration ( gsa ) developed resources to support the use of open innovation strategies by federal agencies . these resources included guidance , staff to assist agencies in implementing initiatives , and websites to improve access to relevant information . for example , gsa developed a step - by - step implementation guide , program management team , and website to help agency staff carry out prize competitions and challenges . agencies have also developed their own resources , including guidance , staff positions , and websites , to reach specific audiences and to provide tailored support for open innovation strategies they use frequently . for example , nasa's solve website provides a central location for the public to find the agency's challenges and citizen science projects , as well as links to relevant resources . we also evaluated key government - wide guidance for the five strategies listed above to determine the extent to which the guidance reflects leading practices for effectively implementing open innovation initiatives . we identified these practices in our october 2016 report .