( see fig . states and sfsp providers have collaborated with others and sought specific types of sites to help provide enrichment activities and attract certain age groups — efforts that fns has supported through information sharing and related grant funding . sponsors in the selected states said they have focused on partnerships with groups such as those focused on youth development , churches , libraries , and police or fire departments , to offer age - appropriate activities for children ( see fig . a sponsor may operate one site or multiple sites . what is known about participation in the summer food service program and how it has changed in the last 10 years ? what other programs help feed low - income children over the summer ? what challenges exist , if any , in providing summer meals to children , and to what extent does fns provide assistance to states and sponsors to address these challenges ? to address our first objective about participation in the sfsp , we analyzed fns's national data on sfsp meals served for fiscal years 2007 through 2016 . for context on these trends , we analyzed , and compared to the sfsp data , fns's data on lunches served through the national school lunch program ( nslp ) , the largest child nutrition assistance program , for the same time period . to assess the reliability of sfsp and nslp data , we ( 1 ) performed electronic testing of relevant data elements , ( 2 ) reviewed existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable to identify the number of meals served in each program and assess change over time . we also reviewed fns's method for estimating the number of children participating in the sfsp using these data and discuss the reliability of this method in the body of the report . from our three selected states , we also analyzed site - level data on meals served and days of operation for 2 months during the summer of 2016 , including the month with the largest number of sfsp meals served in each state . we assessed the reliability of these data by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of relevant data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to obtain information specific to our second objective on other programs that help feed children in the summer , we also analyzed fns data on meals served through the nslp and school breakfast program ( sbp ) in july 2016 because fns used these data to estimate meals served through the seamless summer option in summer 2016 . to assess the reliability of these data , we ( 1 ) performed electronic testing of relevant data elements , ( 2 ) reviewed existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data .