( see app . i for further details on the force structure and functions of the anp. ) prior work by the state and defense inspectors general highlighted the same challenge over a year ago . the afghan national police ( anp ) currently consists of six authorized components under the ministry of interior . the uniformed police , the largest of these six components , report to the police commanders of each afghan province . provincial commanders report to one of five regional commanders , who report back to the ministry of interior . the other five authorized components of the anp all report directly to the ministry ( see fig . table 5 provides further detail on the ministry of interior and the various components of the anp that it oversees . for example , dyncorp stated that a dual chain of command between defense and state has affected the efforts of civilian mentors in multiple ways , such as by producing conflicting guidance and complicating reporting , placement of personnel , the use of facilities , and training and mentoring activities . while defense and state have both cited improvements in coordination since our august 2007 visit to afghanistan , a coordinated plan that clearly states the various agencies' roles and responsibilities would nonetheless be beneficial given the continuous turnover of u.s. government staff . for example , defense officials told us that cstc - a staff typically serve tours of 1 year or less and often have no period of overlap with outgoing officials during which to gain knowledge about their new positions . furthermore , among rated units , about 96 percent ( 296 of 308 ) of uniformed police districts and all border police battalions ( 33 of 33 ) , which together comprise about 75 percent of the anp's authorized end - strength , were rated as not capable . six of the remaining 12 uniformed police districts were rated as capable of leading operations with coalition support , and the other 6 as partially capable . overall , defense assessed approximately 4 percent ( 18 of 433 units rated ) of police units as partially capable and about 3 percent ( 12 of 433 units rated ) as capable of leading operations with coalition support . according to defense reporting as of april 2008 , the expected date for completion of a fully capable afghan police force is december 2012 . however , the benchmark set by the afghan government and the international community for establishing police forces that can effectively meet afghanistan's security needs is the end of 2010 . defense reporting indicates that , as of april 2008 , nearly 80,000 police had been assigned out of an end - strength of 82,000 . according to defense documentation , the objective of this initiative is to focus resources on reforming the uniformed police — the largest component of the anp — as the key to the overall reform of the anp .