supplies . the irc specifically excludes expenditures to acquire depreciable property from eligibility for either the deduction of research expenditures under section 174 or for the research credit . taxpayers have attempted to claim the deduction or the credit for expenditures that they have made for labor and supplies to construct tangible property , such as molds or prototypes , that they used in qualified research activities . irs has taken the position that such claims are not allowed ( even though the taxpayers do not , themselves , take depreciation allowances for these properties ) because the constructed property is of the type that would be subject to depreciation if a taxpayer had purchased it as a final product . for those groups in which the aggregate research spending of all members is determined by group - level management , the only way that the allocation rules can affect the credit's incentive is if they allow the shifting of credits from members without current tax liabilities to those with tax liabilities . if the group credit is computed according to the method that yields the largest credit , then an additional dollar of spending by any group member will increase the group credit by the same amount , regardless of how the group credit total is allocated among members . the gross qre allocation method is much less burdensome for controlled groups and for irs than the stand - alone method because it does not require anyone to maintain base - period records for the regular credit , unless they choose to use that credit themselves . if the regular credit were eliminated , the burden associated with the stand - alone method would be reduced considerably ; however , it would still require more work on the part of taxpayers and irs than would the gross qre method . two significant concerns arise from the lack of any update of the regular credit's base since it was introduced in 1989 . first , the misallocation of resources that can result from the uneven distribution of both marginal incentives and windfall benefits across taxpayers could lead to missed opportunities for the country to benefit from research projects with higher social rates of return . second , the requirement to maintain detailed records from the 1980s , updated for subsequent changes in law and regulations , represents a considerable compliance burden for regular credit users ( including some that are required to use that option ) . regular updates of the base would substantially reduce these problems ; however , no clear purpose would be served by retaining both the asc and a regular credit , the base of which would be updated almost as frequently as that of the asc . unfortunately , neither of the problems can be avoided without a reduction in the credit's bang - per - buck . the addition of a minimum base to the asc would likely improve the bang - per - buck of that credit ( the extent would depend on certain estimating assumptions ) and also reduce inequities in the distribution of windfall credits . the research credit presents many challenges to both taxpayers and irs .