agreement with the union . this individual performance critical job element describes how the employee promotes the satisfaction of taxpayers and customers through professionally and courteously identifying customers' needs and / or concerns and providing quality products and services . communication to the customer is appropriate for the issue and encourages voluntary compliance . this individual performance critical job element describes how the employee promotes the satisfaction of taxpayers and customers by providing the technical expertise to serve the customers with professional and helpful service . accurate identification and resolution of issues and the correct interpretation of laws , rules , regulations and other information sources are key components of this critical job element . officials from the national treasury employees union ( nteu ) and the american federation of government employees , the two unions that represent the largest number of federal employees , both expressed concerns about the use of customer service performance measures in performance appraisals . officials from both unions told us that many employees do not have control over the customer service results achieved , and one said that customer service performance is best addressed at the agency level . this official also cautioned that using customer service measures , such as the time to handle a case , in performance appraisals could lead to employees overlooking details of the case as they attempt to save time . nevertheless , agency officials did not report recent issues related to including customer service as part of performance appraisals . similarly , irs and nteu officials told us there had not been any recent concerns or issues related to the way customer service measures are used in performance appraisals . most of the services we interviewed that had less widespread contact with the public and often different customer groups or missions than those we surveyed reported making customer service standards and results available to customers and using customer service results for various purposes . four of the five services reported making their customer service standards available to customers , but only three of the four services post the standards where they are likely to be viewed by customers . similarly , three of the five services reported making customer service results available to customers , but two posted the results in documents that may not be readily available to customers . three services reported comparing the results to customer service standards , and two reported comparing results to the private sector . all five services reported using results of its customer service measures to improve customer service . finally , three services reported basing performance appraisals in part on customer service measures . for example , performance appraisals for employees staffing cdc's information contact center contain elements based on ensuring customer satisfaction for internal and external customers . a number of approaches have been used by state , local , and other national governments to improve customer service . several approaches , which are also employed by some federal agencies , were identified as good practices in our literature review of customer service and customer service management and by knowledgeable current and former researchers and practitioners in these fields .