site visits . the grant managers' monitoring plans for the most recent awards for 66 demonstration grants and 20 training and technical assistance grants had a specified number of on - site visits to be made . there was no documentation showing that the requirement for site visits was met in 88 percent of the demonstration grants and 90 percent of the training and technical assistance grants . telephone contacts . the grant managers' monitoring plans for the most recent awards for 79 demonstration grants and 34 training and technical assistance grants had specific requirements for telephone contacts ( eg , monthly or quarterly ) . there was no documentation showing that the requirement for telephone contacts was met in 96 percent of the demonstration grants and in any of the training and technical assistance grants . documentation was present that showed that some , but not all , of the required telephone contacts had been made for 49 percent of the demonstration grants and 41 percent of the training and technical assistance grants . documentation was present that showed that some , but not all , of the required on - site visits had been made for 6 percent of the demonstration grants and 10 percent of the training and technical assistance grants . when site visits are made to grantees , a written site visit report is to be prepared . of the awards that had any evidence of site visits , such as memos or e - mails referring to the visit , 7 out of the 12 demonstration grants and 2 out of the 4 training and technical assistance grants had any of the ojp - required , written site visit reports . in commenting on a draft of this report , the acting assistant attorney general informed us that most grant managers prepare site visit reports after an on - site review , as their travel vouchers are not forwarded for payment unless the reports are attached . she noted that the grant managers do not routinely forward copies of the reports to the official grant and program files . she said that a copy of the reports is filed in the grant manager's travel folders that we did not review . however , according to the ojp handbook , the original site visit report is to be placed in the official grant file . while the grant managers' travel folders may contain site visit reports , the official grant files kept by the ojp comptroller's control desk are the official record of the history and activity of the grant . as such , we reviewed the official grant files as well as the grant managers' files for required grant documents and not the travel voucher folders . in another comment to a draft of this report , the acting assistant attorney general told us that monitoring plans that call for on - site visits by grant managers are contingent upon staffing capacity and administrative resources and not requirements . our review indicated that , contrary to the acting assistant attorney general's comment , certain specific program monitoring requirements are included in the ojp handbook , such as creating monitoring plans and writing site visit reports within 10 days of a site visit .