app . §§ 501-597b ) — about their methodology and regulators' oversight , and of the eight servicers we interviewed seven provided information about their process to categorize borrowers for cash payments and regulators' role in this process . to identify the examination teams and servicers to interview , we selected examination teams and servicers that were overseen by each regulator and also considered a range of sizes of eligible populations for the file reviews , including some of the largest servicers . to identify the consultants to interview , we considered those consultants that supplemented information gathered from consultants in prior work on the file review process . finally , we assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing related documentation and interviewing payment administrator officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to assess the objectives for the foreclosure prevention actions and how well regulators designed the actions to realize those objectives , we reviewed the amended consent orders to understand the parameters and requirements for foreclosure prevention actions , reviewed regulators' decision memorandums , and reviewed regulators' statements about the foreclosure prevention actions in press releases and speeches or testimony . we also interviewed regulators about their intentions for the actions and the analysis they conducted to support the negotiations of the design and amounts . we compared this process with regulators' typical processes for issuance of enforcement actions , as described in their supervisory manuals and in interviews with regulators' staff . we also interviewed three experts familiar with negotiations and the design of settlements , including staff from the national mortgage settlement , to understand elements typically considered in the design of settlements . we selected these experts based on their familiarity with similar mortgage servicing settlements or their recognized expertise in the field of settlements involving potential financial harm or where cash payments were to be made to victims . in addition , we interviewed staff from one regulatory agency , the bureau of consumer financial protection ( commonly known as the consumer financial protection bureau , or cfpb ) , about their policies and procedures for negotiating enforcement actions , in particular related to mortgage servicing . finally , we reviewed two settlements that included foreclosure prevention components — the national mortgage settlement and the separate california agreement in the national mortgage settlement — to help identify various factors to consider in the design of foreclosure prevention actions in enforcement orders or settlements . further , to address how regulators oversaw achievement of the objectives of the foreclosure prevention component in the amended consent orders , we considered both regulators' activities to oversee servicers' financial obligations and actions to oversee the foreclosure prevention principles in the amended consent orders . to facilitate this process , we reviewed regulators' instructions to servicers for reporting on their foreclosure prevention obligations and servicers' reporting submissions for may , july , september , and december 2013 . we also reviewed occ's and the federal reserve's instructions to its examination teams for oversight of the foreclosure prevention principles .