iii ) . common themes and risks emerged from this work , primarily the dominant influence of expediency , poorly defined requirements , and inadequate oversight that contributed to ineffective or inefficient results and increased costs . inspector general reviews also noted that many dhs procurement offices reported that their lack of staffing prevents proper procurement planning and severely limits their ability to monitor contractor performance and conduct effective contract administration . while these findings have broad application to services , ofpp policy letter 93-1 encourages the inspectors general to also conduct vulnerability assessments of services contracting — which would include services that closely support inherently governmental functions — to ensure compliance with related guidance . when dhs was established in 2003 , it faced an enormous challenge to quickly set up numerous offices and programs that would provide wide - ranging and complex services critical to ensuring the nation's security . with limited staffing options , the department relied on contractors to perform mission - related services that closely support the performance of inherently governmental functions . however , the tasks assigned to contractors were not always clearly defined up front , and the breadth and depth of contractor involvement were extensive in some cases . four years later , the department continues to rely heavily on contractors to fulfill its mission with little emphasis on assessing the risk and ensuring management control and accountability . given its use of contractors to provide selected services , it is critical for dhs to strategically address workforce deployment and determine the appropriate role of contractors in meeting its mission . until the department emplaces the staff and expertise needed to oversee selected services , it will continue to risk transferring government responsibility to contractors . to improve the department's ability to manage the risk of selected services that closely support inherently governmental functions as well as government control over and accountability for decisions , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security implement the following five actions: establish strategic - level guidance for determining the appropriate mix of government and contractor employees to meet mission needs ; assess the risk of selected contractor services as part of the acquisition planning process , and modify existing acquisition guidance and training to address when to use and how to oversee those services in accordance with federal acquisition policy ; define contract requirements to clearly describe roles , responsibilities , and limitations of selected contractor services as part of the acquisition planning process ; assess program office staff and expertise necessary to provide sufficient oversight of selected contractor services ; and review contracts for selected services as part of the acquisition oversight program . we provided a draft of this report to omb and dhs for review and comment . in written comments , dhs generally concurred with our recommendations and provided information on what action would be taken to address them . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix iv . omb did not comment on the findings or conclusions of this report . dhs concurred with three of our recommendations , and partially concurred with the other two .