training . the coast guard has also provided annual training for msram users , including beginning , intermediate , and advanced courses intended to standardize the data entry process across the coast guard . officials from 34 sectors ( 97 percent ) reported finding the training moderately to very useful in terms of enhancing their ability to assess , understand , and communicate the risks facing their sectors . in 2011 , coast guard headquarters also started providing live web - based training sessions on various msram issues , such as resolving national review comments , to help sector staff gain familiarity with msram's features on an as - needed basis . in addition to msram training provided by headquarters , one coast guard district official we spoke with had developed and provided localized training to the sector - level port security specialists on assessing the vulnerability of chemical facilities . the district official told us that coast guard headquarters was interested in this local model for delivering training and was planning to pilot a similar training program in a different district . to what extent has the coast guard used msram to inform maritime security risk decisions , and what challenges , if any , exist in this effort ? how has the coast guard measured the impact of its maritime security programs on risk in u.s. ports and waterways , and what challenges , if any , exist in this effort ? to address our first objective , we focused on msram , which is the coast guard's primary model for assessing maritime security risk . we compared msram's risk assessment methodology and processes to relevant criteria , including the risk assessment component of the 2009 nipp and our related reports on risk management , such as our 2005 report examining coast guard risk management efforts . we interviewed coast guard headquarters officials to discuss their national - level perspectives on the overall management and implementation of the msram risk model and we interviewed officials from the coast guard's intelligence coordination center to discuss how intelligence information is incorporated into msram . in addition , we interviewed officials from all 35 coast guard sectors to obtain their views on msram . we asked these officials to provide information on the msram risk assessment process , msram training , and processes and procedures for ensuring msram data integrity . the interview was a mix of specific questions using a rating scale and questions asking for open - ended or narrative responses . during these interviews , we interviewed staff responsible for collecting and updating msram data , as well as management - level officials in the sectors' response , prevention , planning , and command units . to minimize any inconsistencies or errors in the information we collected , our subject matter experts developed the interview questions in collaboration with a social science survey specialist and we pretested the interview with officials from two coast guard sectors . we provided an advance copy of the interview questions to each of the sectors to allow time to prepare responses , conduct preliminary research , and identify appropriate points of contact .