ccsp agreed with all of our recommendations . both agencies appear to have taken actions in response to our recommendations , but we have not comprehensively reviewed the extent to which they may have done so . epa and doe expect participants in their respective programs to complete a number of actions within certain timeframes . however , participants' progress toward completing those actions was mixed , and neither agency had a written policy for dealing with this situation . epa estimated that the first fifty climate leaders participants accounted for at least 8 percent of u.s. emissions on average for the years 2000 through 2003 , and doe estimated that climate vision participants account for over 40 percent of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions ; both agencies believe these to be conservative estimates . while epa and doe are participating in an interagency process to estimate the impact of their programs on emissions , we found that accurately attributing specific emissions reductions to either program would be difficult . epa and doe expect participants in their voluntary emissions reduction programs to complete a number of actions ; however , participants' progress toward completing those actions , as well as the agencies' efforts to track accomplishments , varied . for example , within about 1 year of joining the program , epa expects firms to enter into discussions with the agency to establish an emissions reduction goal and to complete these negotiations , generally within another year . as of november 2005 , 38 of the 74 firms had established goals , while most of the other 36 firms , including 13 that joined in 2002 , were still working to establish goals ; most of the remaining firms had joined the program recently and had not yet established goals . epa officials told us that they were developing a system for tracking firms' progress in accomplishing the key steps associated with participating in the program , but were still in the process of obtaining and validating data from participants . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reports . we performed our work on the federal funding report between july 2004 and august 2005 and on the voluntary programs report between june 2004 and march 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , we found that: as reported by omb , federal funding for climate change increased from $2.35 billion in 1993 to $5.09 billion in 2004 ( 117 percent ) , or from $3.28 billion to $5.09 billion ( 55 percent ) after adjusting for inflation . during this period , federal funding increased for science , technology , and before adjusting for inflation , international assistance , according to omb reports . ccsp , which reports only science funding , provided more detail , but generally presented totals that were consistent with omb's . however , changes in methods used by both omb and ccsp to report funding data made it difficult to compare the data over time , and therefore , to determine whether total funding actually increased as reported .