we disagree . numerous official world bank and imf documents as recent as 2003 affirm that a permanent , lasting , or durable exit from unsustainable debt remains a central objective of the hipc initiative . while the treasury may have retreated from this objective , the world bank and imf have not . treasury also said achieving the aspiration of debt sustainability for poor countries requires a combination of elements . the report states that our estimates assume that the countries will follow their world bank and imf development programs , including undertaking recommended reforms and achieving economic growth rates consistent with reducing poverty and maintaining long - term debt sustainability 7 . the treasury said the report contains various cost projections largely unrelated to the current enhanced hipc initiative . we disagree . at least 95 percent of our cost projections directly pertain to achieving the goals of the initiative — helping countries achieve economic growth and maintain long - term debt sustainability . the remaining amount is our estimate of the cost of achieving a second debt target — a debt service - to - government revenue of less than 5 percent — requested by the committee . treasury said that a recent world bank / imf study demonstrates that , while overall the projections were optimistic , almost half the countries have exceeded their original export projections . we do not believe that strong short - term ( 2 to 3 years ) export growth necessarily constitutes a long - term trend . hipc countries have historically experienced great volatility in their export earnings . it is not uncommon to see substantial increases in their export earnings for a few years followed by substantial declines . although some countries have experienced high growth in recent years , sustaining that growth over 20 years or more is a difficult challenge . treasury said that it remains unconvinced that using an export growth average for the past 20 years is the best way to project future export growth . as noted in our previous reports , world bank / imf projected export growth rates have been optimistic — overall , more than double historical rates . we consider historical export growth rates to be more realistic , given these countries' reliance on highly volatile commodities and other vulnerabilities . for example , the increasing prevalence of hiv / aids in many poor countries will likely have substantial negative effects on a broad range of economic variables , including export growth . the following are gao's comments on the world bank letter , dated march 31 , 2004 . the world bank disagreed with the assumption that any deviation from a projected debt profile would be offset only by additional debt relief or compensatory financing . we disagree with the bank's characterization of the report . the report explicitly states that donors have the option of not financing the export shortfalls ; however , this will hamper countries' economic growth and reduce the funds available for poverty reduction . we assume , consistent with world bank and imf projections , that countries are following their reform and development programs . hence we assumed that the other key elements of an effective development strategy are in place .