mass . gen. laws ch . 7 , § 4a ( e ) . and to run competitions in a manner consistent with their individual statutes , regulations , and agency practices . on the other hand , there was also centralization of oversight as demonstrated by the direct involvement of high - level officials such as the vice president , cabinet secretaries , and senior accountable officials in federal agencies receiving recovery act funding , as well as centrally - placed policy and oversight organizations such as omb and the recovery board . this combination of a centralized and decentralized approach to managing the implementation of the recovery act represented a new method of managing grant oversight , one which simultaneously recognized the importance of collaboration while increasing the role of the center . officials in the recovery implementation office employed a collaborative , facilitative approach , while also leveraging the authority of the vice president to facilitate the participation of stakeholders . the office functioned as a convener and problem - solver that engaged with a wide range of federal , state and local partners . this approach was embodied in the objectives identified by the vice president when the office was established . these objectives included the expectation that office staff respond to requests and questions within 24 hours , cut across bureaucratic silos by reaching out to a variety of partners , and always be accessible . toward this end , the office adopted the role of an “outcome broker,” working closely with partners across organizational silos at all levels of government in order to foster implementation of the recovery another role of the recovery implementation act and achieve results . office was to closely monitor recovery act spending . one way it did so was to monitor grants to ensure that they were consistent with the objectives identified by the vice president . a second way the office monitored spending was to review weekly financial reports on agency obligations and expenditures for programs receiving recovery act funds and to meet with the agencies on a regular basis . for more information on the concept of an “outcome broker” , please see frank digiammarino , can government work like open table ? innovation in the collaborative era ( 2012 ) , accessed january 22 , 2014 , http: / / www.scribd.com / doc / 115361546 / can - government - work - like - opentable . omb sought to facilitate effective implementation of the recovery act by working to establish and strengthen relationships with state and local governments that would ultimately implement the programs on the ground . this was done in two ways: ( 1 ) by soliciting feedback from state and local partners when formulating and revising rules and policies governing the implementation of recovery act programs and ( 2 ) by developing its capacity to respond to questions from the many states and localities that would be implementing those rules and policies . a senior omb official directly involved in this work told us the office had to move out of its traditional role as mainly a policy - making organization to adopt a more interactive and service - oriented approach .