bop has not provided this information to congress and other stakeholders . thus , bop has not alerted them of the risks that bop might require additional funding to complete the projects as originally planned . omb guidance points out that estimating inaccuracy — both overestimating and underestimating — can adversely affect other projects . with overestimating , an agency may request and be provided with more resources than it will actually need for the project , thereby resulting in less resources being available for other projects or programs . we obtained and analyzed government and construction industry data concerning the performance of the design - build delivery method versus the traditional design - bid - build delivery system from the national institute of standards and technology and the cii study . we interviewed bop construction , budget , and financial officials in washington , d.c. we did not evaluate the effectiveness of bop's construction policies and procedures in controlling cost increases and schedule delays on these projects because although design and construction contracts were awarded , little construction had been done . cost estimating requires both science and judgment . since answers are seldom — if ever — precise , the goal is to find a reasonable “answer.” cost estimates are based on many assumptions , including the rate of inflation and when construction will begin . we have previously raised concerns about this type of construction management . for example , we have reported that nonconcurrent construction — that is where different phases of a project are constructed at different times — increases the overall cost to the government because it requires additional and expensive mobilization of contractor staff and equipment , security , work to procure building materials , and construction management oversight . we also have raised concerns in prior work about starting capital projects without all of the funding necessary to complete the project or , if the project is divisible into stages , to complete a stand - alone stage that would result in a useable asset . while bop had funding for the pieces for which it awarded a contract , the pieces did not result in a usable asset because it did not have enough of the pieces of the project completed to house prisoners safely and securely . although bop shifted some funds to help pay for the mendota project , according to bop officials , sufficient funds were not available to fully fund the mendota project without delaying or canceling other projects that bop had told congress it planned to begin . to date , the total funding for fci mendota has exceeded the initial fiscal year 2001 estimate by about $72 million , or almost 45 percent . however , the latest project estimate is over $6 million , or 2.8 percent , more than the current funding . bop officials have told us that they do not plan to request any more funding for this project , and that bop will shift funds within its buildings and facilities account as necessary to complete fci mendota . in fiscal year 2004 , about $154 million was appropriated for fci berlin , and about $40 million was appropriated for an fci in the mid - atlantic region .