we disagree . this report contains new information highlighting that loans are being made to borrowers providing service in highly populated metropolitan areas ; it provides examples of specific counties in highly populated areas that are served by borrowers ; and it contains a nationwide analysis of counties that are served by borrowers that obtained loans from rus in recent years . the report also contains in appendix ii updated information on loans made to borrowers that have a high number of customers . we revised the report to recognize that hardship rate loans are made to borrowers that have a relatively high cost of providing service , as indicated by a high average revenue per kilowatt - hour sold , and that serve customers with below - average income , or at the discretion of rus' administrator . however , we note that in the current period of low interest rates , the rate charged on hardship rate loans , which is set at 5 percent , has been higher than the rates charged by rus on its municipal rate loans and treasury rate loans . specifically , as the report states , the interest rate on municipal rate loans ranged from 1.1 percent to 4.6 percent during the first quarter of calendar year 2004 , and on treasury rate loans ranged from 1.2 percent to 4.4 percent in mid - march 2004 . in addition to the individuals named above , jonathan c. altshul , vondalee r. hunt , cynthia c. norris , patrick j. sweeney , and amy e. webbink made key contributions . we agree that these classifications are not the criteria of the re act . our purpose , however , was to describe the characteristics of areas served by rus electricity distribution borrowers , and the economic research service's classification system is useful for that purpose . we believe our analyses , taken together , provide insight into the extent of service provided by borrowers in counties with large urban populations within metropolitan areas , which we have emphasized in our results . furthermore , the population has grown in many areas served by rus distribution borrowers that originally qualified for loans under the requirement that they serve sparsely populated rural areas . during our review , rus officials agreed that many of its borrowers would no longer meet the re act population test for service to rural areas if that criterion were applied . usda also discussed the general location of places where rural residents reside and stated that the majority live in metropolitan counties . accordingly , usda said that the report would classify service to these consumers as evidence that a distribution borrower was serving nonrural areas . we did not use our results in this manner and our leading observation , based on several analyses and our previous reports , is that rus distribution borrowers serve not only rural areas but also highly populated areas . at the same time , we reported that about 24 percent of the counties served by rus distribution borrowers are completely rural or have only nominal urban populations . we are presenting three matters for congressional consideration .