dod concurred with the remainder of our recommendations . however , dod did not indicate what , if any , specific actions it would take to address the intent of our recommendations . therefore , we believe dod needs to more clearly identify what steps it will take to implement these recommendations . the full text of dod's written comments is reprinted in appendix ii . the department of state did not provide formal written comments on a draft of this report . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and the secretary of state . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions on the matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8365 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report were carole coffey , assistant director ; johana ayers , assistant director , acquisitions and sourcing management ; vincent balloon ; laura czohara ; robert grace ; jason pogacnik ; karen thornton ; cheryl weissman ; and natasha wilder . our scope was limited to contracts and contractors with a direct contractual relationship with either the department of defense ( dod ) or the department of state . for dod , our analysis of contract materials was limited to contractors performing under dod's largest security contract in terms of employment , the theater wide internal security services contract . similarly for state , our contract analysis was limited to contractors performing under the agency's largest contract for security services in terms of employment , the worldwide personal protective services contract . officials added that they are not trained to interpret or adjudicate the results . moreover , while some of the name - checks and biometric data collection associated with issuing badges and requests for arming authority use data collected in iraq , such as information collected from suspected insurgents , the current screenings rely primarily upon u.s. - based databases of criminal and terrorist information . as we have previously reported , background checks that are reliant upon u.s. - based databases , such as the automated process , described above , may not be effective in screening foreign nationals who have not lived or traveled to the united states . without training to ensure that military commanders and contracting officials understand the department's policies and procedures for background screening as well as their roles and responsibilities , dod will not have reasonable assurance that contractor personnel have been screened . the existing mnf - i process also does not provide contractors with standards on what the background screening should entail and how the results should be interpreted , particularly for foreign national personnel . according to mnf - i guidance , which shall be incorporated into all contracts and solicitations where arming of contracted employees is contemplated in iraq , dod private security contractors are required to develop a background screening plan and submit the results of the background screening to their contract's contracting officer representative upon completion .