permanent work . in march 2019 , we reported that officials from fema , cor3 , and municipalities said they experienced initial challenges with the recovery process , including concerns about lack of experience and knowledge of the alternative procedures ; and concerns about missing , incomplete , or conflicting guidance from fema on the alternative procedures . in addition , in our june 2019 testimony statement we continued to report on these challenges and preliminary observations from our ongoing work indicate that these challenges continue . for example , officials from puerto rico's government agencies told us they did not feel they had sufficient guidance on the fema public assistance program and where they did , written and verbal fema guidance was inconsistent or conflicting . for instance , officials from one agency expressed their desire for more fema guidance communicated in writing as fema officials would frequently interpret existing guidance differently . similarly , officials from two agencies described situations where they had initially been directed to follow one interpretation of a policy , only to be directed to follow a different , conflicting interpretation in the subsequent months . puerto rico agency officials also stated that the lack of sufficient instruction led to a “back and forth” with fema for clarifications , which led to delays in the phases of project development . for example , officials from one puerto rico government agency stated that conflicting verbal instructions from several fema officials contributed to delays in opening the bidding process for recovery - related contracts . fema officials in puerto rico stated that the agency has developed specific guidance for disaster recovery in puerto rico and that there are various ways , such as in - person meetings , where officials from puerto rico can obtain clarification . fema officials also reported that they developed additional training for new fema employees . we are continuing to examine this issue as part of our ongoing review of puerto rico's recovery . fema's new delivery model in puerto rico . in may 2019 , fema's federal disaster recovery coordinator for puerto rico announced that fema was transitioning to using the new public assistance program delivery model in puerto rico beginning on june 3 , 2019 . among other things , the implementation of the new delivery model establishes a new consolidated resource center in puerto rico to support grant development for disaster recovery across all recovery sectors and geographic branches . following the hurricanes , fema implemented a program delivery model developed specifically for puerto rico which included , among other things , a sector - based approach which coordinated recovery resources across the federal interagency , private sector , and nongovernmental organizations to identify and complete proposed work . according to fema officials , the decision to transition from the initial delivery model to the new delivery model in puerto rico was due to improvements made since its nationwide deployment in 2017 . in response , cor3 officials raised concerns about the scope of the changes and potential challenges with the amount of time and resources needed to transition to the new delivery model . the bipartisan budget act of 2018 .