gao - 13-784t . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2013 . we are not making recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of this report to dhs , the department of justice , ondcp , and jiatf - s for review and comment . we received technical comments that we have incorporated , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security , the commandant of the coast guard , and appropriate congressional committees . what actions has the coast guard taken to combat illicit drug smuggling into puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands during fiscal years 2009 through 2013 and what have been the trends in vessel and aircraft deployments during this time period ? to determine the trends in the coast guard's deployments of resources to the transit zone , we reviewed coast guard documents , including memorandums and guidance describing the coast guard's drug interdiction mission and its process for allocating resources to jiatf - s. we reviewed coast guard - provided data on deployments of resources to jiatf - s during fiscal years 2009 through 2013 , which included vessel and aircraft hours provided for the drug interdiction mission and resource deployment targets . we also reviewed and analyzed coast guard drug interdiction mission performance data for fiscal years 2009 through 2013 and compared the performance data against mission performance targets . in addition , we interviewed coast guard officials at coast guard headquarters and at field units that are responsible for planning and conducting drug interdiction operations and tracking deployment and mission performance . specifically , we met with officials from the coast guard's atlantic and pacific area commands , and the coast guard's seventh district ( miami , florida ) and eleventh district ( alameda , california ) . we met with officials from these two districts because these two districts are the only coast guard districts that have operational roles for drug interdiction and apprehension in the transit zone — with the seventh district responsible for caribbean sea operations and the eleventh district responsible for eastern pacific ocean operations . we also met with officials from the coast guard's intelligence coordination center , in suitland , maryland , which tracks information on illegal smuggling events . further , we met with officials from the dhs office of policy's counter illicit trafficking section , which is responsible for coordinating dhs's counterdrug strategy , and officials from ondcp . we also met with officials from the department of justice , who were responsible for providing prosecutorial and law enforcement assistance for drug interdiction operations in the transit zone . finally , we also visited key west , florida , to meet with officials from jiatf - s to obtain information on u.s. government - wide drug interdiction planning and operations in the transit zone . we assessed the reliability of coast guard drug interdiction resource deployment and mission performance data we obtained and analyzed in this report by reviewing the coast guard's data management practices and interviewing knowledgeable officials about how the respective data were compiled and the systems that produced the data .