hais can be expensive . in 2005 the average payment for a hospitalization in pennsylvania was over six times higher for patients who contracted a hospital - acquired infection than for patients who did not acquire infections , according to a report by the pennsylvania health care cost containment council . a 2007 study of 1.69 million patients who were discharged from 77 hospitals found that the additional cost of treating a patient with an hai averaged $8,832 . the costs of hais are borne not only by the patients who suffer infections , but also by those who pay for care , such as the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . according to the american hospital association , medicare paid for over one - third of all hospital costs in 2005 . although not all hais are preventable , public and private organizations have established standards and other activities aimed at controlling and preventing them . cms has established health and safety standards — known as conditions of participation ( cop ) — with which hospitals must comply in order to be eligible for payment by medicare and medicaid and which include the cop for infection control . hospitals may choose one of two ways to show that they have met these or equivalent standards: they may be certified by a state agency under agreement with cms to survey the hospital's compliance with the cops or they may be accredited by one of two private organizations — the joint commission or the healthcare facilities accreditation program of the american osteopathic association ( aoa ) . most hospitals are accredited by the joint commission . other activities within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) aimed at addressing the problem of hais in hospitals include the development of guidelines by cdc , which contain recommended practices that hospitals may adopt , and the management of several databases in different parts of hhs that contain information about hais in hospitals . according to the institute of medicine , prevention of hais through implementation of evidence - based guidelines can lead to improvements in quality of care . we also interviewed selected experts in the field of infection control . while cdc's infection control guidelines describe specific clinical practices recommended to reduce hais , the infection control standards that cms and the accrediting organizations require as part of the hospital certification and accreditation processes describe the fundamental components of a hospital's infection control program . these components include the active prevention , control , and investigation of infections . examples of standards and corresponding standards interpretations that hospitals must follow include educating hospital personnel about infection control and having infection control policies in place . the standards are far fewer in number than the recommended practices in cdc's guidelines — for example , cms's infection control cop contains two standards . furthermore , cms and the accrediting organizations generally do not require that hospitals implement all recommended practices in cdc's infection control and prevention guidelines . only the joint commission and aoa have standards that require the implementation of certain practices recommended in cdc's infection control guidelines .