if not , at which agency ? what other u.s. government agencies does your mission / field office work or coordinate with on vct , pmtct , pmtct plus , and / or other arv treatment programs ? the office of the u.s . with the advent of pepfar , u.s. proposed funding for hiv / aids - related activities in the 14 focus countries increased substantially , as shown in figure 5 . the office of the u.s . global aids coordinator was organized to manage u.s. policies and programs to combat the global aids epidemic and to support administrative , communications , and diplomatic efforts . to accomplish this mission , the office has eight specialized units ( see fig . management services — provides administrative support to the office , including human resources , information management , and operational budget . communications — plans and implements all communications support for pepfar activities while promoting the involvement of public and private organizations . diplomatic liaison — prepares strategic plans , conducts activities to promote international involvement , and coordinates international response on hiv / aids by working with non - u.s. stakeholders . training and human resources — oversees human capacity and development activities and develops , implements , and monitors training programs . program services — develops and monitors the 14 countries' pepfar implementation plans and provides technical and clinical support to the focus countries and for all other activities conducted by the global aids coordinator . monitoring , evaluation , and strategic information — evaluates progress toward pepfar goals and the impact of pepfar activities ; works with the international community to harmonize information collection and serves as the liaison to both the research community and the research and information divisions of implementing agencies . government relations — responds to congressional requests for information , communicates policy to the congress , and prepares congressional reports and compliance documents . budget and appropriations — develops the annual program budget for the coordinator's office and serves as the liaison to the white house , administrative departments and agencies , and the field on program budget issues , including disbursement , tracking , and reporting . as of june 25 , 2004 , 69 percent of the positions shown in figure 7 were staffed . positions within the coordinator's office are filled with a combination of permanent hires and individuals on reimbursable and nonreimbursable detail from other sections of the state department or other agencies . the office of the u.s . global aids coordinator reported that , together with usaid and hhs , it had obligated a total of $346.9 million in pepfar funds as of march 31 , 2004 . these funds were obligated by means of tracks 1 and 1.5 through many awards to implementing entities in the 14 focus countries for activities related to hiv / aids treatment , prevention , and care , as follows . track 1 provided rapid funding to organizations such as u.s. - based ngos that can respond quickly in more than one country .