( see fig . 3 , which shows an in - line configuration with three eds machines. ) generally , an in - line checked baggage inspection system employs three levels of screening ( see fig . eds machines perform automated ( level 1 ) screening . if the eds machine is unable to clear a bag , it sends an alarm to a screener who performs a secondary ( level 2 ) inspection known as on - screen resolution by reviewing an image of the contents of the bag via computer monitor . to what extent are tsa's cost estimation procedures consistent with best practices and is tsa's acquisition baseline consistent with dhs guidance ? to determine the status of tsa's efforts to install optimal checked baggage screening systems , we obtained the most current data available from tsa as of december 2011 and january 2012 for the following: 1 ) on the current number of airports with at least one in - line system , 2 ) the number of airports that have optimal checked baggage screening systems , 3 ) and the number of operational in - line systems and eds and etd machines deployed to tsa - regulated airports . we reviewed documentation from tsa's ebsp , including the ebsp strategic plans for fiscal years 2006 , 2008 , and 2009 , and the 2011 eds and etd recapitalization and optimization plan . to determine how reducing the current federal cost share for eligible airport facility modification projects may affect the amount that tsa pays for these modifications , we calculated estimates based on tsa's august 2011 projections of how much airport modifications will cost in the future . to estimate what cost shifts could occur in the future , we obtained tsa's projections of its airport modification costs as stated in its final august 2011 life cycle cost estimate ( lcce ) report . we used tsa's lcce projections of airport modification costs for each fiscal year , 2012 through 2030 , and estimated the amount of expenditures for airport modifications that could be shifted from tsa to airports and airlines if the federal government's cost share were reduced from the current 90 percent to previous federal cost share of 75 percent . we assessed the reliability of the various data tsa provided about airports , including the number of tsa - regulated airports ( by category ) and the numbers of airports with the different configurations of baggage screening ( in - line or stand - alone ) systems , and the investment and budget expenditure dollar values in the lois and otas by questioning cognizant tsa officials and obtaining documentation about these various data.our report . we found these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of to assess the extent to which tsa's cost estimation methods are consistent with best practices and how its acquisition program baseline efforts are consistent with dhs guidance , we analyzed the tsa august 2011 lcce for ebsp . we used best practices in gao's cost estimating and assessment guide to evaluate tsa's estimating methodologies , assumptions , and results to assess whether the official cost estimates were comprehensive ( i.e.