americans . taken together , social security , medicare , and medicaid are the major taken together , social security , medicare , and medicaid are the major drivers of our future fiscal challenge . while the appropriate level of drivers of our future fiscal challenge . while the appropriate level of revenues will be part of the debate about our fiscal future , making no revenues will be part of the debate about our fiscal future , making no changes to spending on social security , medicare , medicaid , and other changes to spending on social security , medicare , medicaid , and other drivers of the long - term fiscal gap would require ever - increasing tax drivers of the long - term fiscal gap would require ever - increasing tax levels — something that seems both inappropriate and implausible . levels — something that seems both inappropriate and implausible . substantive reform of social security and our major health programs substantive reform of social security and our major health programs remains critical to recapturing our future fiscal flexibility . remains critical to recapturing our future fiscal flexibility . last year several proposals were made to establish special groups to help last year several proposals were made to establish special groups to help develop proposals for entitlement reforms to address the long - term fiscal develop proposals for entitlement reforms to address the long - term fiscal challenge . on september 18 , 2007 , you jointly introduced a bill to establish challenge . on september 18 , 2007 , you jointly introduced a bill to establish a bipartisan task force for responsible fiscal action . composed of a bipartisan task force for responsible fiscal action . composed of members of congress and administration officials , this group would be members of congress and administration officials , this group would be asked to make recommendations on how to significantly improve the asked to make recommendations on how to significantly improve the government's long - term fiscal imbalances . others have also introduced proposals to establish special groups with similar aims . at the senate budget committee's october 31 , 2007 , hearing on the bipartisan task force proposal , i testified that this approach offers one potential means to achieve the objective of taking steps to make the tough choices that will be necessary to address the long - term fiscal challenge . as i have noted , revenues will also have to be on the table as we address the long - term fiscal challenge , but slowing the growth of entitlements is a necessary component of the solution . accordingly , i have called for the establishment of a commission that would address the long - term fiscal challenge by developing proposals to put social security on a sustainable path and begin the reform of health care and the tax system . you asked us to look at entitlement reforms in other countries with an eye to identifying useful insights and possible “lessons learned” from their reform process .