we disagree . specifically , dhs contends that it is not accurate to state that tsa “has not conducted vulnerability assessments for 87 percent of the nation's 450 commercial airports” because this statement does not recognize that tsa uses other activities to assess airport vulnerabilities , and that these activities are conducted for every commercial airport . for example , dhs stated that ( 1 ) every commercial airport must have a tsa - approved asp , which is to cover personnel , physical , and operational security measures ; ( 2 ) each asp is reviewed on a regular basis by a fsd ; and ( 3 ) such fsd reviews “include a review of security measures applied at the perimeter.” as we noted in our report , tsa identified jvas , along with professional judgment , as the agency's primary mechanism for assessing airport security vulnerabilities in accordance with nipp requirements . moreover , it is not clear to what extent the fsd reviews and other activities tsa cites in its comments address airport perimeter and access control vulnerabilities or to what extent such reviews have been applied consistently on a nationwide basis , since tsa has not provided us with any documentary evidence regarding these or other reviews . finally , in meeting with tsa , its officials acknowledged that because they have not conducted a joint vulnerability assessment for 87 percent of commercial airports , they do not know how vulnerable these airports are to an intentional breach in security or an attack . thus , we consider the statement on our highlights page to be accurate . tsa also stated that “as provided in our draft report” the foundation of tsa's national strategy is its individual layers — or actions — of security , which , when combined , generate an exponential increase in deterrence and detection capability . however , we did not evaluate tsa's layered approach to security or the extent to which this approach provides increased deterrence and detection capabilities . regarding our first recommendation that tsa develop a comprehensive risk assessment for airport perimeter and access control security , dhs stated that tsa will develop such an assessment through its ongoing efforts to conduct a comprehensive risk assessment for the transportation sector . tsa intends to provide the results of the assessment to congress by january 2010 . according to dhs , the aviation domain portion of the sector risk assessment is to address , at the national level , nine airport perimeter and access control security scenarios . it also stated that the assessment is to integrate all three elements of risk — threat , vulnerability and consequence — and will rely on existing assessment activities , including jvas . in developing this assessment , it will be important that tsa evaluate whether its current approach to conducting jvas , which it identifies as one element of its risk assessment efforts , appropriately assesses vulnerabilities across the commercial airport system , and whether additional steps are needed .