individual . for certain types of medical services , patients may be required to pay deductibles or additional charges . under current law , employers withhold oasdi and hi payroll taxes from employees' pay along with federal and state income taxes , if any . both the employees' and the employers' shares of fica taxes are deposited — along with other federal taxes — to a designated federal reserve bank or other authorized depository . all federal taxes are then deposited in the treasury . treasury credits the social security and hi trust funds for the applicable amounts . neither eligibility for benefits nor the amount of benefits is based on the amount of taxes paid by an individual , and neither irs nor the social security administration ( ssa ) directly credits to the individual the annual and cumulative fica taxes paid by or on behalf of each individual . cumulatively , the oasdi and hi taxes collected represent dedicated receipts . they are accounted for in earmarked funds: the social security oasi trust fund , social security di trust fund , and medicare hi trust fund . these trust funds hold funds in the form of special nonmarketable u.s. treasury securities that are backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government . they are an asset to the trust fund and a legal claim on — or an obligation of — the general fund of the treasury . when benefits are to be paid , securities sufficient to fund those benefits are redeemed , and benefits are paid by the treasury . trust funds earn interest on the funds lent to the treasury . this interest is paid in the form of additional treasury securities . until 1983 , program revenues and expenses were closely matched , and the reserves were modest . after the 1983 social security commission recommendations were enacted , balances grew . as a result , interest credits have become a more important source of revenue for the oasdi trust funds . as we have reported , both social security and medicare face serious financing challenges . today , taxes paid into the trust funds exceed benefits paid out . however , as more and more of the “baby boom” generation enters retirement , this will change . the combination of a larger elderly population , increased longevity , and rising health care costs will drive significant increases in health and retirement spending when the “baby boom” generation begins to retire . this is especially true when eligibility depends on information that cannot be readily and rapidly verified by irs as it processes tax returns . eitc eligibility , particularly related to qualifying children , is difficult for irs to verify through its traditional enforcement procedures , such as matching return data to third - party information reports . correctly applying the residency test , for example , often involves understanding complex living arrangements and child custody issues . thoroughly verifying qualifying child eligibility basically requires irs to audit individual tax returns , as was done in the tax year 1994 compliance study — a costly , time - consuming , and intrusive proposition .