these are the only options . it may well be that some general revenue will be part of reform . if so , this would a major substantive change . considering both the long - term fiscal situation and the potential implications for social security , the use of any general revenue in proposals — reallocated or new — will need to be clearly understood by both policymakers and the general public . although ocact's determination of “sustainable solvency” for a reform plan will remain an important threshold that plans will need to meet , it is not a sufficient benchmark in the context of the long - term fiscal outlook facing the united states . it is also an incomplete metric for comparing and evaluating reform plan financing implications . given that most recent proposals use reallocated general revenue , a determination of trust fund solvency alone can be especially misleading . this report seeks to answer the following questions: ( 1 ) what information is available about general revenue use in recent social security proposal scoring memos by ocact and how can available information about general revenue use best be presented in order to facilitate comparison of reform proposals ? ( 2 ) in recent social security reform proposals , what common mechanisms , especially general revenue mechanisms , are used to increase revenue to the program ? ( 3 ) what are the implications of general revenue use for the trust fund and the federal budget ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant literature on social security and performed an in - depth analysis of 17 ocact proposal scoring memos done from 2001 through 2006 . these included all proposals scored as achieving long - range solvency . where a proposal was scored in multiple years , we used the most recent scoring . we also interviewed selected federal budget experts representing a range of views on reform approaches and met with officials from ocact and congressional budget office ( cbo ) involved in proposal scorings . ( see app . i for more details on our scope and methodology. ) we have prepared this report under the comptroller general's authority to conduct evaluations on his own initiative , and it is intended to assist congress in its deliberations on social security and retirement issues . the report is addressed to interested congressional committees . we performed our work between may 2005 and december 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the commissioner of social security and incorporated those comments as appropriate . ( see “agency comments and our evaluation” and app . ii. ) when social security was enacted in 1935 , the nation was in the midst of the great depression . about half of the elderly depended on others for their livelihood , and roughly one - sixth received public charity . many had lost their savings . social security was created to help ensure that in the future the elderly would have adequate incomes in retirement and would not have to depend on welfare . instead , the new program would provide benefits based on the payroll tax contributions of workers and their employers .