medicare currently covers these services in other settings for other beneficiaries . although cms used its broad administrative authority to redefine snf residency status to exclude patients receiving certain services in hospital outpatient departments , it gave no reason as to why it could not use this same authority to redefine the residency status of beneficiaries receiving the same services in other settings . we believe that services should be provided in the most appropriate setting and that this site - of - service distinction will effectively limit the choice of where services are provided for beneficiaries in snfs . except to acknowledge that shifts in coverage increase beneficiary liability for these services , cms did not address the shift in coverage from part a to part b that results from its policies . we believe part - b payment rules could be applied to excluded services while maintaining part - a coverage . in our matters for congressional consideration , we state that congress should clarify if coverage for facility services excluded from the pps should be provided under part a or part b . finally , while recognizing the importance of cost and utilization data , cms raised concerns about the administrative burden this collection might impose . we believe that cms should explore less burdensome ways to collect adequate data to evaluate the current service exclusions or additional exclusions proposed by the industry . this high growth was due to a number of factors . implementation of a pps for inpatient hospital care in 1983 created an incentive to discharge patients from the hospital sooner , which may have resulted in more beneficiaries needing snf care . indeed , the number of medicare beneficiaries receiving snf services more than doubled between 1983 and 1990 . technological advances also contributed to a change in the mix of services provided by some snfs , allowing some snfs to offer more complex services that had previously been delivered only in hospitals . for example , snfs now admit beneficiaries who require ventilator support , specialized wound care , or intravenous medications following their hospital stay . medicare's cost - based reimbursement method for snfs , which provided few checks on spending , combined with minimal program oversight , contributed to snf expenditure growth . medicare's payment method controlled spending for routine costs , such as room and board , but spending for ancillary services and capital costs was not constrained . in most cases , ancillary services such as therapies were provided by outside suppliers that billed the snfs . the outside suppliers' charges , in turn , became the snfs' costs to provide these services . these costs were reimbursed by medicare , so that the more snfs spent , the more they were paid . under this payment approach , snfs had no financial incentive to furnish only clinically necessary ancillary services or to control their costs . as a result , snfs provided more services and higher cost services to medicare beneficiaries , making the snf benefit one of the fastest growing components of medicare . in response to rising snf spending , the bba required a pps for snf services , which hcfa began to phase - in on july 1 , 1998 .