the data include only environmental cases . accordingly , nonenvironmental cases , such as those brought under the freedom of information act ( foia ) , equal employment opportunity act , and other civil rights statutes , were not included . not all of the attorney fees and costs included in the spreadsheet were paid from forest service appropriations , as treasury may have paid some of the attorney fees and costs from its judgment fund . in some instances , award or settlement amounts may be overstated . specifically , court documents forest service officials reviewed to compile the data do not always break out award amounts to be paid by separate defendants . for example , if a party sued the forest service and interior's u.s . fish and wildlife service and prevailed , both agencies might need to pay attorney fees and costs if they lost , but the court might not specify the amount each agency is to pay . in these instances , the data assumed the forest service paid the total amount . using the forest service's spreadsheet data , we reported that about $16.3 million in attorney fees and costs in 241 environmental cases from fiscal years 2000 through 2010 was awarded against or settled by the forest service . the types of actions that involve usda are varied . for example , lawsuits may involve challenges to certain agency actions — such as under provisions of the endangered species act , which permits parties to file challenges to government actions affecting threatened and endangered species , or under the national environmental policy act , which requires federal agencies to prepare a statement identifying the environmental effects of major actions they are proposing or ones for which third parties seek federal approval or funding and that significantly affect the environment . cases may involve other statutes , such as title vii of the civil rights act , which prohibits discrimination in employment . additionally , the administrative procedure act authorizes challenges to certain agency actions that are considered final actions , such as rulemakings and decisions on permit applications . with respect to the payment of attorney fees , in the context of judicial cases , the law generally provides for three ways that prevailing parties can be eligible for the payment of attorney fees by the federal government . first , many statutes contain provisions authorizing the award of attorney fees from a losing party to a prevailing party ; many of these provisions apply to the federal government . second , where there is a fee - shifting statute that allows for the payment of attorney fees by a losing party to a prevailing party but is not independently applicable to the federal government , eaja provides that the government is liable for reasonable attorney fees to the same extent as a private party ( i.e. , claims paid under eaja subsection ( b ) ) .