state had no comments . labor and dhs provided written comments which are reproduced in appendices i and ii . labor and dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . dhs concurred with our recommendation that the agency develop a method to automatically collect additional data through its forthcoming electronic application system to improve the timeliness of application processing . similarly , labor agreed with our recommendation that the agency develop a method of automatically collecting data on the reasons for deficiency notices and use this information to develop strategies to improve the timeliness of h - 2a application processing and noted that it would explore the resources required to collect such information as part of its online application system . labor also agreed with our recommendation that it update the guidance it provides to state workforce agencies on methods to determine the acceptability of employment practices . labor did not agree with our recommendation that it allow employers to file a single application per season for workers arriving on different start dates , stating that the department's regulations define the date of need as the first date the employer requires the services of all h - 2a workers that are the subject of the application , not an indication of the first date of need for only some of the workers . labor stated that having each employer file a single application with staggered dates of need would result in one recruitment for job opportunities that could begin many weeks or months after the original date of need , which could nullify the validity of the required labor market test . we are not recommending that employers conduct a single labor market test corresponding with their earliest date of need . employers should still be required to submit evidence of their recruitment efforts for every start date listed on each application , but we believe they should not be required to resubmit a full application package for each set of workers needed during a season . labor also expressed concern that our report points to the experiences of some employers or those of a single employer to support our conclusions . as noted earlier in this report , information obtained from our interviews cannot be generalized to all states or all agricultural employers . in addition , the illustrations used in this report highlight challenges expressed by numerous employers with whom we spoke , even when we used one employer's experience as an example . further , as we noted previously , agency data are not available to document the extent of some employer challenges , such as whether workers arrive by the date they are needed by employers . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 7 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of homeland security , labor , state , and other interested parties . adjudication issues that have arisen during the last calendar year . our internal control standards state that agency managers should identify the knowledge and skills needed for various jobs and provide necessary training , among other things .