conditions varied by location . among barracks in poor conditions , we observed a number of typical heating and air conditioning , ventilation , and plumbing - related deficiencies that formed the basis of the services' ratings for their barracks . base officials told us that , although these deficiencies had an adverse impact on the quality of life for recruits and were a burden on trainers , they were able to accomplish their overall training mission . at the same time , we noted recent improvements had been made to some recruit barracks at various locations . we observed that , overall , the services' recruit training barracks had significant or major deficiencies , but that conditions of individual barracks vary by location . in general , we observed that the army's , navy's , and marine corps' parris island barracks were in the worst physical condition . table 2 shows the services' overall rating assessments for the recruit barracks by specific location and the typical deficiencies in those barracks that form the basis of the ratings . with the exception of parris island , all locations reported either c - 3 or c - 4 ratings for their barracks . these ratings are relatively consistent with the ratings of other facilities within the dod inventory . recent defense data show that nearly 70 percent of all dod facilities are rated c - 3 or c - 4 . further , as shown in appendix 2 , the c - ratings for recruit training barracks are not materially different from the ratings of other facilities at the training locations we visited . the c - ratings depicted in table 2 show the overall condition of the recruit barracks at a specific location , but the condition of any one building within a service and at a specific location could differ from the overall rating . the army , with the greatest number of barracks , had the most problems . for the most part , the army's barracks were in overall poor condition across its training locations , but some , such as a recently renovated barracks at fort jackson and a newly constructed reception barracks at fort leonard wood , were in better condition . similarly , the navy barracks , with the exception of a newly constructed reception barracks in 2001 , were in a similar degraded condition because the navy , having decided to replace all of its barracks , had limited its maintenance expenditures on these facilities in recent years . of the marine corps locations , parris island had many barracks in poor condition , the exception being a recently constructed female barracks . the three recruit training installations plan to renovate their existing recruit barracks and construct two additional barracks at parris island and san diego . the marine corps expects to spend about $40 million in operation and maintenance funds to renovate existing barracks at its training locations by fiscal year 2004 . the renovations include replacing the bath and shower facilities , replacing hot water and heating and air conditioning systems , and upgrading the electrical systems . the marine corps also expects to spend at least $16 million in military construction for the new barracks by fiscal year 2009 .