monitoring . mcc has taken steps to ensure ongoing monitoring and periodic testing of control activities . mcc's investment committee embodies functions of monitoring and testing and operating as an integral part of mcc's internal control program by overseeing the program units' compliance with both the procedural and substantive elements required by its internal processes . also , mcc conducted its first comprehensive survey of internal controls , performed by outside consultants , in conjunction with its annual audit . in addition , mcc has formed formal review panels to monitor the progress of addressing findings from internal and external reviews . for example , consistent with omb guidance , mcc formed an fmfia management review panel to assess the results of the internal control survey along with the findings of mcc's independent financial auditors . similarly , mcc implemented a specific procedure to address recommendations from reviews and audits performed by its inspector general ( ig ) . reporting . mcc has made progress in establishing a process for assessing and reporting on the operating effectiveness of its internal controls . mcc established a formal board - level audit committee whose responsibilities include ( 1 ) financial controls ; ( 2 ) the integrity of the reporting process ; and ( 3 ) performance of the independent audit process . in addition , mcc's fmfia management review panel assessed the results of the internal control survey , along with the findings of mcc's independent financial auditors . the panel identified four material weaknesses and actions that mcc will be taking in future months to resolve them , which the acting chief executive officer certified on november 7 , 2005 . mcc officials told us that the development of new internal control policies and procedures and the revision of those already in place is a continuing process as mcc continues to mature as an organization . table 5 summarizes mcc's progress in addressing our april 2005 recommendations . mcc has taken steps and is continuing to further develop its human capital systems by ( 1 ) assessing its staffing needs ; ( 2 ) improving its recruitment , development , and retention systems ; and ( 3 ) implementing a performance management system linking compensation to individual contributions toward corporate goals . however , despite having plans to increase its staff by an additional 38 percent between may and september 2006 , mcc does not systematically assess its staffing needs , has not developed a human capital plan , and has not yet fully implemented its improved performance management system , as follows: staffing . although mcc has completed an assessment of its human capital needs since our april 2005 recommendation , it does not systematically track the use of staff time on an ongoing basis . mcc's updated assessment of its human capital needs shows that it plans to increase its staffing from 218 staff , as of may 2006 , to approximately 300 staff , as of september 2006 . mcc also has created an organization chart that includes the specific approved positions for each department under the new 300-person staffing model , and it is hiring for many of these positions using limited - term appointments to provide greater flexibility in filling future needs .