we are making the following three recommendations to fema . the fema administrator should fully document the underlying assumptions and justifications that form the basis of the risk - based grant assessment model , such as the size of the weights assigned to threat , vulnerability , and consequence , or the justification for changes to these weights from one year to the next . the fema administrator should perform sensitivity analyses to verify how changes to the risk - based grant assessment model could affect the resulting risk scores , and document the results . the fema administrator should take steps to coordinate an independent , external peer review of its risk - based grant assessment model . we provided a draft of this product to the fema and dhs for comment . in its comments , reproduced in appendix ii , fema generally concurred with our findings and three recommendations . in fema's concurrence to our first recommendation that the agency fully document the underlying assumptions and justifications that form the basis of the risk - based grant assessment model , fema requested that gao consider this recommendation resolved and closed as implemented . as part of fema's response , they reiterate their process of providing draft risk profiles to all 100 urban areas and 56 states and territories and their annual communications to congress on how fema calculated risk and computed grant awards . shsp grant awards are calculated in two parts . all states and territories are to receive a minimum grant amount required by law , based on a percentage of the total amount of shsp and uasi appropriations in a given fiscal year . the remaining award amounts are based on fema's risk - based grant assessment model . uasi grants provide federal assistance to address the unique needs of high - threat , high - density urban areas , and assists the areas in building an enhanced and sustainable capacity to prevent , prepare for , protect against , respond to acts of terrorism . since 2015 , congress has instructed through the explanatory statements accompanying the annual dhs appropriations acts that the uasi grants should be awarded to urban areas that reflect up to 85 percent of nationwide risk . for the uasi program , fema uses the risk - based grant assessment model each year to identify those urban areas that will be eligible to receive funding . we have reported on fema's risk - based grant assessment model in june 2008 and march 2013 , where we found grant years when the risk model was sensitive to even small changes . for example , we noted that a potential increase or decrease in a measure would have resulted in one urban area displacing the eligibility of another , thereby potentially shifting funding as well . fema officials stated that they focus their limited time and resources on developing the executive summary - level materials that dhs leadership will use to determine final grant eligibility and grant allocation amounts . fema officials agreed that they could better document the steps used in their analyses across all the model's measures and weights so that a complete understanding of potential impacts are documented and can be made available to leadership when making decisions about changes .