education . five of the six states that we reviewed required a high school diploma or equivalent . officials from four of these states indicated that this level of education was necessary given the skills needed by peer support specialists , such as reading comprehension and communication skills . in contrast , oregon officials told us that they did not require a high school diploma or equivalent ; however , the officials noted that most of their peer support specialists have at least a high school education . mental health experience . while all six state programs we reviewed required applicants to have lived experience in recovery from mental illness , the programs implemented this requirement in different ways . some required a mental health diagnosis , while others required a minimum length of recovery time or required applicants to have received services for a mental illness . texas officials said they did not have a specified length of recovery requirement due to the difficulty of pinpointing the specific time a person began his or her recovery ; rather , texas required applicants to self - identify as having experience living in recovery . prior work or volunteer experience . three of the six state programs required applicants to have prior relevant work or volunteer experience , although the amount of experience required varies . for example , to start the certification process , applicants in michigan must be currently working in a peer support specialist role and have been in that position for at least 10 hours a week for the past 3 months . in contrast , georgia officials told us that they found this requirement to be a barrier for some individuals who have not been able to work ; therefore , georgia did not have this requirement . letters of recommendation . three of the six states required letters of recommendation as another way to assess applicants' readiness to become peer support specialists . state officials stressed that the letter should be a personal , work , or volunteer reference , rather than a clinical reference . to ensure the competence of the peer support specialist workforce , all six state programs we reviewed required applicants to complete an initial training , which we refer to as “core training.” the core training is the initial training provided to applicants seeking to become certified peer support specialists and , while the curricula may vary by state or training vendor , its purpose is to convey the skills and competencies that peer support specialists need to enter the workforce . topics covered during the training typically include ethics , recovery , sharing the recovery story , and communication skills . ( see app . iii for an example of a peer support specialist core training schedule. ) while all six states require applicants to attend core training , the length , cost , and curricula of these trainings varied across the states , as figure 3 shows . length of training . eight of the 10 stakeholders we interviewed confirmed that this was a leading practice , though some cautioned that these requirements should not unnecessarily exclude individuals with unique backgrounds or little work history .