ntial . to improve the effectiveness of contingency and disaster recove planning for nnsa's classified supercomputing capabilities , we recommend that the administrator of nnsa direct the weapons laboratories to take the following four actions , where not already implemented: develop business impact analyses that , among other things , ( 1 ) identify and prioritize critical systems , data , and supporting resources ; ( 2 ) id allowable outage times and impacts for classified supercomputi capabilities ; and ( 3 ) identify recovery priorities and strategies . develop and implement comprehensive contingency and disaster recov plans for all classified supercomputing systems that identify how eac h weapons laboratory's classified supercom recovered following service disruptions . onduct contingency and disaster recovery plan testing . test the three weapons laboratories' ability to share “on - demand” classified supercomputing capacity to ensure the event of unexpected service disruptions . in addition , we recomm following five actions: end that the administrator of nnsa take the document an agencywide means for reprioritizing the workload across nsa's classified supercomputing systems should a disruption occur . clearly define the oversight responsibilities of the nnsa asc program office and the nnsa office of the chief information officer , as they r to contingency and disaster recovery planning for nnsa's classified s upercomputing operations . identify , assess , and communicate the minimum classified supercomputing capacity needed to meet stockpile stewardship r equirements in the event of a service disruption . develop , document , and implement a process that identifies and tracks expenditures for contingency and d classified supercomputing assets . isaster recovery planning for nnsa's develop and document the total anticipated costs for contingency and disaster recovery planning of nnsa's classified superco which includes the replacement costs for these assets . in providing written comments ( reprinted in app . iii ) on a draf report , nnsa's associate administrator for management and administration agreed that improvements can be made in contingency an disaster recovery planning for supercomputing operations . he indicated that nnsa agreed with six of our nine recommendations and outlined t agency's intent to conduct business impact analyses , develop and test appropriate contingency and disaster recovery plans , document workload prioritization , and clearly define roles and responsibilities . however , nnsa did not agree with our recommendation related to identifying the minimum capacity needed to meet stockpile stew ardship requirements in the event of a service disruption . the associate administrator stated that this recommendation did not take into accou that the different types of supercomputers — capacity and capability — serve different functions and are procured and managed differently . in our report , we recognize that different types of supercomputers exist and that they are used for different purposes , they process unique workloads and operate independently . however , as we point out in the report , althoug h the weapons laboratories have identified supercomputing processing needed for normal business operations , they have not identified the minimum capacity needed to achieve processing priorities in the event of a service disruption .