dod concurred with our recommendation . dod's formal comments are reproduced in appendix ii . dod also provided technical comments on the draft report , which we have incorporated when appropriate . we will send copies of this report to the secretary of defense , the director of the department of defense education activity , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to determine: 1 ) what professional development dod provides its staff to support students with dyslexia and how the fiscal year 2004-to - 2006 funds designated for this purpose were used , ( 2 ) what identification and instructional services dod provides to students who may have dyslexia , and ( 3 ) how dod assesses the academic achievement of students with disabilities , including dyslexia . to meet these objectives , we interviewed and obtained documentation from dod and others , conducted a web - based survey of all 208 dod school principals , and visited or interviewed by phone officials and parents in six school districts . we conducted our work between january 2007 and october 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to obtain information on how schools support students with dyslexia we interviewed officials from the department of defense education activity ( dodea ) and the department of education , as well as representatives from the international dyslexia association and the national association of state directors of special education . we obtained several dodea reports including: a 2007 report to congress on dodea's efforts to assist students with dyslexia , a 2006 evaluation of dodea's english and language arts instruction , and a 2005 survey of dodea special education personnel . we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and dod guidance , and also obtained information on dod's obligation and disbursement of funds designated for professional development on dyslexia . we also reviewed the dodea web site for schools' student performance data to determine how dod assesses the academic achievement of students with disabilities . we also obtained summary reports on the scientific evidence regarding the effectiveness of dodea's supplemental reading programs from the department of education's what works clearinghouse and the florida center for reading research , two organizations that compile and evaluate research on reading . to gather information concerning dyslexic students in dodea schools , including how dodea schools identify dyslexic students and the instructional services provided to such students , we designed a web - based survey . we administered the survey to all 208 dodea school principals between may 10 , 2007 and july 6 , 2007 , and received completed surveys from 175 school principals — an 84 percent response rate .