raba . established in the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) in 1998 and modified in safetea - lu , raba was designed to align highway account program levels with actual revenues and help ensure that the account is used to fund highway programs instead of accumulating large balances . raba provisions require dot , as part of the annual budget submission process , to compare current revenue estimates with revenue estimates in the multiyear authorization act , most recently safetea - lu . based on these comparisons , dot is required to adjust both contract authority and obligation limitations either upwards when the account has greater revenues than projected or downwards when revenues do not meet projected levels . however , as revised under safetea - lu , no downward adjustments will be made in a fiscal year if , as of october 1 of that fiscal year , the balance in the highway account is more than $6 billion . safetea - lu also modified how the raba adjustments were calculated in order to smooth out the effects of the adjustment over 2 fiscal years , and added the provision concerning the $6 billion balance . while infusing more money into the htf would help keep the highway account solvent , such action would not ensure the long - term sustainability of the htf nor address the need for improved performance of our nation's surface transportation programs . we have previously reported that current surface transportation programs — authorized in safetea - lu — do not effectively address the transportation challenges the nation faces . as a result , we have called for a fundamental reexamination of the nation's surface transportation programs to follow several key principles: ( 1 ) have well - defined goals with direct links to an identified federal interest and role , ( 2 ) establish more performance - based links between funding and program outcomes to enhance grantee accountability , ( 3 ) institute tools and approaches that emphasize the return on the federal investment , and ( 4 ) ensure fiscal sustainability and bring revenues and expenditures into balance . such a reexamination would include reviewing the results of existing transportation programs , policies , and activities relative to the national interests and testing their continued relevance and relative priority . to address long - term sustainability , we have reported on several options that could be used to better align revenues and expenditures . each of these options has different merits and challenges , and the selection of any option will likely involve trade - offs among different policy goals . improve the efficiency of current facilities . better managing existing system capacity and improving the performance of existing facilities could minimize the need for additional expenditures . we have reported that the efficiency of the nation's surface transportation programs is declining and that the return on investment could be improved in a number of ways , including creating incentives to better use existing infrastructure . alter existing sources of revenue . the highway account's current sources of revenue — motor fuels taxes and truck - related taxes — could be better aligned with actual outlays .