illiteracy . mentors reported that widespread illiteracy among afghan army and police personnel had substantially impaired equipment accountability . for instance , a march 2008 mpri report on an afghan national army unit noted that illiteracy was directly interfering with the ability of supply section personnel to implement property accountability processes and procedures , despite repeated training efforts . in july 2008 , a police mentor in the zari district of balkh province stated that , “a lack of personnel [at the district headquarters] who can read and write is hampering efficient operations,” and added that there is currently one literate person being mentored to take charge of logistics . in addition , an august 2008 dyncorp report on the afghan national police noted that in kandahar , “concerns expressed over maintaining control over the storage facility keys . he cannot read or write , does not record anything that is being given out or have a request form for supplies filled out . is the same individual that was handing out automatic weapons to civilians the previous week.” corruption . reports of alleged theft and unauthorized resale of weapons are common . during 2008 , dyncorp mentors reported multiple instances of afghan national police personnel , including an afghan border police battalion commander in khost province , allegedly selling weapons to anti - coalition forces . in a march 2008 report , mentors noted that despite repeated requests , the afghan national police chief logistical officer for paktika province would not produce a list of serial numbers for weapons on hand . the dyncorp mentors suggested this reluctance to share information could be part of an attempt to conceal inventory discrepancies . in addition , a may 2008 dyncorp report on police cited corruption in helmand as that province's most significant problem , noting that the logistics officer had been named in all allegations of theft , extortion , and deceit reported to mentors by their afghan national police contacts . desertion . dyncorp mentors also reported cases of desertion in the afghan national police , which resulted in the loss of weapons . for instance , in july 2008 , mentors reported that when afghan border police officers at a faryab province checkpoint deserted to ally themselves with anti - coalition forces , they took all their weapons and two vehicles with them . another dyncorp mentor team training police in ghazni province reported in july 2008 that 65 afghan national police personnel had deserted and would not be coming to the base to be processed . the police officers that did arrive came without their issued weapons . unclear guidance . mpri mentors reported that afghan ministry logistics policies were not always clear to afghan army and police property managers . a mpri report dated april 2008 stated that approved ministry of interior policies outlining material accountability procedures were not widely disseminated and many logistics officers did not recognize any of the logistical policies as rule . additionally , a mpri mentor to the afghan national army told us that despite the new decrees , afghan national army logistics officers often carried out property accountability functions using soviet - style accounting methods and that the ministry of defense was still auditing army accounts against those defunct standards .