we disagree . we spoke with numerous agents in the field who cited coordination as a challenge . the examples we provided were illustrations of some of the types of coordination challenges that existed . our evidence indicates that coordination is a challenge given that three agencies with differing approaches have concurrent jurisdiction to investigate potential violations of export control laws . at times , these agencies have competing priorities , making it difficult to leverage finite enforcement personnel for oftentimes complex cases . homeland security agrees in principle with our first recommendation , but believes the establishment of an export enforcement coordination center within ice would address coordination concerns in the most immediate and comprehensive manner . homeland security's solution is one option for improved coordination . however , it would need to work with the other enforcement agencies to determine the viability of this option . our recommendation for a joint task force is the means by which to do so . in its technical comments related to coordination , justice commented that fbi looks forward to working closely with other export enforcement agencies . in its comments on our second recommendation — to establish goals for the processing of license determinations and coordinate with other enforcement officials to determine what additional training or guidance is needed on license determinations — commerce noted it was already taking action to improve license determination efforts through developing procedures and leading and participating in training conferences on export enforcement . however , these actions do not fully address our recommendation on establishing goals . specifically , commerce has not established formal license determination response times in conjunction with the exodus command center , which is a key means by which license determination requests are processed . homeland security agreed to support goal setting by providing input from a law enforcement perspective . in its comments on our draft report , state indicated that it had already established goals for processing license determinations in conjunction with the exodus command center . as a result , we revised our recommendation to direct that commerce and homeland security establish goals for processing license determinations . state concurred with our recommendation to determine what additional training or guidance is needed on license determinations . specifically , state has agreed with homeland security to update and clarify its guidance on license determinations . state further noted that consulting with fbi and ice regarding additional training for coordinating state's support to their criminal investigations would build upon its past and ongoing work in this area . regarding our third recommendation — to determine the feasibility of having homeland security's customs and border protection officers decrement commerce export licenses — commerce expressed some reservation . specifically , commerce stated that it has seen no data to indicate that the underlying issue is of sufficient enforcement concern and that automated systems would need to be developed within cbp to support this effort . we do not believe that commerce should dismiss this recommendation without further analysis . we previously reported that commerce has not conducted comprehensive analyses of items that have been exported ; therefore it is not in a position to know whether it is an enforcement concern .