department of state . state plays a role in the h - 1b program by interviewing and potentially issuing visas to h - 1b candidates living abroad , whose petitions were approved by homeland security . state conducts its own review of the h - 1b petitioner and documentation pertaining to his or her employer by comparing information gleaned from interviews against basic information in the lca and i - 129 petition , such as the name of the petitioner and the foreign worker . however , official department guidance instructs consular officials not to question the petition approvals made by homeland security when making their decision on the visa application without having obtained new evidence . state guidance stipulates that a petition can only be sent back when there has been a clear error committed in adjudicating the i - 129 petition or new evidence is submitted that contradicts homeland security adjudicators' decisions . officials noted that there is a high threshold for the identification of a clear error and this rationale is almost never used . state has , however , recommended 1,744 revocations in fiscal year 2009 based on new evidence . as a general rule , state consular officers treat information provided to and reviewed by homeland security on business establishments , relationships , and individual qualifications as bona fide . labor's wage and hour division . labor's wage and hour investigates h - 1b complaints primarily related to improper wage payments and failures to notify workers that a company intends to hire an h - 1b worker . however , its ability to enforce worker protections with regard to the h - 1b program is limited . although the secretary of labor has authority to initiate investigations , wage and hour reported that it had never initiated an investigation under this authority . officials explained that they rarely proactively investigate companies for h - 1b violations , and that they may generally only act on formal complaints . moreover , by law , investigations can only be initiated from information obtained from an aggrieved or credible party outside of labor . further , labor officials told us they have interpreted this restriction to include information from homeland security as well . as a result , labor's wage and hour could not initiate a complaint based on any information it might receive from homeland security , such as information on potential abuses that homeland security might glean from its review of the i - 129 petition . in a prior report , gao suggested that congress remove these legal restrictions , but congress has yet to take action . while the majority of complaints received by labor have been reported by h - 1b workers , very few complaints are filed . in 2009 , only 664 out of 51,980 companies approved to hire new or extending h - 1b workers had complaints against them . according to agency officials , h - 1b workers are likely to be reluctant to file complaints against employers for fear that the company might be disbarred , which in turn could result in the complainant and fellow h - 1b workers at the company losing their jobs and potentially having to leave the united states .