i would be pleased to answer your questions . if you or your staff members have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . other individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include jeffrey knott ( assistant director ) , di'mond spencer ( analyst - in - charge ) , chris businsky , nancy glover , franklin jackson , and daniel swartz . also contributing were melina asencio , scott pettis , and zsaroq powe . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . va's ig reported deficiencies in each of these categories for the department . as a result of these deficiencies , the igs at 18 of the 24 cfo act agencies designated information security as either a material weakness ( six agencies , including va ) or significant deficiency ( 12 agencies ) in internal control over financial reporting for their agency . for va , fiscal year 2018 was the 17th year in a row that the department had reported a material weakness in information security . in addition , igs at 21 of the 24 agencies , including va , cited information security as a major management challenge for their agency for fiscal year 2018 . the administration has developed key milestones and performance metrics for agency chief information officers ( cio ) to use to assess their agency's progress toward achieving outcomes that strengthen federal cybersecurity . effectively implementing information security controls va has been challenged to effectively implement security controls over its information and information systems . as previously mentioned in this statement , the va ig reported that the department did not have an effective information security program and has had deficient information security controls over its financial systems . the weaknesses described by the ig are consistent with the control deficiencies we identified during an examination of va's high - impact systems that we reported on in 2016 . in those reports , we described deficiencies in va's implementation of access controls , patch management , and contingency planning . these deficiencies existed , in part , because the department had not effectively implemented key elements of its information security program . we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . va's mission is to promote the health , welfare , and dignity of all veterans by ensuring that they receive medical care , benefits , social support , and lasting memorials . in providing health care and other benefits to veterans and their dependents , va relies extensively on it systems and networks to receive , process , and maintain sensitive data , including veterans' medical records and other personally identifiable information .