we disagree . fisma specifies in detail a number of oversight responsibilities that it assigns to omb . it was several of these specific responsibilities that in 2010 omb announced dhs would be assuming . therefore we conclude that omb transferred these responsibilities to dhs . more importantly , with these responsibilities now divided between the two organizations , it remains unclear how omb and dhs are to share oversight of individual departments and agencies . the director of the departmental gao - oig liaison office at dhs provided written comments that discussed specific actions the department has taken or plans to take to address challenges we identified , such as information sharing , analysis and warning , and expanding the cybersecurity workforce . he added that the department's blueprint for a secure cyber future aligns with the various national strategies we discuss in this report and addresses the challenge areas we identified . in addition , the audit liaison officer in the office of the chief financial officer provided technical comments via e - mail , which we have incorporated into the final report as appropriate . dhs's written comments are reprinted in appendix iii . the special assistant for cybersecurity in the office of the secretary of defense provided general observations about the draft report as well as technical comments via e - mail . for example , the comments indicated that any update to the national cybersecurity strategy should address ways to make cyberspace more defensible . the special assistant for cybersecurity also acknowledged inconsistencies in departmental guidance but said that dod officials were not confused about their responsibilities and that future updates to the departmental guidance would clarify cyber policy responsibilities . we agree that clarification of dod organizations' roles and responsibilities would enhance the department's ability to support dhs during significant domestic cyber incidents . in addition , the comments indicated that cybersecurity strategies should be evaluated in terms of to whom the strategy is addressed ( i.e. , the federal government or the private sector ) , the rapidity of change in cybersecurity issues , and the environment for which the strategy is written ( i.e. , federal civilian government , the military , or the private sector ) . we agree that these are important factors to consider in developing comprehensive cybersecurity strategies and believe our report reflects these factors . we also believe that the issues we identified remain of critical importance in developing and implementing an effective national cybersecurity strategy . finally , the comments identified actions dod has taken or is taking to address challenges related to sharing information , promoting education , and promoting r&d . we are sending copies of this report to the special assistant to the president and cybersecurity coordinator , the acting director of the office of management and budget , the director of the office of science and technology policy , the secretary of the department of homeland security , the secretary of defense , the acting secretary of the department of commerce , and other interested parties . the report will also be available on the gao website at no charge at http: / / www.gao.gov .