cost . the cost estimate that informed the program's $9.8 billion cost baseline — which includes lifecycle costs for the acquisition , operations , and maintenance of three polar icebreakers — substantially met our best practices for being comprehensive , well - documented , and accurate , but only partially met best practices for being credible . the cost estimate did not quantify the range of possible costs over the entire life of the program , such as the period of operations and support . as a result , the cost estimate was not fully reliable and may underestimate the total funding needed for the program . schedule . the coast guard's planned delivery dates of 2023 , 2025 , and 2026 for the three ships were not informed by a realistic assessment of shipbuilding activities , but rather were primarily driven by the potential gap in icebreaking capabilities once the coast guard's only operating heavy polar icebreaker — the polar star — reaches the end of its service life ( see figure 2 ) . the polar star's service life is estimated to end between fiscal years 2020 and 2023 . this creates a potential heavy polar icebreaker capability gap of about 3 years , if the polar star's service life were to end in 2020 and the lead polar icebreaker were to be delivered by the end of fiscal year 2023 as planned . if the lead ship is delivered later than planned in this scenario , the potential gap could be more than 3 years . the coast guard is planning to recapitalize the polar star's key systems starting in 2020 to extend the service life of the ship until the planned delivery of the second polar icebreaker ( see figure 3 ) . further , our analysis of selected lead ships for other shipbuilding programs found the icebreaker program's estimated construction time of 3 years is optimistic . an unrealistic schedule puts the coast guard is at risk of not delivering the icebreakers when promised and the potential gap in icebreaking capabilities could widen . design . the coast guard set program baselines before conducting a preliminary design review — a systems engineering event that is intended to verify that the contractor's design meets the requirement of the ship specifications and is producible — which puts the program at risk of having an unstable design , thereby increasing the program's cost and schedule risks . although the coast guard set the program baselines prior to gaining knowledge on the feasibility of the selected shipbuilder's design , it has expressed a commitment to having a stable design prior to the start of lead ship construction . this is consistent with shipbuilding best practices we identified in 2009 . to address these four areas and other risks , we made six recommendations to dhs , coast guard , and the navy in our september 2018 report . establishing an integrated ship design team . the ship design team includes coast guard and navy technical experts who develop ship specifications based on the polar icebreaker program's operational requirements document . the ship design team is under the supervision of a coast guard ship design manager , who provides all technical oversight for development of the polar icebreaker's design .