postaccident tracking . we also found large differences in the information contained in the plans we reviewed for the postaccident tracking component . all of the plans we reviewed for one district detailed the responsibilities of surface and underground personnel for this component and described the underground areas or zones to be used in identifying the location of miners . in contrast , in another district , none of the plans we reviewed described the responsibilities of the mine personnel or the zones to be used to identify the location of miners . without providing specific information about how to track miners , it was not clear how the districts determined that the methods identified in the plans will be sufficient for those mines and how mine operators will identify where trapped miners are located in the event of an accident . most of the components of mines' emergency response plans have been implemented , but two key components remain . as of january 2008 , all underground coal mines had implemented all or most components of their emergency response plans . however , few of the mines had implemented one key component — postaccident breathable air — because needed equipment was not available . in addition , mines had not begun to implement another component — wireless communications systems or a comparable alternative — because fully wireless technology is not available and msha had not determined what alternative technologies mine operators will be allowed to use to meet this requirement of the miner act , which mines must implement by june 2009 . as of january 2008 , all underground coal mines had implemented all or most of the components of their emergency response plans that were required to be implemented immediately after approval . twenty percent of all underground coal mines had fully implemented all components of their emergency response plans . the remaining mines had implemented all of the components , except the requirement for postaccident breathable air . specifically , according to msha district officials , all mines had implemented the redundant communication and tracking systems required by their plans , had provided training on emergency procedures and the use of self - contained self - rescuers , and had developed procedures for coordinating and communicating with local emergency responders , as required . in addition , many mines had installed flame - resistant lifelines , although the miner act generally does not require their installation until june 2009 . generally , as with most plan components , mines are using widely accepted methods to implement the current postaccident communications and tracking requirements of their emergency response plans and are moving toward using electronic tracking systems to meet the june 2009 requirement of the miner act . to meet the redundant communications requirement , according to niosh , most mines are using hardwired mine phones and leaky feeder cable systems with handheld radios ( see fig . to meet the postaccident tracking requirement , nearly 90 percent of the plans we reviewed specified that a dispatcher or equivalent system would be used to track miners . at the time of our review , according to the manufacturers we interviewed , approximately 13 mines were installing electronic tracking systems .