these trends appear to have continued . for example , in 2015 three for - profit , independent providers together reported operating 692 helicopters , or about 66 percent of the total 1,045 helicopters in the industry that year . these three providers operate helicopters that span all three business model types across multiple states . as a result , some of these 692 helicopters may be under contract for aviation services to hospital - affiliated providers , in which case the hospital pays the independent provider a fixed rate and sets the prices charged for the service rather than the independent provider . air ambulance providers , like other medical service providers , charge standard rates for all transports but receive payments from many sources , often at varying rates . air ambulance providers charge patients based on a pre - established lift - off fee and per mile fee , regardless of medical services provided in route . providers then receive payments from a mix of sources , depending on the transported patient's insurance coverage . the amount paid by private health insurance also depends on whether the provider has a contract in place with the insurer . key payers of air ambulance service charges include: medicare — a federal program for people who are 65 or older and certain younger people with disabilities , regardless of income level . medicaid — a joint federal and state program for some people with limited income and resources . private health insurance companies — may have a contractual in - network agreement with an air ambulance provider for a payment rate negotiated ahead of time . without such a contract , air ambulance providers are considered out of network , and the insurance company's policies set its payment rates . self - pay — patients not covered by insurance . whether or not an air ambulance provider may bill a patient for amounts in excess of the amount covered by insurance , as well as any deductibles , coinsurance , or copayment — called balance billing — varies based on the patient's insurance coverage . under medicare rules , for example , air ambulance providers are not permitted to balance bill medicare patients for ambulance services beyond deductibles and coinsurance requirements . with respect to medicaid , providers participating in a state's medicaid program are required to accept medicaid payment as payment in full and are prohibited from collecting any additional amounts from medicaid patients , other than authorized cost sharing amounts . patients with private health insurance might only be balance billed when the insurer and provider lack an in - network agreement , while uninsured patients might be held responsible by the provider for the entire price charged ( see table 1 ) . cms sets rates and pays claims for medicare . medicare payments , including beneficiary co - payments , for helicopter air ambulance service totaled approximately $460 million in 2014 . although cms typically sets medicare payment rates by considering whether payments are adequate for a relatively efficient provider , medicare rates for air ambulance service were last updated in 2002 as part of a negotiated rulemaking that involved public and industry stakeholders .