we disagree . in our view , all of the contract extensions beyond 1994 — the contract's 6th year — represent work beyond the scope of what mwaa offered for competition in 1988 . the solicitation clearly anticipated a contract for professional services for a period approximating 5 years . finally , although the contractor was asked to prepare mwaa's original capital development plan , the solicitation did not ( 1 ) specify that the contractor was to oversee the plan's implementation until completion or ( 2 ) anticipate the contractor's involvement in the new development plan that mwaa initiated in august 2000 . the contract , which is currently scheduled to expire in december 2003 , is now in its 13th year and had cost about $230 million through december 31 , 2000 . mwaa noted that although its board of directors was aware and supportive of the contract extensions , it now regrets not having sought the board's approvals . according to mwaa , the approvals would have eliminated even the shadow of a doubt about the propriety of mwaa's contract extensions . mwaa explained that it would have been detrimental to initiate a change in its program management services during the high growth and highly dynamic period between 1995 and 2000 because of the need to address , among other things , protracted and ongoing issues involving an unfinished project in mwaa's original capital development project . thus , in mwaa's view , we did not adequately consider the importance of maintaining continuity in its program support during this period . we disagree . under the terms of mwaa's lease with the federal government , it is the responsibility of mwaa's board of directors to decide whether mwaa's desire for continuity necessitated a series of sole - source contract extensions . the extensions in question were not competed , and mwaa staff did not present the sole - source contract extensions , along with a justification supporting each extension , to the board . accordingly , the board did not approve them . iv. ) the use of full and open competition has long been recognized as promoting several important objectives . contracting organizations must limit the scope of a competitively awarded contract to the work that they originally procured . to achieve full and open competition , an organization cannot add work to a contract that was not originally subject to competition . for example , if an organization solicits offers to furnish 1,000 items at a fixed unit price , it cannot later add another 1,000 items at the time of award — even if the contractor consents to the change . instead , since the organization knew at the time of award that its requirement was for 2,000 items , it must cancel the solicitation and reopen competition for the full 2,000 items using full and open competition . likewise , an organization cannot award a contract with the intention of materially modifying it later . thus , in the example given , the organization cannot award a contract for 1,000 items knowing that it will increase the quantity to 2,000 items after the award is made .