comparisons with other maos . these mao - specific comparisons display an mao's volume of encounters — overall and by service type ( professional , inpatient , outpatient , and durable medical equipment ) — alongside the regional and national averages for both ma encounter data submissions and medicare ffs claims for each of the past 3 years . developing an automated report for maos on diagnoses used for risk adjustment . this step partially fulfills the data validation protocol activity to summarize findings on encounter data completeness and accuracy to provide recommendations to maos . the automated report identifies diagnoses from mao encounter data submissions that cms will use to calculate risk scores for the next payment year . the report is primarily intended to help maos ascertain the basis of enrollee risk scores , though representatives from health insurance trade associations told us that they have also used the automated reports to prepare internal financial projections and compare patient diagnoses between encounter data and raps data submissions . maos first received these reports in december 2015 , and since then , cms has modified the report layout in response to mao feedback . according to agency officials , cms has finalized the initial version of the automated report and is distributing the automated reports to maos on a monthly basis . further , the agency intends to make technical changes as necessary in the future . according to agency officials , they finalized the protocol for validating ma encounter data in november 2016 and have begun implementing several parts of it . in september 2016 , cms awarded a contract to update the protocol and report annually on the implementation and outcomes of protocol activities . the stakeholder organizations we interviewed raised several issues with cms's recent actions to ensure the completeness of ma encounter data . the main issues mentioned by several stakeholder organizations included the following: errors in identifying diagnoses used for risk adjustment . representatives from health insurance trade associations we interviewed criticized cms's process for identifying diagnoses that are relevant for risk adjustment . first , they stated that maos question the integrity of cms's data processing . they noted , for example , that the automated reports maos receive had missing procedure codes for some encounters where the original data submissions had included them . cms told us that they are working with maos to make needed corrections to these reports . second , representatives said that maos have been unable to replicate cms's analyses because cms has made adjustments to how it identifies diagnoses eligible for risk adjustment using encounter data . as a result , they say , maos are unsure whether cms is properly distinguishing diagnoses that are used for risk adjustment from those that are not used . when asked about this concern , cms officials noted that they publicly announced how the agency intends to implement the risk adjustment transition in december 2015 , and the methodology has not changed . inclusion of encounter data elements considered irrelevant .