decision - support tools . hsa - eligible plans typically provide enrollee decision - support tools that include , to some extent , information on the cost of health care services and the quality of health care providers . experts suggest that reliable information about the cost of particular health care services and the quality of specific health care providers would help enrollees become more actively engaged in making health care purchasing decisions . these tools may be provided by health insurance carriers to all health insurance plan enrollees , but are likely to be more important to enrollees of hsa - eligible plans who have a greater financial incentive to make informed decisions about the quality and costs of health care providers and services . hsa - eligible plans had lower premiums , higher deductibles , and higher out - of - pocket spending limits than traditional plans in 2005 . specifically , data from national employer health benefits surveys regarding plans offered in the group market indicate: premiums for hsa - eligible plans averaged 35 percent less than employers' traditional plan premiums for single coverage and 29 percent less for family coverage in 2005 . annual deductibles for hsa - eligible plans averaged $1,901 for single coverage and $4,070 for family coverage in 2005 — nearly six times greater than those of employers' traditional plans . the median annual out - of - pocket spending limit for hsa - eligible plans offered by large employers was $3,500 for single coverage in 2005 , which was higher than the median out - of - pocket spending limit of $1,960 reported for traditional plans . the hsa - eligible and traditional plans we reviewed covered the same broad categories of services , including preventive services , and also used similar provider networks in 2005 . about 55 percent of hsa - eligible plan enrollees reported hsa contributions in 2004 , according to our analysis of data obtained from irs and a publicly available survey . hsa - eligible plan enrollees from the employers we reviewed were more likely to contribute to an hsa when their employer also offered account contributions . among tax filers who claimed a deduction for an hsa in 2004 , the average deduction was about $2,100 and the average amount deducted increased with income . about two - thirds of employers offering hsa - eligible plans contributed to their employees' hsas in 2005 , according to two national employer health benefits surveys . in 2004 , the average employer hsa contribution reported to irs was about $1,064 . account holders used hsa funds to pay for medical care and to accumulate savings . about 45 percent of tax filers reporting an hsa contribution in 2004 — made by themselves , their employers , or others on their behalf — also reported withdrawing funds in 2004 . the average annual amount withdrawn by these tax filers was about $1,910 . about 90 percent of these withdrawn funds were used to pay for expenses identified under the internal revenue code as eligible medical expenses . irs data show that about 40 percent of all funds contributed to hsas in 2004 were withdrawn from the accounts by the end of the year .