usps had no comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the postmaster general , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions on this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or stjamesl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . ( fig . 3 provides more information on usps's process for reviewing retail facilities for possible closure. ) when headquarters officials decide to close a retail facility , district employees carry out a variety of activities related to the closure . for example , district employees must move equipment , realign any affected delivery routes , and transfer mail carriers and other employees into other locations . related to this , district employees also are responsible for identifying potential positions for staff affected by the closure . for example , one district office manager told us that employees in her department have been seeking management opportunities outside usps because of these concerns . another district manager commented that he has seen a decrease in the number of employees willing to move into managerial positions because of uncertainty about future promotional opportunities and the stress associated with these positions . in addition , 17 field officials we talked to expressed concern that the loss of a significant number of senior , experienced area and district employees during the 2011 consolidation might negatively affect usps's ability to manage field operations . area and district employees have key roles in realigning city delivery routes . specifically , area employees oversee the city route realignment process to ensure consistency across districts in their area , while district employees directly carry out the realignments . to do so , district employees ( 1 ) gather and analyze information on the factors that affect delivery time ; ( 2 ) observe the time a mail carrier spends servicing his or her route and , if the route is determined to represent less than a full 8- hour work day ; ( 3 ) reconfigure the route so that it is more efficient . to evaluate the factors that affect delivery time , district managers consider a variety of factors , including the number of addresses and mail volume on a particular route , the distance between addresses , the geographic location of the route ( eg , the downtown of a major metropolitan area versus a small town ) , and the mode of delivery ( eg , mail delivered to a curbside mailbox , a mail slot in a door , or a cluster box ) . in addition , district employees physically observe a mail carrier's daily activities , both in the office preparing mail for delivery and transporting and delivering the mail , to determine whether the route represents a full 8-hour day .