interior generally concurred with our recommendations . in response to our first recommendation , interior commented that there are ongoing usgs efforts to analyze existing water quality data in the piceance basin and to monitor surface water quality and quantity in both basins but that it also plans to conduct more comprehensive assessments in the future . with regard to our second recommendation , interior stated that blm and usgs are working on identifying shared needs for modeling . interior underscored the importance of modeling prior to the approval of large - scale oil shale development and cited the importance of the industry's testing of various technologies on federal rd&d leases to determine if production can occur in commercial quantities and to develop an accurate determination of potential water uses for each technology . in support of our third recommendation to coordinate with doe and state agencies with regulatory authority over water resources , interior stated that blm and usgs are working to improve such coordination and noted current ongoing efforts with state and local authorities . in conclusion , mr. chairman , attempts to commercially develop oil shale in the united states have spanned nearly a century . during this time , the industry has focused primarily on overcoming technological challenges and trying to develop a commercially viable operation . however , there are a number of uncertainties associated with the impacts that a commercially viable oil shale industry could have on water availability and quality that should be an important focus for federal agencies and policymakers going forward . chairman lamborn , ranking member holt , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . for further information about this testimony , please contact anu k. mittal , director , natural resources and environment team , ( 202 ) 512-3841 or mittala@gao.gov . in addition to the individual named above , key contributors to this testimony were dan haas ( assistant director ) , quindi franco , alison o'neill , barbara timmerman , and lisa vojta . retorting can be accomplished primarily by two methods . one method involves mining the oil shale , bringing it to the surface , and heating it in a vessel known as a retort . mining oil shale and retorting it has been demonstrated in the united states and is currently done to a limited extent in estonia , china , and brazil . however , a commercial mining operation with surface retorts has never been developed in the united states because the oil it produces competes directly with conventional crude oil , which historically has been less expensive to produce . the other method , known as an in - situ process , involves drilling holes into the oil shale , inserting heaters to heat the rock , and then collecting the oil as it is freed from the rock .