gao - 02-348 . washington , d.c.: 2002 . ( see fig . in addition to federal funds , other sources are used to support the provision of special education and related services for children with disabilities , such as state general and special education funds , local funds , and private insurance . ( 3 ) what is known about the effectiveness of these programs and of the early interventions they fund ? ( 4 ) what opportunities exist for better coordination among the programs or consolidation of the programs to achieve efficiencies ? to answer these questions , we reviewed pertinent documents , including state monitoring reports issued by the u.s. department of education's ( education ) office of special education programs ( osep ) , which provided detailed information about state and local efforts to implement idea . we examined the grant application process and administrative structure for each grant program , conducted interviews with special education program officials and representatives from special education stakeholder groups ( parents and state directors of special education ) , conducted comprehensive state - level interviews in four states — maine , minnesota , ohio , and virginia — and conducted structured telephone interviews with officials from 15 states . we selected the four states for comprehensive interviews based , in part , on recommendations from state - level officials and others with a direct interest in these programs . we also considered variations in how states administer these programs and selected states that represented a variety of administrative structures and geographic regions . for the telephone interviews , we selected at least 1 state from each of education's 10 regions . in order to obtain a wide range of perspectives on program administration , we also considered which state agency had been designated to administer infant grants . we performed our work from june 2001 through february 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the 50 states and the district of columbia spent an estimated $50 billion on special education for children from birth through age 21 in school year 1999-00 . about 12 percent of this amount came from federal funds , specifically idea grants ( 10 percent ) and medicaid funds ( 2 percent ) . under idea , three grants can fund services to children under age 6 . school - age grants provide money to states to help them serve all eligible children , ranging in age from 3 through 21 . preschool grants provide money to states to help serve 3 through 5-year - olds with disabilities and require states to have policies and procedures that assure a free appropriate public education for all 3 through 5-year - olds with disabilities as a condition for receiving other idea funds for this age range . infant grants provide money to states to serve children under age 3 who have developmental delays or a condition that will probably result in a developmental delay , or at a state's discretion , who are otherwise at risk of developmental delays . unlike the other two grants , infant grants provide services to both children and their families , primarily in settings that are not school - based . ( see table 1. )