gao - 10-790 . washington , d.c.: july 27 , 2010 . department of homeland security: assessments of selected complex acquisitions . gao - 10-588sp . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2010 . staff acknowledgments are provided in appendix ii . the coast guard authorization act of fiscal year 2010 , as amended , specified that “within 180 days after the date of enactment of the coast guard authorization act for fiscal year 2010 , the comptroller general of the united states shall transmit a report to the appropriate congressional committees that — ( 1 ) contains an assessment of current coast guard acquisition and management capabilities to manage level 1 and level 2 acquisitions ; ( 2 ) includes recommendations as to how the coast guard can improve its acquisition management , either through internal reforms or by seeking acquisition expertise from the department of defense ( dod ) ; and ( 3 ) addresses specifically the question of whether the coast guard can better leverage department of defense or other agencies' contracts that would meet the needs of level 1 or level 2 acquisitions in order to obtain the best possible price.” to determine the coast guard's current management capabilities for its major acquisition programs , we evaluated the coast guard's acquisition policies and processes , status of its acquisition workforce , and execution of its major programs since we last reported on the coast guard's acquisitions and acquisition management in june and july 2010 . we reviewed coast guard acquisition governance , policy , and process documents such as the coast guard's major systems acquisition manual and blueprint for continuous improvement that have been issued , implemented , or updated since july 2010 . we also interviewed coast guard and other department of homeland security ( dhs ) acquisition officials to analyze and explain the factors behind the acquisition governance changes as well as how changes have been implemented to date through review of meeting briefings , minutes , and subsequent decision memos . to evaluate the coast guard's status of its acquisition workforce , we reviewed coast guard information on government , contractor , and vacant positions to identify any progress made in reducing acquisition workforce vacancies and filling critical positions since july 2010 as well as any positions that continue to be challenging to fill . additionally , we obtained and analyzed coast guard program staff information to determine specific programs experiencing staffing shortfalls and conducted interviews to supplement coast guard information and determine the extent to which staffing shortfalls affect program execution . to evaluate the coast guard's execution of its major programs we analyzed information on the status of those programs since july 2010 through reviews of general acquisition status reports ( eg , quarterly acquisition reports to congress and quarterly performance reports ) , program briefings , and acquisition process documents ( eg , acquisition program baselines ) to determine how many programs have cost , schedule , or performance issues based on criteria in the major systems acquisition manual .