notification of make decisions . according to the federal acquisition regulation , the prime contractor is responsible for managing contract performance , including planning , placing , and administering subcontracts as necessary to ensure the lowest overall cost and technical risk to the government . when “make - or - buy programs” are required , the government may reserve the right to review and agree on the contractor's make - or - buy program when necessary to ensure negotiation of reasonable contract prices , among other things . we recommended that the coast guard be notified of make decisions over $5 million in order to facilitate controlling costs through competition . most of our recommendations have not been fully addressed . recent information shows continued challenges in the areas of overall system integration , cost and schedule management , and integrated product teams , which consist of contractor and government personnel and are the coast guard's principal tool for managing the deepwater program . in our opinion , the uncertainties associated with the proposed revisions to the deepwater program only heighten these risks . as the lead federal agency for maritime homeland security within the department of homeland security , the coast guard is responsible for homeland and nonhomeland security missions , including ensuring security in ports and waterways and along coastlines , conducting search and rescue missions , interdicting drug shipments and illegal aliens , enforcing fisheries laws , and responding to reports of pollution . the deepwater fleet , which consists of 186 aircraft and 88 cutters of various sizes and capabilities , plays a critical role in all of these missions . first , the need to replace or upgrade deteriorating legacy assets is considerable . while the coast guard is making progress on developing ( 1 ) measures that better demonstrate how the deteriorating condition of the legacy assets impact on mission capabilities and ( 2 ) a strategy to better prioritize upgrades and maximize capabilities , it is clear that the deepwater legacy assets are insufficient for meeting all of the coast guard's missions . second , although the need to replace and upgrade assets is strong , there still are major risks in the coast guard's acquisition approach . the cost increases and schedule slippages that have already occurred are warning signs . we will continue to work with the coast guard to determine how best to manage these risks so that the deepwater missions can be accomplished in the most cost - effective way . third , there are signs that as the deepwater program moves ahead , the coast guard will continue to report more problems with sustaining existing assets , together with the attendant need for additional infusions of funding to deal with them . as shown in table 1 , the fleet includes fixed - wing aircraft , helicopters , and cutters of varying lengths . some coast guard deepwater cutters were built in the 1960s . notwithstanding extensive overhauls and other upgrades , a number of the cutters are nearing the end of their estimated service lives .