household size . this is used when the bureau knows an address is a real , occupied home , but not how many people live there . to carry out each of these types of count imputation , the bureau uses a technique referred to as hot - deck imputation which employs continually updated census data from similar nearby households as the basis for filling in the missing statuses and household size . the bureau has been using some form of hot - deck imputation since at least the 1960 census . according to bureau reporting , in 2010 , about 500,000 of 137 million addresses counted in the decennial ( 0.4 percent ) were missing an entire response and the bureau therefore used count imputation to determine a combination of their residence and occupancy status and household size . the bureau's count imputation in 2010 added about 1.2 million people to the final census count . for 2020 , however , some of the missing responses which otherwise would have required count imputation will instead be resolved through the use of administrative records in conjunction with the bureau's door - to - door non - response follow - up effort . specifically , the bureau plans to draw on relevant data from records of sufficient quality thereby reducing the amount of follow - up field work needed and the number of households in need of count imputation . according to bureau officials , they plan to finalize a decision memorandum in december 2019 specifying the bureau's thresholds for determining whether administrative records are of sufficient quality for such uses . according to bureau officials , tests and evaluations performed during the preceding decade demonstrate that these uses of administrative records will provide more accurate results than traditional methods of seeking information about the address from neighbors and others or from count imputation alone . bureau testing and evaluation also identified improvements to its count imputation technique for 2020 , including enhanced use of administrative records in its hot - deck imputation , which it expects will generate results better aligned with actual data for those addresses where it had been missing . once the bureau has determined the total number of households and people as of census day for apportionment purposes , it resolves incomplete and conflicting information within individual household responses for redistricting and final tabulation purposes . specifically , for 2020 , the bureau plans to ensure that each household response includes complete and consistent information regarding , for occupied housing units , the age , date of birth , sex , race , and ethnicity ( hispanic or non - hispanic origin ) of each household resident ; their relationship to the householder ; whether the housing unit is rented or owned by a member of the household ; for group quarters , the type of such quarters , such as federal detention center or in - patient hospice facility ; and , if the unit is vacant , why ( see figure 4 ) . these characteristics ( which the bureau refers to as person and housing characteristics ) may be incomplete or conflicting for various reasons , including intentional or accidental omissions or errors by the person filling out the form .