selective service . generally , to be eligible to receive pell grants , applicable male students must have registered with the selective service . however , for male students who have not registered , institutions may determine that the student is not ineligible for a pell grant if the student can demonstrate by submitting evidence to the institution that ( 1 ) he was unable to present himself for registration because of reasons beyond his control — such as hospitalization , incarceration , or institutionalization — or ( 2 ) he is over 26 and when he was between the ages of 18 to 26 , he did not knowingly and willfully fail to register with the selective service . education data showed that about 15 percent of the fafsas submitted in the pilot's first year were from applicants who had not registered for selective service . what experiences are participating schools having as they implement the second chance pell pilot ? how is education monitoring and evaluating the pilot , and what opportunities , if any , exist for improvement in these areas ? to determine what actions education and other stakeholders have taken to implement the pilot , we reviewed summary - level data from education regarding the schools and individuals that participated in the first 2 years of the pilot . to ensure the reliability of these data , we reviewed agency documentation about the data and the system that produced them and interviewed officials from education responsible for collecting and validating the data . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to further identify the actions taken to implement the pilot , we interviewed officials from the department of justice , as well as education's office of federal student aid , on the actions taken to prepare for the pilot and the guidance and support provided to participants , among other topics . we also interviewed representatives from three research groups — the urban institute , the vera institute of justice ( vera ) , and new america — in order to gain additional insight on the effects of postsecondary correctional education as well as the design and implementation of the second chance pell pilot . to understand schools' actions and experiences implementing the pilot , we interviewed officials from a non - generalizable sample of 12 participating schools ( and associated prison partners ) that were selected for variation in type of schools ( i.e . public and private nonprofit ) , degrees awarded , type of prisons served , and other variables . as part of these interviews , we also interviewed officials from seven correctional facilities who partnered with the participating schools . we also visited three prisons that partnered with the selected schools ( jessup correctional institution in maryland , mission creek corrections center for women in washington state , and sing sing correctional facility in new york ) and one school's campus ( city university of new york ) in order to observe classrooms and student resources such as libraries and study spaces and to talk with individuals selected by the schools about their experiences participating in the pilot .