state . in its 2014 adaptation plan , state included a brief discussion of climate change as one of multiple factors that potentially will drive migration and impact its mission . state reported that the specific impacts of climate change on the ability of the department to promote peace and stability in regions of vital interest to the united states were unknown . for example , according to the plan , an increase in heavy precipitation events around the world could damage the electric grid and transportation and energy water infrastructure , upon which state depends , making it difficult to maintain operations and diplomatic relations . in its plan , state reported that climate change impacts may threaten international peace , civil stability , and economic growth through aggravating existing problems related to poverty and environmental degradation . further , environmental and poverty - related issues and regional instability could stress relationships with some foreign governments . however , the plan noted that specific impacts of climate change on conflict , migration , terrorism , and complex disasters were still unknown . usaid . in its 2014 adaptation plan , usaid included a brief discussion of migration as one potential effect of climate change that could also impact security . usaid stated that the impact of climate change on its programs and operations , if left unaddressed , could compromise the agency's ability to achieve its mission . further , usaid's plan referred to increased migration as a potential risk of climate change . flooding and other extreme climate events can result in increased migration , among other impacts , that could affect existing and planned usaid programming . in particular , programs in areas like agriculture and food security , global health , water and sanitation , infrastructure , and disaster readiness and humanitarian response are vulnerable to climate change , according to usaid . furthermore , dod stated that the impacts of climate change may cause instability in other countries by , among other things , impairing access to food and water , damaging infrastructure , uprooting and displacing large numbers of people , and compelling mass migration . these developments , according to the department , could undermine already fragile governments that are unable to respond effectively , or challenge currently stable governments , as well as increase competition and tension between countries vying for limited resources . in response to executive order 13677 , state and usaid developed processes for climate change risk assessments for their country and regional planning documents . though these assessments are not specific to migration , a few of the assessments identified the nexus of climate change and migration . state . state required climate change risk assessments for all new integrated country strategies drafted in 2016 or later . we reviewed 10 integrated country strategies from the two regions that were the first to implement the climate change risk assessment requirement — africa , and east asia and the pacific . all 10 of the strategies included climate change risk assessments , one of which — cambodia — identified migration as a risk for the country . the cambodia strategy states that internal migration due to climate change hinders access to health care and the prevention of infectious diseases like malaria .