iii. ) second , higher - income individuals are also more highly represented in the soi data than lower - income individuals . for example , our analysis of the 2001 income distribution of financial aid applicants and of itemizers shows that about 35 percent of aid applicants have an income of less than $20,000 , while less than 10 percent of itemizers have incomes in that range . borrowers are responsible for paying all interest on the loan . like unsubsidized loans , plus loans are generally awarded based on the difference between a student's coa less other awards of student aid including unsubsidized loan awards . as is the case with unsubsidized loans , a change in a student's or family's efc can affect the amount of a plus loan that a parent may borrow . these returns and state tax regulations are analyzed to estimate state , local , real estate , property , and sales taxes paid based on household characteristics . adjustments are made to reflect potential nonfilers as well . these reports are available via the internet . use — were education to determine itep data reliable , education could use the itep tax figures to generate tax allowances by income band . two advantages of itep data are that they include sales taxes and that an adjustment is made to estimate what nonfilers pay in sales taxes , whereas soi data do not reflect sales taxes and do not account for nonfilers . a disadvantage is that itep's income bands are not consistent across states and do not match those established by congress . while these publications are publicly available , education could also contract with any of these organizations to customize a dataset for the purpose of developing the tax allowance . the third strategy would be to apply the same allowance to all aid applicants , regardless of their state of residence . this would involve creating a standard allowance based on the cps that reflects the median taxes paid by all households . this strategy would have the advantage of simplifying the need analysis methodology , but a disadvantage is that it would not account for the variation in taxes paid across states or income bands . for example , using a standard allowance may on average underestimate the taxes paid by those from high - tax states but may overestimate the taxes paid by those from low - tax states . the fourth strategy would be to collect tax information directly from aid applicants by adding questions to the financial aid application form . under this strategy , applicants would report state and other taxes along with their federal taxes paid , information that could be used to reduce available household financial resources directly , making an allowance unnecessary . while documentation would likely be available for aid applicants to use in reporting their state income and property taxes , documentation concerning sales taxes may not be as readily available . independent of this report , the advisory committee on student financial assistance is currently assessing this strategy in the context of simplifying the financial aid application process and is expected to release its report in early 2005 .