we disagree . as our report states , irs' process for deriving a reliable p&e balance for its annual financial statements involves the use of extensive manual procedures by a contractor to extract and analyze irs' data on expenses to identify items that should be classified as assets . this process is time - consuming , occurs months after the acquisition of the assets , and only provides a reliable balance for p&e for a single point in time . this process does not provide irs with reliable p&e data on an ongoing basis for use in operational decision - making . irs also disagreed with our conclusions regarding the timeliness of irs' recording of obligations . irs believed that the 2 instances we cited of irs' failure to timely record obligations were isolated and thus did not constitute a material weakness in controls over appropriated funds . the 2 instances cited in our report were illustrative examples of irs' failure to record obligations before goods and services were received , and did not represent the total number of errors found in our testing . in fact , we found 10 instances in which irs failed to record obligations before goods and services were received . these exceptions were brought to the attention of irs staff and management , in writing , throughout the audit . these 10 instances together represent more than isolated instances of irs' not recording obligations before goods and services are received . it is also important to note that we did not characterize in our report the issue of irs not timely recording obligations in and of itself as a material weakness . however , taken collectively , this , plus other issues in the area of appropriated funds management , constitute a material weakness in irs' internal controls over its appropriated funds that preclude irs from providing reasonable assurance that material misstatements would be prevented or detected on a timely basis . in addition , irs disagreed that we should include its failure to properly record adjustments to obligations as a material weakness . irs also requested that we reconsider our recommendation that it include in its systems modernization blueprint the capability to differentiate between valid and invalid adjustments to prior - year obligations . irs stated that the issue stemmed from our and its different interpretations of the definition of upward and downward adjustments . irs believed that it had successfully resolved this issue because it made audit adjustments we proposed prior to issuing its final fiscal year 2000 financial statements and stated that it would continue to make these adjustments in the future . while we agree that irs made the audit adjustments we proposed to its financial statements , we disagree that this issue has been resolved and should be excluded from our report . as discussed above , our report does not characterize this issue in and of itself as a material weakness . as stated in our report , we requested that irs make adjustments in instances involving changes in accounting codes and travel entries that do not meet the definition of upward and downward adjustments . irs made these adjustments to its fiscal year 2000 financial statements .