leadership instability . we have previously reported , most recently in september 2018 , that procurement leadership instability has made it difficult for the va to execute and monitor the implementation of key acquisition programs and policies . for example , changes in senior procurement leadership , including the cao and vha's chief procurement and logistics officer , occurred during the implementation of mspv - ng and similar instability in leadership affected the mspv - ng program office itself . overall , the mspv - ng program office has had four directors , two of whom served in an acting capacity , since its inception in 2014 . to address this instability , we recommended in november 2017 that va appoint a non - career employee as the cao and prioritize the hiring of the mspv - ng program office's director position on a permanent basis . va concurred with these recommendations and implemented them in 2018 . stable leadership should help bring consistent and much needed direction to the mspv - ng program , but we recently identified other areas within the va where sustained leadership is also needed . for instance , in september 2018 , we reported there have been six acting directors within the past 2 and a half years within an oversight office that helps assess whether va is in compliance with aspects of its veterans first policy . we designated improving and modernizing federal disability programs as high risk in 2003 . an estimated one in six working - age americans reported a disability in 2010 . many of these americans need help finding or retaining employment , or rely on cash benefits if they cannot work . three of the largest federal disability programs — one run by va — disbursed about $270 billion in cash benefits to 21 million people with disabilities in fiscal year 2017 . however , federal disability programs , including va's , struggle to meet their needs . in particular , va struggles to manage its disability claims workloads , and , when determining whether individuals qualify for disability benefits , va relies on outdated eligibility criteria . managing disability claims workloads . since our 2017 high - risk report , our assessment of ratings for all five criteria remains unchanged for this area of concern for va as of march 2019 . leadership commitment: met . va has maintained leadership focus on managing initial disability claims and appeals workloads through various initiatives to improve benefits processing and reduce backlogs . all of our recommendations remain open . as of january 2019 , va estimated completing the recommended revisions to its policy and audit processes in august 2019 and august 2020 , respectively . in july 2018 , we reported that va collected data related to employee misconduct and disciplinary actions , but data fragmentation , reliability issues , and inadequate guidance impeded department - wide analysis of those data . thus , va management is hindered in making knowledgeable decisions regarding the extent of misconduct and how it was addressed . we recommended that va develop and implement guidance to collect complete and reliable misconduct and associated disciplinary - action data department - wide , whether through a single information system , or multiple interoperable systems .