the certificates are sold separately from the electricity with which they are associated . certificates can be purchased by utilities seeking to meet state requirements for renewable energy generation or by other entities seeking to support the use of renewable energy sources , and their sale can serve as an additional source of revenue to power plants using such sources . the colorado power plant in our review generated about 730 megawatt hours of electricity through its use of woody biomass , and sold the associated renewable energy certificates to the forest service for $23 per megawatt hour , or about $17,000 in total . the forest service purchased the certificates in order to promote woody biomass use and to offset the power plant's costs for using woody biomass . energy cost savings also were a major incentive for using woody biomass among six of the users we reviewed . of the four users that produce central heat with wood , two users — small rural school districts in pennsylvania and montana — told us that they individually had saved about $50,000 and $60,000 in annual fuel costs by using wood instead of natural gas or fuel oil . officials at one of these districts told us that these savings represented the equivalent of one teacher's annual salary , stating “we could either burn fuel oil and watch that money go up the chimney , or burn wood and put the money toward education.” likewise , the state college in nebraska , which uses woody biomass to heat and cool about 1 million square feet of space in several campus buildings , typically saves about $120,000 to $150,000 annually , while the georgia state hospital reported saving at least $150,000 in 1999 , the last year for which information was available . similarly , the two pulp and paper mills we reviewed each reported saving several million dollars annually by using wood rather than natural gas or fuel oil to generate steam heat for their processes ; officials at one mill stated that the mill's operating costs would increase significantly without the savings generated by burning wood , making it difficult for the mill to remain competitive . each of these users told us that they planned to continue their use of woody biomass because they anticipated continuing high fossil fuel prices . an affordable supply of woody biomass facilitated its use , especially in areas where commercial activities such as logging or land clearing generated woody biomass as a byproduct . for example , the nebraska state college was able to purchase woody biomass for an affordable price because logging activities in the area made slash readily available . logging companies harvested timber in the vicinity of the college , hauling the logs to sawmills and leaving their slash ; the college paid only the cost to collect , chip , and transport the slash to the college for burning . one official told us that without the area's logging activity , the affordable supply of woody biomass used by the college would be severely jeopardized and the college would have to pay much higher prices to heat and cool its campus . two pennsylvania users in our review also obtained an affordable supply of woody biomass generated through commercial activities .