the army pays for these examinations . the examinations are also used to assign early - deploying reservists a physical profile rating , ranging from p1 to p4 , in six assessment areas: ( a ) physical capacity , ( b ) upper extremities , ( c ) lower extremities , ( d ) hearing - ears , ( e ) vision - eyes , and ( f ) psychiatric . ( see app . ii for the army's physical profile rating guide. ) according to the army , p1 represents a non - duty - limiting condition , meaning that the individual is fit for duty and possesses no physical or psychiatric impairments . p2 means a condition may exist ; however , it is not duty - limiting . p3 or p4 means that the individual has a duty - limiting condition in one of the six assessment areas . p4 means the individual functions below the p3 level . a rating of either p3 or p4 puts the reservist in a nondeployable status or may result in the changing of the reservist's job classification . beginning in january 2003 , early - deploying reservists with a permanent rating of p3 or p4 in one of the assessment areas must be evaluated by an administrative screening board — the military occupational specialty / medical retention board ( mmrb ) . this evaluation determines if reservists can satisfactorily perform the physical requirements of their jobs . the mmrb recommends whether a reservist should retain a job , be reassigned , or be discharged from the military . army regulations that implement the statutory certification requirement provide that all reservists — including early - deploying reservists — certify their physical condition annually on a two - page certification form . army early - deploying reservists must report doctor or dentist visits since their last examination , describe current medical or dental problems , and disclose any medications they are currently taking . ( see app . iii for a copy of the annual medical certificate — da form 7349. ) in addition , the army is required to conduct an annual medical screening for all early - deploying reservists . according to army regulations , the army is to meet the annual medical screening requirement by reviewing the medical certificate required of each early - deploying reservist . in addition , army early - deploying reservists are required to undergo , at the army's expense , an annual dental examination . the army is also required to provide and pay for the dental treatment needed to bring an early - deploying reservist's dental status up to deployment standards — either dental class 1 or 2 . ( see table 1 for a general description of each dental classification. ) according to army officials , most of the 5-year and 2-year physical examinations , the dental examinations , and the dental treatments that have been performed were administered by military medical personnel . however , beginning in march 2001 , the army started outsourcing some examinations through the federal strategic healthcare alliance ( feds_heal ) — an alliance of private physicians and dentists and other physicians and dentists who work for the department of veterans affairs and hhs's division of federal occupational health .