flexible . at one school in the south , students can request a dependent care allowance based on their actual child care expenses , according to a school official . financial aid officials at the school use their judgment to determine if the request is reasonable for the community and may request documentation for requests exceeding $2,500 per semester . for example , students with more than one child may spend more than $2,500 per semester on child care . an official at another school in the west said it does not set limits for the allowance , but financial aid counselors use their judgment to counsel students if the requested amount looks too high for the student's circumstances . 2 ) what is known about the ccampis grant program and how reliable is education's reported outcome information ? npsas data contain nationally representative , detailed demographic and financial aid data for college students enrolled in postsecondary education programs . these data come from institutional records , government databases , and interviews with students . we also analyzed beginning postsecondary students longitudinal study ( bps ) data from 2008-2009 . bps tracks students over a 6-year period and collects both survey and transcript data . the most recently completed bps cohort first enrolled in postsecondary education in the 2003-2004 school year . we assessed the reliability of the npsas and bps data by reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them . we also interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined these data to be reliable for our purposes . because the npsas and bps data are based on probability samples , estimates are calculated using the appropriate sample weights provided , which reflect the sample design . unless otherwise noted , all percentage estimates from the npsas data analysis have 95 percent confidence intervals within plus or minus 3.8 percentage points of the percent estimate , and all number estimates from the npsas data analysis have 95 percent confidence intervals within plus or minus 9 percent of the estimate . similarly , all percentage estimates from the bps data analysis have 95 percent confidence intervals within plus or minus 3.7 percentage points of the percent estimate . we compared 95 percent confidence intervals for both npsas and bps data to identify statistically significant differences between specific estimates and the comparison groups . the information collected from the interview portions of the npsas and bps studies , such as the variables measuring whether students have children in paid child care and a student's monthly child care costs , is self - reported and is not based entirely on federal determinations or cross - verified with outside sources . students' monthly child care costs may be prone to more error than simpler yes / no questions . child care access means parents in school grant program to determine what is known about the child care access means parents in school ( ccampis ) grant program , we reviewed relevant program information and federal laws and regulations , and interviewed education officials knowledgeable of the program . to provide illustrative examples of how selected colleges and universities use ccampis grant funding to help students pay for child care , we interviewed officials from two schools .