iv. ) however , none of the criteria address the issue of demonstrating that the fcs concept will work . instead , the criteria call for the demonstration of some early fcs prototypes and the completion of some events such as a 2008 joint service experiment . the defense acquisition board criteria also include several that call for delivery of certain early prototypes and others that call for demonstration of selected capabilities . without questioning the value of these individual criteria , it is not clear what they will tell decision makers about the value or demonstration of the fcs concept as a whole . in making the assessment of whether the fcs program should continue , congress required dod to make several determinations , including ( 1 ) whether actual demonstrations , rather than simulations , have shown that the software for the program is on a path to achieve threshold requirements on cost and schedule ; ( 2 ) whether the program's planned major communications network demonstrations are sufficiently complex and realistic to inform major decision points ; ( 3 ) the extent to which manned ground vehicle survivability is likely to be reduced in a degraded communications network environment ; ( 4 ) the level of network degradation at which fcs manned ground vehicle survivability is significantly reduced ; and ( 5 ) the extent to which the fcs communications network is capable of withstanding network attack , jamming , or other interference . in addition , the assistant secretary of defense for networks and information integration is required to submit a report to congress on the fcs communications network and software . that report is to be submitted by september 30 , 2009 and is to include an assessment of the communications network that will specifically address areas such as vulnerability to network attack , electronic warfare , adverse weather , and terrain ; dependence on satellite communications support ; and operational availability and performance under degraded conditions . the report is also to include assessments of the communications network's test schedule and army efforts to synchronize funding , schedule , and technology maturity of critical networking programs with fcs . appendix v contains the comprehensive criteria from the legislation directing this review . these assessments of the capabilities and vulnerabilities of the fcs network will be important in determining if the fcs concept is feasible . however , as we reported last year , the army had an understanding of network requirements and how to build the network , but many challenges and work remained before the network would reach maturity . hence , network development and demonstration is at a very early stage and therefore , the network assessments will most likely be based on analysis and simulations rather than demonstrated results . even if software development proceeds on schedule and technical risks of key network elements , such as jtrs and win - t are successfully retired , the uncharted nature of the fcs network makes predicting its eventual performance difficult . army test officials are assessing network scalability , which relates to increasing the number of radios , or nodes , on the network , through limited testing .