gao - 07-225t . washington , d.c.: january 18 , 2007 . we do not underestimate the challenge involved . nevertheless , such a comprehensive implementation would place dhs in a better position to identify the threats that can and should be offset by limited resources . so that policymakers can make informed spending decisions , it is essential that policymakers fully understand the the assumptions and policy judgments that inform the risk analyses used for these decisions . a more comprehensive approach to risk management would also help the dhs components responsible for emergency preparedness , transportation , port security , and other mission areas to better protect our nation's assets . without further attempts to address this incomplete work , dhs cannot assure the congress or the public that federal funding is targeting the most critical risks . mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . in assessing the challenges faced by the nation for the 21st century , the comptroller general has asked the question , “what criteria should be used to target federal funding for homeland security in order to maximize results and mitigate risk within available resource levels ? ” today , i am here to discuss the extent to which dhs has taken steps to apply risk management principles to target federal funding for homeland security investments ( 1 ) in making homeland security grant allocations , ( 2 ) in funding transportation security enhancements , ( 3 ) in funding port security enhancements , ( 4 ) in other dhs mission areas , and ( 5 ) at a strategic level across the department . my comments are based on gao's historical body of work on risk management principles , including: strategic budgeting: risk management principles can help dhs allocate resources to highest priorities , gao - 05-357t , february 15 , 2005 ; and homeland security: a risk management approach can guide preparedness efforts , gao - 02-208t , october 31 , 2001 . in addition , my testimony draws on issued gao reports and testimonies addressing dhs's use of risk management to make homeland security investments in specific mission areas , for example: homeland security grants: observations on process dhs used to allocate funds to selected urban areas , gao - 07-381r , february 7 , 2007 ; passenger rail security enhanced federal leadership needed to prioritize and guide security efforts , gao - 07-225t , january 18 , 2007 ; and risk management: further refinements needed to assess risks and prioritize protective measures at ports and other critical infrastructure , gao - 06-91 , december 15 , 2005 . this work was conducted according to generally accepted government auditing standards . risk management has been widely practiced for years in areas such as insurance , construction , and finance . by comparison , its application in homeland security is relatively new — much of it coming in the wake of the terrorist attacks of september 11 — and it is a difficult task with little precedent . the goals for using it in homeland security include informing decisions on ways to reduce the likelihood that an adverse event will occur , and mitigate the negative impact of and ensure a speedy recovery from those that do .