we photographed these as appropriate . information we gathered from these interviews and observations , while not generalizable , provides insight into the conditions present in the states and school districts we visited at the time of our interviews , and may be illustrative of efforts in other states and school districts . to examine expenditures for capital construction by school district characteristics , we analyzed federal data from education's local education agency finance survey for school year 2015-16 , the most recent available at the time of our analysis . education collects these data annually as part of the ccd . state educational agencies provide these data on behalf of their school districts to nces and the u.s. census bureau's economic reimbursable surveys division . in school year 2015- 16 , states reported finance data for 96.7 percent of school districts , according to education's survey documentation . we analyzed school district data on capital construction expenditures by poverty level , locale , district size , racial demographics , and receipt of federal funding through impact aid or indian education grants . we normalized data across school districts that fell into these different categories by calculating capital construction expenditures per student and per school . we determined these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives by reviewing relevant documentation , interviewing knowledgeable education officials , and testing for missing data , outliers , and other potential errors . through discussions with nces officials , we determined it was necessary to exclude some school districts from our analysis to develop accurate per pupil and per school calculations . specifically , we excluded school districts for which the state did not report finance data and school districts where the number of students and schools was zero or missing . we conducted this performance audit from february 2019 to june 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . this appendix contains the closed - and open - ended questions from our surveys of ( 1 ) local educational agencies ( referred to in this report as school districts or districts ) and ( 2 ) state educational and school facility agencies . in some cases , respondents received different questions based on their response to a prior question . for example , school districts that conducted a facilities condition assessment in the last 10 years received additional questions about those assessments , however school districts that had not conducted such an assessment received questions to explain the reasons why . for a detailed discussion of our survey methodologies , see appendix i . this appendix summarizes key information on the condition of and funding for school facilities in districts that received impact aid . the department of education ( education ) administers the impact aid program to assist school districts that experience a financial burden as a result of certain federal activities being carried out there .