unexploded ordnance ) . that for about 60 percent of all ndai properties the corps may not have contacted all the current owners to obtain information about potential hazards present on the site . the corps appeared to have overlooked or dismissed information in its possession that indicated hazards might be present . for example , at a nearly 1,900 acre site previously used as an airfield by both the army and the navy , the file included a map showing bomb and fuse storage units on the site that would suggest the possible presence of ordnance - related hazards ; however , we found no evidence that the corps searched for such hazards . the files contained no evidence that the corps took sufficient steps to assess the presence of potential hazards . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . for example , although corps guidance calls for a site visit to look for signs of potential hazards , we estimated that the corps did not conduct the required site visit for 686 or about 18 percent of all ndai properties . we found that these problems occurred in part because the corps' guidance did not specify ( 1 ) what documents or level of detail the agency should obtain when looking for information on the prior uses of and the facilities located at fuds properties to identify potential hazards or ( 2 ) how to assess the presence of potential hazards . for example , some corps district staff stated that there was no guidance showing the types of hazard normally found at certain types of facilities . we concluded that , since many properties may have not been properly assessed , the corps did not know the number of additional properties that may require cleanup , the hazards that were present at those properties , the risk associated with these hazards , the length of time needed for cleanup , or the cost to clean up the properties . to address these problems , we recommended that the corps develop more specific guidelines and procedures for identifying and assessing potential hazards at fuds and to use them to review ndai files and determine which properties should be reassessed . dod told us that it has implemented this recommendation ; however , according to one major association of state regulators , problems persist in how the corps makes ndai determinations in many cases . in 2008 , the association published a fact sheet indicating , among other things , that the evidence collected is not adequate for making determinations . we will be reviewing some aspects of this decision making process as part of our ongoing work on fuds and mmrp . at spring valley , the corps' estimate of the cost to complete cleanup of the site increased by about six fold – – from about $21 million to about $124 million – – from fiscal year 1997 through 2001 . factors such as the future discovery of hazards made it inherently challenging for the corps to estimate the costs for completing cleanup activities at the site .