of $1.5 billion . to develop the plan , dhs conducted an analysis of alternatives and outreach to potential vendors , and took other steps to test the viability of the current system . however , dhs has not documented the analysis justifying the specific types , quantities , and deployment locations of border surveillance technologies proposed in the plan , or defined the mission benefits or developed performance metrics to assess its implementation of the plan . we are reviewing dhs's efforts to implement the plan , and we expect to report on the results of our work later this year . dhs spent more than $200 million on advanced spectroscopic portals , used to detect smuggled nuclear or radiological materials , without issuing an accurate analysis of both the benefits and the costs — which we later estimated at over $2 billion — and a determination of whether additional detection capabilities were worth the additional costs . dhs subsequently canceled the advanced spectroscopic portals program as originally conceived . each year dhs processes millions of applications and petitions for more than 50 types of immigrant - and nonimmigrant - related benefits for persons seeking to study , work , visit , or live in the united states , and for persons seeking to become u.s. citizens . dhs embarked on a major initiative in 2005 to transform its current paper - based system into an electronic account – based system that is to use electronic adjudication and account - based case management tools , including tools that are to allow applicants to apply online for benefits . however , dhs did not consistently follow the acquisition management approach outlined in its management directives in developing and managing the program . the lack of defined requirements , acquisition strategy , and associated cost parameters contributed to program deployment delays of over 2 years . in addition , dhs estimates that through fiscal year 2011 , it spent about $703 million , about $292 million more than the original program baseline estimate . we found that dhs could reduce the costs to the federal government related to major disasters declared by the president by updating the principal indicator on which disaster funding decisions are based and better measuring a state's capacity to respond without federal assistance . from fiscal years 2004 through 2011 , the president approved 539 major disaster declarations at a cost of $78.7 billion . our work on dhs's mission functions and crosscutting issues has identified three key themes — leading and coordinating the homeland security enterprise , implementing and integrating management functions for results , and strategically managing risks and assessing homeland security efforts — that have impacted the department's progress since it began operations . as these themes have contributed to challenges in the department's management and operations , addressing them can result in increased efficiencies and effectiveness . for example , dhs can help reduce cost overruns and performance shortfalls by strengthening the management of its acquisitions , and reduce inefficiencies and costs for homeland security by improving its research and development ( r&d ) management . these themes provide insights that can inform dhs's efforts as it works to implement its missions within a dynamic and evolving homeland security environment .