app . vi provides more information on changes to states' share of medicaid payments when increased fmap is no longer available. ) states indicated that legislation to extend the increased fmap funding would help address their concerns about program sustainability . at the time of our survey , legislation extending the increased fmap had been proposed , but not enacted . despite uncertainties about the availability of the increased fmap beyond december 2010 , however , 30 states had assumed a 6-month extension of the increased fmap in their fiscal year 2011 budgets without any changes to the way it is calculated as provided for under the recovery act , and only 9 of these states had contingency plans in place if such legislation was not enacted . on august 10 , 2010 , congress passed legislation amending ยง 5001 of the recovery act to extend the increased fmap through june 30 , 2011 , but at a lower level . specifically , under the amendments to the recovery act , states' increased fmap rates will decrease by at least 3 percentage points beginning on january 1 , 2011 , and continue to be phased down to their regular fmap rates by july 1 , 2011 . for states that had assumed an unmodified extension of the increased fmap , the available federal funds will be less than anticipated . however , without the extension , we estimate that states , on average , would have faced a nearly 11 percentage point decrease in their fmap rates on january 1 , 2011 . the additional 6 months of increased fmap funding will allow states more time to adjust as they return to their regular fmap rates . how states will fare as they return to their regular fmap rates will vary depending on each state's unique economic circumstances and the size of their medicaid population . officials from several states indicated that the loss of increased fmap funds would distress their state's budget , requiring the state to make additional program reductions , as the following examples illustrate . wisconsin medicaid officials reported that the state would need to reduce medicaid expenses by $1 billion annually , or about 20 percent of the state's medicaid budget , and are considering several options , including eliminating the state's prescription drug program for seniors and several rate reform initiatives . colorado medicaid officials reported that the state would need to reduce medicaid expenditures by an estimated $250 million , in addition to approximately $320 million the state has already cut . the state reported that the additional expenditure reduction would require drastic cuts to optional programs , benefits , and provider rates . in addition , the recently enacted ppaca includes several provisions that affect states' medicaid programs , and states will need to take into account these provisions when considering additional adjustments to their programs .