oar . according to an oar official , the line office assessed its ppas rates varying from about 16.5 percent to about 18.4 percent of the ppa's federal labor costs . for example , in fiscal year 2009 oar assessed its national severe storms laboratory ppa varying percentages over the year including 16.5 percent , 17.6 percent , and 18.4 percent , of the federal labor costs of its national severe storms laboratory for a total assessment of $777,109 . oar officials reported that the line office's m&a obligations ranged from about $10.2 million in fiscal year 2007 to about $11 million in fiscal year 2009 . table 3 summarizes each line office's m&a obligations for fiscal years 2007 through 2009 , based on data provided by line office officials . as the table shows , these obligations ranged from a low of about $10.2 million at oar in fiscal year 2007 to about $38.8 million at nws in fiscal year 2009 . according to noaa officials , line offices each define and track their m&a services in different ways . as a result , the information in the table below is not comparable across line offices . fmcs at two of noaa's line offices use assessments to fund the m&a services they provide , and some or all the fmcs at the other three line offices do not track their costs for m&a services . specifically , according to line office officials , fmcs below the line office level at nmfs and most fmcs in oar below the line office level assess subunits within their organizations to pay for m&a services using methods that are generally similar to the methods their line offices use . for example , oar's earth science research laboratory's global monitoring division assesses each of its ppas on the basis of its federal labor costs , which is the same approach the oar line office uses . in contrast , according to officials in three line offices — nos , nws , and nesdis — funding for m&a services at some or all of their fmcs is not defined or separately accounted for . because these fmcs do not separately account for their m&a services , they could not provide us with information on their costs . when organizations within noaa enter into reimbursable agreements with other agencies to perform work for those agencies , it is noaa's policy to charge the agencies for the m&a costs noaa incurs in executing the agreements unless the law authorizing the agreement provides otherwise . these payments are distributed to noaa's headquarters , line offices , or fmcs , depending on which entities perform work related to the agreements . the noaa budget office reported that m&a reimbursements associated with these agreements were about $15.9 million in fiscal year 2007 , about $19 million in fiscal year 2008 , and about $16.7 million in fiscal year 2009 . noaa's headquarters , line offices , and fmcs have documented some aspects of their policies and procedures for m&a services , but not to the full extent called for by applicable federal cost accounting and internal control standards .