yes . this preapplication / application was made . available to the state executive order 12372 process for review on .. b . program is not covered by e. o . authorized representative prefix middle name first name c. telephone number ( give area code ) . in addition to the contact named above , the following individuals made major contributions to this report: tuyet - quan thai , assistant director ; gary bianchi ; ray bush ; shafee carnegie ; william cordrey ; jessica gray ; ken hill ; aaron holling ; leslie jones ; shirley jones ; jason kelly ; john kelly ; rick kusman ; barbara lewis ; andrew mcintosh ; aaron piazza ; john ryan ; barry shillito ; and michael zola . is application subject to review by state executive order 12372 process ? or program has not been selected by state . is the applicant delinquent on any federal debt ? yes if “yes” attach an explanation . to the best of my knowledge and belief , all data in this application / preapplication are true and correct . the document has been duly authorized by the governing body of the applicant and the applicant will comply with the attached assurances if the assistance is awarded . charitable organizations ( i.r.c . § 501 ( c ) 3 ) constitute the largest classification , accounting for over 60 percent of all exempt organizations as of september 30 , 2006 . other classifications of exempt organization include civic and business leagues , labor organizations , recreational clubs , domestic fraternal societies , and credit unions . differences between the various classifications include whether donations to the exempt organization are tax deductible and whether the exempt organization has to submit an application to irs for specific recognition of its tax exempt status . the determination of exempt status and monitoring of exempt organizations is the responsibility of the tax exempt and government entities division ( te / ge ) of irs . the division's responsibilities include accepting applications for and determining whether organizations qualify as exempt under the i.r.c. , monitoring exempt organizations for continued compliance with the i.r.c. , and when appropriate , revoking the exempt status of an organization that no longer meets requirements for exemption . like all other employers , exempt organizations with employees are required to pay payroll taxes that they withhold from employees' wages “in trust” for the federal government , as well as other applicable federal taxes . payroll taxes withheld from employees consist of income taxes ; old age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) , commonly referred to as social security ; and medicare . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the commissioner of irs . we received oral comments from irs's tax exempt and government entities division . section 501 ( c ) of the i.r.c . we eliminated these types of debt by including only unpaid federal taxes for tax periods prior to calendar year 2006 . further , we did not include exempt organizations with tax debt of $100 or less because these small debts likely do not represent abusive behavior . we also eliminated all tax debt irs identified as not agreed to by the exempt organization .