while they agreed with the recommendation , they have yet to implement it . we made a number of recommendations to address these issues . today , i will ( 1 ) describe how selected assets are performing in the field as well as results from recent operational test events ; ( 2 ) provide summary cost information on the coast guard's portfolio of acquisitions ; and ( 3 ) discuss the extent to which the coast guard is experiencing capability gaps given known affordability issues . my testimony will summarize the findings and recommendations from our report . to assess the operational performance of the coast guard assets , we selected all four major acquisition programs that were fielded between fiscal year 2007 and 2014 and that the coast guard planned to test — the maritime patrol aircraft ( hc - 144 ) , fast response cutter , national security cutter , and the c4isr system . for each asset , we reviewed post - deployment reports and test reports and interviewed officials responsible for the testing and operation of these assets . to assess the cost of the coast guard's portfolio and steps taken to address affordability concerns , we reviewed each asset's acquisition program baseline as well as the coast guard's budget and discussed the acquisition portfolio with coast guard , dhs , and office of management and budget ( omb ) officials and followed up on previous efforts to address affordability . we also reviewed the coast guard's capital investment plan and compared it to relevant law that specifies the plan's contents . to assess what , if any , capability gaps exist given the coast guard's affordability issues , we reviewed funding needs , mission needs , future plans , and performance data and reviewed the coast guard's fiscal year 2014 and 2015 budgets . we also reviewed the coast guard's estimates of its overall fleet performance and current or potential performance gaps . in the meantime , the extent of expected costs — and how the coast guard plans to address them through budget trade - off decisions — is not being clearly communicated to congress . the mechanism in place for reporting to certain congressional committees , the capital investment plan , does not reflect the full effects of these trade - off decisions on the total cost and schedule of its acquisition programs . this information is not currently required by statute , but without it , decision makers do not have the information to understand the full extent of funding that will be required to complete the coast guard's planned acquisition programs . based on the results , neither asset met all key requirements during this testing . the fast response cutter partially met one of six key requirements , while the hc - 144 met or partially met four of seven key requirements . the fast response cutter was found to be operationally effective ( with the exception of its cutter boat ) though not operationally suitable , and the hc - 144 was found to be operationally effective and suitable . it is important to recognize that this was the initial operational testing and that the coast guard has plans in place to address most of the major issues identified .