ii. ) in 2003 , usaid issued a formal strategic plan on tcb , to focus its tcb efforts and guide the selection of new activities . the plan calls for usaid's tcb projects to support the three primary objectives of helping countries participate in trade negotiations , implement trade agreements , and take advantage of trade opportunities . mcc obligates full funding for its 5-year compact agreements in the year the compacts enter into force . in addition , state supports usaid's tcb efforts outlined in its strategy . the usaid and state joint strategic plan for fiscal years 2007 to 2012 calls for supporting usaid's strategic goal of providing assistance to help countries participate in and benefit from trade agreement negotiations . we found that usaid and state planned and provided assistance that supported tcb strategic objectives . usaid also provided assistance that aligns with its april 2008 strategy for economic growth that includes the goals of ( 1 ) developing well functioning markets in developing countries , primarily through supporting policy and regulatory reforms and ( 2 ) strengthening the international framework of policies and institutions that support countries' economic growth and opportunities by promoting international standards . usaid and state , in collaboration with other u.s. government agencies , have provided tcb assistance as part of ustr - created tcb working groups in developing countries where the united states is negotiating a fta . ( for further information on interagency efforts to coordinate tcb assistance , see app . iii. ) these working groups meet during the negotiations to identify and select tcb activities that assist developing country negotiating partners through regional and bilateral tcb programs . in particular , tcb working groups were a feature of the bilateral negotiations in support of the ratified central america - dominican republic free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) and peru fta , and the signed ftas with colombia and panama . for example:  during the cafta - dr negotiations , usaid , state , and other u.s. agencies helped to provide technical assistance to the central american countries to address a variety of trade capacity issues , including the strengthening of plant and animal health and food safety regulatory systems , and the strengthening of customs procedures . in conjunction with the u.s. - colombian free trade negotiations a usaid program assisted the government of colombia in adopting and implementing policy and regulatory reforms to facilitate the conclusion and implementation of the fta . the program included 18 components of trade - related policy reforms that led to colombia's development of new regulations and procedures consistent with the fta's requirements . for example , the program supported the establishment of a national food safety policy that ensured consistency with u.s. sanitary and phytosanitary standards . in addition , usaid provided tcb assistance to support countries' efforts to accede to the wto . the tcb survey team under contract with usaid annually reviews various sources , such as the president's budget request , to identify any tcb - related funding that is not currently being reported to the survey . in fiscal year 2009 , usaid provided tcb assistance supporting the accession and membership of nine countries to the wto .