( see table 1. ) four of the contracts have used all of the option years and three of these have been extended for an additional 2 years . key contributors to this testimony include michael t. blair , bonnie w. anderson , and allan c. richardson . defense health care: continued management focus key to settling tricare change orders quickly ( gao - 01-513 , april 30 , 2001 ) . military health care: factors affecting contractors' ability to schedule appointments ( gao / hehs - 00-137 , july 14 , 2000 ) . defense health care: opportunities to reduce tricare claims processing and other costs ( gao / hehs - 00-138t , june 22 , 2000 ) . dod and va health care: jointly buying and mailing out pharmaceuticals could save millions of dollars ( gao / hehs - 00-121t , may 25 , 2000 ) . va and defense health care: evolving health care systems require rethinking of resource sharing strategies ( gao / hehs - 00-52 , may 17 , 2000 ) . defense health care: observations on proposed benefit expansion and overcoming tricare obstacles ( gao / hehs / nsiad - 00-129t , march 15 , 2000 ) . all of the contracts were awarded for a base period and 5 option years . the negotiation for the fourth contract's extension is expected to be completed in june 2001 . tma anticipates that all of its contracts will be extended ; however , the tricare contracts will eventually need to be resolicited and awarded because they are only authorized to be extended a maximum of 4 option years . in august 1999 , the deputy secretary of defense formed dmoc to provide greater oversight in the operation of the tricare program . its membership consists of the under secretary of defense ( personnel and readiness ) , the four service vice chiefs , the military department under secretaries , the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , the director for logistics from the joint staff , the surgeons general , and the assistant secretary of defense ( health affairs ) . as part of its responsibilities , dmoc undertook a review of tma's contract approach for the tricare contracts . dod's current contracting approach for tricare poses several administrative challenges , and has contributed to significant funding shortfalls . to be considered for a contract award , offerors were required , in effect , to submit voluminous , expensive - to - produce proposals , which has limited competition . offerors have stated that complicating the preparation of proposals was the need to address dod's overly prescriptive requirements , restricting its ability to use best practices to achieve the same results with greater cost efficiency . furthermore , tricare contracts were awarded while dod was realigning and reducing its mtf capability during a time of budgetary concerns . the resulting shift to greater reliance on civilian providers as well as frequent changes to the program resulted in numerous adjustments to the tricare contracts , both planned and unplanned . given long - range budget pressures and escalating health care costs , dod faces a formidable challenge in creating a new contract approach .