fsa has taken steps to adopt these practices . since being established as a pbo , fsa has restructured itself into three customer - oriented “channels” — one for students , schools , and financial partners ( guaranty agencies and lenders ) — - each led by a channel general manager . according to fsa officials , the realignment was intended to improve the organization's performance and increase coordination of mission - critical activities . fsa also created a number of “enterprise” units to support the channels by focusing on internal customer or stakeholder needs . these units , each with its own enterprise director , focus on activities such as analysis , communications , and human resources . the operations of the chief financial officer ( cfo ) and chief information officer ( cio ) are considered support organizations responsible for technical and financial management practices and infrastructure . figure 1 shows how fsa's total workforce of about 1,200 employees is organized and how the coo positioned his office in the middle of fsa's official organization chart to stress the importance of the three customer - oriented channels . in addition to changing the way its staff is organized , fsa also created a management council to steer the organization strategically and ensure communication among the channels . the council is comprised of the coo , cio , cfo , each of the channel general managers , and representatives from fsa's primary contractors responsible for modernizing information systems . conduct at least three national conferences for schools . develop a “how to” guide with our oversight partners on processing school closures that focuses on reducing the impact to students . promote the title iv schools' quality performance by providing them with tools for understanding and improving management practices , program requirements , and verification outcomes . identify areas for improving compliance effectiveness and take the appropriate steps to fix them . while fsa has developed strategies intended to improve schools' regulatory compliance , it is not clear how fsa will know whether its strategies are effective . first , fsa has not developed an indicator of schools' compliance . second , while fsa's fiscal year 2002 performance plan defines success for the strategies shown above , the definitions may not be appropriate . for example , fsa plans to conduct at least three national conferences for schools to disseminate information about student financial aid programs and processes including program integrity . fsa states that high scores on participant evaluations of these national conferences will indicate its success in disseminating this information . while participant evaluations may reflect the quality of presentations , they will not indicate whether the information helped institutions comply with applicable laws , regulations , and procedures . another way that fsa ensures program integrity is through its efforts to collect and prevent defaulted student loans . fsa's draft fiscal year 2002 performance plan specifies the goals it has for default management ; however , it includes only limited information about the strategies it will use to achieve those goals .