gao - 13-337 . washington , d.c.: april 18 , 2013 . the survey is described in detail below . we also reviewed dod and service guidance on dod and the services' roles and responsibilities in the event of a base closure or growth . to inform multiple objectives , we sent a survey to representatives of all 23 growth communities and 22 of the 23 closure communities to gather detailed information on the greatest challenges each community had experienced , successful strategies they had used to deal with change , and assistance and information they had received from federal sources . we did not send a survey to the mississippi army ammunition plant because the property was transferred from the u.s. army to the national aeronautics and space administration , which did not require disposal through a local redevelopment authority . using the identified themes , the analyst then developed categories for coding the responses . a second gao analyst reviewed each response from each community representative and reviewed the first analyst's themes and categories to reach concurrence on the themes and categories . each of the two gao analysts then independently reviewed the answers to each open - ended question and placed them into one or more of the categories . the analysts then compared their coding to identify any disagreements and reached agreement on all items through discussion . we conducted this performance audit from june 2012 to may 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . james r. mctigue , jr. , ( 202 ) 512-7968 or mctiguej@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , laura durland , assistant director ; bonita anderson ; leslie bharadwaja ; timothy carr ; mary jo lacasse ; gregory marchand ; michael silver ; and erik wilkins - mckee made key contributions to this report . defense infrastructure: improved guidance needed for estimating alternatively financed project liabilities . military bases: opportunities exist to improve future base realignment and closure rounds . gao - 13-149 . washington , d.c.: march 7 , 2013 . has your community received any financial , technical , or other assistance ( eg , networking assistance ) from the office of economic adjustment , the military services , or any other office within the department of defense ( dod ) to deal with the first challenge you listed above ? please do not include any assistance you received from the association of defense communities or any other agency or organization other than dod . washington , d.c.: november 15 , 2012 . ( response options provided: checkboxes labeled “yes” , “no” , and ‘don't know.” ) if yes , what assistance has your community received from the office of economic adjustment , the military services , or any other office within dod to deal with the first challenge you listed above ? ( response option provided: one text box. ) washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2012 .