( see fig . the interim final rule set forth additional requirements for both state - and federally run pcips providing cciio the means to oversee the program and to promote its efficient and fair operation . for example , the rule requires pcips to establish procedures to identify and report instances of fraud , waste , and abuse , as well as cases of “insurer dumping” — that is , insurance carriers or employers discouraging high - risk individuals from remaining enrolled in their coverage so that they may instead enroll in a pcip program . in addition , state - run pcips operating in states that had an existing hrp were subject to a maintenance of effort provision , which required these states to maintain funding for the existing pool . provisions relating to maintenance of effort and other requirements were included in contracts signed with states and nonprofit entities administering the pcips . health insurance plans offered by state - and federally run pcips generally had similar cost sharing features . other pcip features varied across states , such as coverage limits , premiums , and the criteria for demonstrating that an applicant had a pre - existing condition . health insurance plans offered by state - and federally run pcips had similar cost sharing , including annual deductibles and out - of - pocket maximums . for example , the most popular plans available in most states had annual deductibles ranging from $1,000 to $2,999 , out - of - pocket maximums at or near the legal maximum of $5,950 , and coinsurance of 20 percent . ( see table 2. ) in 2011 , the 27 state - run pcips collectively offered 49 plans — 15 out of the 27 states offered a single plan , 5 states offered 2 plans , and 7 states offered more than 2 plans . hhs offered 3 plans in the 24 federally run pcip states — known as the standard , extended , and hsa plans . see appendix i for pcip cost sharing features by state . in 2011 , almost all state - and federally run pcips had coverage limits for some benefits ; however , the selected benefits and the extent of coverage limits varied . ( see fig . most pcips imposed limits on skilled nursing , home health , and therapy services . for example , coverage limits for skilled nursing services in the state - run pcips ranged from 30 days to 180 days per year in utah and oklahoma , respectively . the federally run pcip limited skilled nursing charges to $700 per day for up to 14 days following an acute inpatient discharge . hhs also added rates for children under 19 beginning in 2011 , which allowed these enrollees to pay lower premiums than they would have paid in 2010 . cciio's outreach efforts included educating various referral sources about the pcip program — that is , those who most often interact with potential pcip applicants , such as disease advocacy groups , provider groups , and state officials . in addition , cciio conducted several nationwide webinars , distributed posters and brochures , and coordinated with the social security administration to contact individuals applying for disability insurance .