most of the reports filed were annual reports . according to aousc officials , as of march 2018 , all annual financial disclosure reports required to be filed from calendar years 2012 through 2016 were filed , except for one for calendar year 2015 . additionally , all nominee and initial financial disclosure reports required to be filed during this time period were filed , and all but one final financial disclosure report , for calendar year 2016 , were filed . in addition to its technical comments , aousc provided an official letter for inclusion in the report , which can be seen in appendix iii . in its letter , aousc stated it concurred with the recommendation and will determine how best to implement a more formalized process to better ensure it can submit annual redaction reports to congress in a timely manner . we are sending copies of this report to the administrative office of the u.s. courts , the attorney general , the united states marshals service , selected congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , this report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any further questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or goodwing@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributions to this reported are listed in appendix iii . such redactions are good until the end of the calendar year in which they are granted . the committee on financial disclosure notifies the judicial official if the information requested to be redacted has been granted , granted in part , or denied . judicial officials can appeal a redaction decision ; however , according to aousc officials , there were no appeals from 2012 through 2016 , the time period covered by our review . the judicial conference's committee on financial disclosure has developed an electronic report filing system , written guidance , and a compliance process to help ensure judicial officials file their financial disclosure reports . specifically , in 2011 , aousc switched from having judicial officials file financial disclosure reports in hard copy to electronic filing through an online electronic depository , financial disclosure online filing system ( fido ) . potential risks to judicial officials could be general or specific . general risks include revealing the unsecured location of a judicial official , a spouse's place of employment , or a child's school . specific threats could include the potential for kidnapping or extortion , or a threat of violence against a judge by a former defendant or litigant . for example , in 2012 , a federal judge requested that certain information be redacted from his financial disclosure report after an inmate convicted of threatening to kill the judge was released from prison and requested a copy of the judge's report , as well as information on the judge's home security system . the law that authorizes the judiciary to redact financial disclosure reports also requires it to submit annual reports on the operation of its redaction authority to specified congressional committees .