includes civilian agencies in guam . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the febs have played a role in responding to past emergencies . for example , when the oklahoma city murrah federal building was bombed on april 19 , 1995 , the feb staff knew all of the agencies in the murrah building ; the home telephone numbers of critical staff ; the city , county , and state principals in oklahoma city ; and which federal agencies were available to provide immediate relief and support . during hurricanes katrina and rita , according to a fema official , the new orleans feb executive director established and maintained an essential communication link between fema's office of national security coordination and opm . the new orleans feb also served as a conduit for information between washington and local federal agencies and was able to provide status updates to identify common needs or problems that agency leaders were facing that required expedited assistance to resolve . the nature of pandemic influenza presents distinctive challenges . unlike incidents that are discretely bounded in space or time ( eg , most natural or man - made disasters ) , a pandemic is not a singular event , but is likely to come in waves , each lasting weeks or months , and pass through communities of all sizes across the nation and the world simultaneously . while a pandemic will not directly damage physical infrastructure , such as power lines or computer systems , it will threaten the operation of critical systems by potentially removing from the workplace the essential personnel needed to operate them . according to the national strategy for pandemic influenza implementation plan , the center of gravity of the pandemic response will be in communities . the distributed nature of a pandemic , as well as the sheer burden of disease across the nation over a period of months or longer , means that the federal government's support to any particular state , tribal nation , or community will be limited in comparison to the aid it mobilizes for disasters such as earthquakes or hurricanes , which strike a more confined geographic area over a shorter period of time . this makes it essential to have joint and integrated planning across all levels of government and the private sector to ensure that available plans and response actions are complementary , compatible , and coordinated . created by a presidential directive in 1961 , the febs are composed of the federal field office agency heads and military commanders in the febs' areas of service . the febs' overall mission over the past 46 years has included supporting and promoting national initiatives and responding to the local needs of federal agencies and their communities through activities such as the combined federal campaign and local scholarship programs .