collecting restitution . officials from all six usaos stated that using the treasury offset program ( top ) , a program that allows for the reduction or withholding of a debtor's federal benefits , such as a tax refund , was one of the most effective practices for collecting restitution . specifically , officials in one usao told us that top requires minimal effort for flu staff and can result in a high amount of collections . requesting restitution . we conducted semi - structured interviews with officials from six u.s. attorneys' offices ( usao ) to obtain their views on the restitution process and the extent to which they believed doj - recommended restitution practices related to the restitution process were effective . in particular , we spoke with usao officials from the district of connecticut ; the southern district of california ; the district of new jersey ; the southern district of ohio ; the district of south dakota ; and the district of wyoming . to what extent has doj conducted oversight on the collection of restitution ? to answer all four questions , we analyzed relevant laws , including the mandatory victims restitution act of 1996 ( mvra ) and the justice for all reauthorization act of 2016 . we also reviewed agency documentation and spoke with officials from doj components and the judiciary . within doj , these included officials from the executive office for u.s . attorneys ( eousa ) , the criminal division , the money laundering and asset recovery section within the criminal division and the justice management division . within the judiciary , these included officials from the administrative office of the u.s. courts ( aousc ) , the judicial conference , the u.s . sentencing commission ( ussc ) , and probation and pretrial services within aousc . we further selected six federal judicial districts throughout the country and conducted semi - structured interviews with usao officials and federal probation officers within those districts to obtain their views on the restitution process . because the collection of restitution has been a longstanding challenge , we selected districts to study based on the extent of the usao's collection of restitution within that district . specifically , we selected usaos for three districts that had relatively high levels of restitution collected and usaos for three districts that had relatively low levels of restitution collected from fiscal years 2014 through 2015 — the last 2 years of data available when we began our review . in particular , we spoke with usao and probation officials within the district of connecticut , the southern district of california , the district of new jersey , the southern district of ohio , the district of south dakota and the district of wyoming . additionally , we ensured that our selected districts reflected geographical diversity to capture a range of perspectives and experiences . since we selected a non - probability sample of districts , the information we obtained cannot be generalized more broadly to all districts . however , the information provides important context and insights into how the restitution process works across the country .