gao - 15-714 . september 29 , 2015 . gao - 15-220t . november 18 , 2014 . we identified articles from 2010 to 2015 . we examined summary - level information about the literature identified in our search that we believed to be germane to our report . it is possible that we may not have identified all of the reports with findings relevant to our objective , and there may be other challenges affecting ip networks during times of crisis that we did not present . to determine the actions taken by fcc , dhs , and other stakeholders to ensure the reliability of ip communications during times of crisis , we reviewed relevant fcc proceedings , reports , and documents . specifically , we reviewed fcc proceedings related to technology transitions and ensuring consumer backup power for continuity of communications , reports on disruptions to communications reports on major disruptions to 911-related communications , and documents related to outage - reporting information . to identify information on the proposed ip transition experiments , we reviewed at&t and centurylink's proposals , stakeholder comments submitted to fcc on these proposals , and other documents related to the experiments . we assessed fcc's efforts to collect data on the effect of the ip transition against criteria established in the federal standards for internal control . we reviewed relevant dhs documents including the 2013 national infrastructure protection plan , the 2010 communications sector specific plan , and the 2012 risk assessment report for communications . we also reviewed reports and best practices from the communications security , reliability , and interoperability council and the alliance for telecommunications industry solutions . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the communications sector's infrastructure is a complex system of systems that incorporates multiple technologies and services . the infrastructure includes wireline , wireless , satellite , cable , and broadcasting capabilities , and includes the transport networks that support the internet and other key information systems . historically , networks based on time - division multiplexed ( tdm ) circuit - switches running on copper loops provided voice service for consumers . in a 2015 report and order , fcc noted that for over 100 years customers could rely upon telecommunications carriers for backup power for their residential landline phones during power outages because power is provided over traditional copper telephone lines . in other words , telephones served by copper networks continue to work during commercial power outages as long as the telephones do not need to be plugged into an electrical outlet to function . on the other hand , the physical infrastructure for ip - based networks , such as fiber and co - axial cable , does not carry power , which means telephones connected to ip networks may not work during commercial power outages ( see fig.1 ) .