none was . in fact , at some of these sites , not only was there no information about the census , but there was no indication that the organization we were looking for was at the address we had from the database . the results of the overseas test point to the difficulties of overseeing the contractor's performance . as census materials were made available at scores of locations across the three test countries , it would have been impractical for the bureau to inspect each site . the difficulty of supervising contractors — and any field operation for that matter — would only be magnified in a global enumeration . the bureau's experience in counting the nation's population for the 2000 and earlier censuses sheds light on some of the specific operations and other elements that together form the building blocks of a successful head count ( see fig . while performing these activities does not necessarily guarantee a cost - effective headcount , not performing them makes a quality count far less promising and puts the entire enterprise at risk . the current approach to counting overseas americans lacks these building blocks , as most are infeasible to perform on an overseas population . each is discussed in greater detail below . mandatory participation: under federal law , all persons residing in the united states regardless of citizenship status are required to respond to the decennial census . by contrast , the overseas enumeration test was conducted as a voluntary survey where participation was optional . the bureau has found that response rates to mandatory surveys are higher than the response rates to voluntary surveys . this in turn yields more complete data and helps hold down costs . early agreement on design: both congress and the bureau need to agree on the fundamental design of an overseas census . concurrence on the design helps ensure adequate planning , testing and funding levels . conversely , the lack of an agreed - upon design raises the risk that basic design elements might change in the years ahead , while the opportunities to test those changes and integrate them with other operations will diminish . under the bureau's current plans , after the 2006 test , the bureau would have just one more opportunity to test its prototype for an overseas enumeration — a dress rehearsal in 2008 . any design changes after 2008 would not be tested in a real - world environment . the design of the census is driven in large part by the purposes for which the data will be used . currently , no decisions have been made on whether the overseas data will be used for purposes of congressional apportionment , redistricting , allocating federal funds , or other applications . some applications , such as apportionment , would require precise population counts and a very rigorous design that parallels the stateside count . other applications , however , could get by with less precision and thus , a less stringent approach . as we noted previously , congress will need to decide whether or not to count overseas americans , and how the results should be used .