we provided the customs service with a draft of this report . customs' written comments are discussed in our agency comments section and are included as appendix i to this report . for example , all eight entities had identified weak controls over seized property and were implementing corrective actions . corrective actions included developing evidence and sign - in logs for property rooms and vaults and improving processes for transferring seized property to secure vaults in a timely manner . in addition , at one port of entry we visited , customs officials discovered problems in the imprest fund as a result of a self - inspection . according to the port director , the self - inspection raised questions about a cashier's handling of the fund , which led to a determination that the cashier had embezzled $1,000 from the fund . according to an ofo report , cmcs and ports of entry identified approximately 3,000 items needing improvement with corresponding corrective actions nationwide during the second sip cycle . the ofo sip program coordinator tracks the status of the corrective actions for issues that occur at many ports . financial management , trade programs , passenger processing ( including personal searches ) , and fines , penalties , and forfeitures ( including seized property ) were the areas identified most frequently as needing improvement . in addition , all the entities we visited had identified numerous areas needing improvement and had implemented a number of corrective actions . for example , one port of entry identified 37 areas needing improvement out of 54 they inspected during the second sip cycle . of the 37 areas , corrective actions for 31 had been completed at the time of our visit ; the rest were in process . during the third sip cycle , the port identified 27 different areas needing improvement out of 64 inspected . of the 27 areas , corrective actions for 23 had been completed by the time of our visit ; the rest were in process . in addition to problems uncovered through local level self - inspections , mid verification and validation inspections identified additional areas needing improvement . for example , at one port of entry , mid inspectors found late filing of travel vouchers , security checks not being conducted , and personal search facilities having privacy and safety shortcomings . in response , mid made numerous recommendations to port management for corrective actions . like ofo , oi placed activities considered low - risk on an annual , instead of semiannual cycle ; an example would be whether a threat analysis has been conducted to determine the potential for fraud investigations . similar to ofo , the oi sip program coordinator said that worksheets covering high - risk areas such as money , narcotics , seized property , and other sensitive areas were retained on a semiannual cycle . in all , oi placed the majority of its worksheets — 16 out of 22 — on an annual , instead of semiannual cycle . a third area where mid is making improvements is in the way it reports inspection results . mid is to prepare a management inspection report after each inspection it performs at customs entities .