pub . 111-203 , 124 stat . controversy or debate . for example , no consensus exists on the extent to which the act will help to reduce the likelihood and severity of future financial crises . in addition , some market observers have raised concerns about the pace of reform , with some suggesting that reform is occurring too slowly and others arguing that it is moving too quickly . we prepared this report under the authority of the comptroller general to conduct work on gao's initiative to assist congress with its oversight responsibilities . specifically , this report examines the ( 1 ) overall status of u.s. financial regulatory reforms arising from the act , ( 2 ) challenges affecting the implementation of these reforms , and ( 3 ) areas that pose continued risk . to address our objectives , we synthesized gao's body of work on dodd - frank act reforms and other financial regulatory reform efforts and challenges . we also reviewed and analyzed government , academic , and other studies on dodd - frank act reforms and implementation . to examine regulators' efforts to implement the provisions of the dodd - frank act , we focused on eight major reform areas: capital requirements ; resolution of financial institutions ; proprietary trading ; derivatives ; consumer protection ; mortgage reforms ; expanded regulation of institutions and products ; and investor protection . we also obtained and analyzed information from a database maintained by the law firm davis polk and wardwell that identified provisions of the dodd frank act that require and authorize regulators to take actions , and tracks the status of regulators' efforts to implement these provisions . we then used various sources and assumptions to compile a list of provisions requiring actions by regulators , including discussing provisions with agency officials who are responsible for implementation of the majority of these efforts . we focused our analysis on provisions that required rulemakings and other key actions , but excluded other requirements , such as those to publish studies . in addition , we used our professional judgment to categorize the information from the law firm and financial regulators . using different sources , assumptions , and judgments in compiling the list of provisions requiring rulemakings and other key actions could result in different totals , and therefore the information we provide should not be taken as a definitive count of all actions required by the act . we also interviewed officials from seven federal financial regulators — board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , bureau of consumer financial protection — also known as the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) , federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , as well as staff from the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) about their implementation of various dodd - frank reforms , challenges they are facing , and areas that continue to pose risk .