dod concurred with our recommendations . in april 2011 , we reported that some of the general and economic criteria in dod's instruction were not clear on when to establish or continue a commissary versus when to discontinue commissary operations at naval air station brunswick , maine . for example , dod's instruction stated that the primary consideration in assessing the need for a commissary and selecting the location of the store — including whether to operate commissaries on closed installations — is the effect on active - duty personnel and their dependents . however , the instruction did not specify how this effect should be measured and used as decision criteria . additionally , at the time of our review , the instruction stated that “as a general rule , commissary operations are discontinued when an installation is completely closed and no active - duty or reserve component personnel remain on the installation.” however , we found that it was unclear what conditions would warrant an exception to the general rule and how the general rule relates to the other criteria for closing a commissary . as a result , we recommended that dod revise and clarify its guidance . dod concurred with and implemented our recommendation . in july 2010 , we reported that the army experienced challenges with its efforts to privatize its lodging facilities . specifically , the army pursued privatization to obtain private - sector financing in order to address poor conditions of its facilities . we made recommendations related to the army needing to assess the costs and benefits of future privatization efforts and to the need for dod to incorporate lessons learned in future privatization efforts within the department . dod concurred and implemented our recommendations . deca is required by law to use appropriated funds to cover commissary operating costs , which subsidizes the price of groceries and household goods for patrons shopping at commissaries . in fiscal year 2015 , deca received $1.3 billion in appropriations . deca also is governed by regulations that may limit its ability to control costs and allocate funds in the same way as commercial grocery stores , which do not operate under such regulatory requirements . for example , under law , deca employees are subject to civil service rules , including the general schedule pay scales and office of personnel management regulations on personnel policies such as hiring , pay , and retention , but that are not sensitive to local market conditions such as local labor costs as would be true for a commercial grocery store . figure 1 shows how deca allocated $1.3 billion in appropriated funds by labor and non - labor operating costs in fiscal year 2015 . when dod established deca in 1991 , it consolidated the management of separate grocery stores run by the army , the air force , the navy , and the marine corps . according to deca officials , the consolidation helped reduce costs by combining buying power and sharing overhead . in recent years , several studies reviewed the potential impact of employing business concepts normally used in commercial grocery stores , such as variable pricing and improvements in product management , in commissary operations .