international mail . the countries handle international mail in a similar manner , which includes a review of the documentation detailing the sender , country of origin , and contents of the package . only packages considered suspect , for example , because they do not include required information , are from high - risk countries , or have been sent by repeat offenders , are selected and opened for further inspection . canada uses x - ray technology to help identify packages containing prohibited items , and mexican officials told us that all international packages arriving from fmd - affected countries are opened and inspected for prohibited items . garbage from international carriers . in the united states , according to usda's draft fmd response plan , burial would be the preferred method of disposal when conditions make it practical . the plan states that burial is the fastest , easiest , and most economical method of disposal . when burial is not feasible , the plan recommends incineration as the alternative means of disposal even though usda recognizes that incineration is both difficult and expensive . according to a usda veterinarian who helped during the u.k. outbreak , a 200-meter funeral pyre was used to incinerate 400 cows or 1,200 sheep or 1,600 pigs . such a pyre required 1,000 railway ties , 8 tons of kindling , 400 wooden pallets , 4 tons of straw , 200 tons of coal , and 1,000 liters of diesel fuel . in addition , heavy equipment , such as bulldozers and a team of about 18 to 20 people , was needed to construct the pyre . figures 5 and 6 show burial pits and incineration pyres used in the united kingdom to dispose of slaughtered animals . according to the federal and state officials we spoke with , each of these disposal methods presents significant implementation challenges that have not yet been fully considered . for example , burial poses such challenges as the potential to contaminate groundwater , the need to identify burial sites and obtain appropriate federal and state permits and clearances in advance , and the potential to spread the disease if animals have to be transported to an off - farm burial site . for incineration , the incineration site has to be accessible to large equipment , and yet has to be sufficiently away from public view to minimize negative public reaction to the sight of large burning pyres . in addition , incineration could not only affect air quality but also may be ineffective because if not constructed properly , the pyres may not generate sufficient temperatures to completely incinerate the carcasses . according to a usda veterinarian , in the united kingdom the pyres generally burned for about 9 to 10 days before all of the carcasses were incinerated . similarly , rendering poses challenges because transporting carcasses to rendering plants increases the risk of spreading the disease , and additional cleaning and disinfecting procedures would be needed at the rendering facility .