none . would exempt information obtained from disclosure under the freedom of information act ( foia ) or otherwise , or from disclosure under state or local laws ; information would also not be subject to discovery or admitted into evidence in any federal or state civil judicial or administrative procedure other than in civil compliance action brought by dhs . calls for dhs , in consultation with others , to establish confidentiality protocols . would exempt information obtained from disclosure under foia ; calls for epa , in consultation with dhs , to establish information protection protocols . would exempt information obtained from disclosure under foia , or from disclosure under state or local laws . certifications submitted by the chemical sources , orders for failure to comply , and certificates of compliance and other orders would generally be made available to the public . calls for dhs , in consultation with the director of the office of management and budget and appropriate federal law enforcement officials , to create confidentiality protocols for the maintenance and use of records ; would establish penalties for the unlawful disclosure of protected information . upon petition , dhs would be required to endorse other industry , state , or federal protocols or standards that the secretary of dhs determines to be substantially equivalent . none . would allow the secretary to determine that vulnerability assessments , security plans , and emergency response plans prepared under alternative security programs meet the act's requirements and to permit submissions or modifications to the assessments or plans . would grant dhs right of entry ; would exempt facilities that are subject to mtsa ( port facilities ) or the bioterrorism act ( community water systems ) . except with respect to protection of information , would not affect requirements imposed under state law . would grant epa right of entry ; would authorize epa to provide grants for training of first responders and employees at chemical facilities ; would not affect requirements imposed under state law . would grant dhs right of entry ; would exempt facilities that are subject to mtsa from certain area security requirements but these facilities would otherwise comply with the act's requirements . would preserve the right of states to adopt chemical security requirements that are more stringent than the federal standard , as long as the state standard does not conflict with the federal standard . s. 2486 , introduced on march 30 , 2006 , would impose a general duty on chemical facility owners and operators , in the same manner as the duty under the clean air act's section 112 ( r ) , to identify hazards that may result from a criminal release , ensure the design , operation , and maintenance of safe facilities by taking such actions as are necessary to prevent criminal releases , and eliminate or significantly reduce the consequences of any criminal release that does occur . s. 2486 also directs dhs to work with epa , as well as state and local agencies , to identify not fewer than 3,000 high priority chemical facilities .