for example , omb circular no . 5% ( 15% for indian tribes ) includes salaries of administrative and implementation agency staff ; costs related to planning , developing , and designing the program ; public outreach and hearings ; preparing the application ; monitoring and reporting on program activities ; coordinating with federal , state and local officials ; official travel ; accounting and audit services ; rental and purchase of equipment , utilities , and office supplies ; and indirect costs . includes costs related to overall management , including salaries of the executive director , personnel officer , fiscal officer / bookkeeper , payroll / insurance / property clerk , and janitor for administrative office space , and costs associated with volunteers carrying out administrative functions ; fringe benefits , travel , transportation and training ; expenses related to bookkeeping and payroll services , audits , and bonding ; administrative office insurance , supplies , copy machines , postage , and utilities ; and occupying , operating and maintaining space for administrative activities . indirect charges that typically include depreciation on buildings and equipment ; costs of operating such facilities ; salaries of executive officers attributable to administrative functions ; salaries of clerical staff ; office supplies ; and library expenses . aitr grantees do not have statutory or individual program administrative cost caps . however , omb circular no . a - 21 ( now codified in title 2 of the code of federal regulations ) imposes a 26 percent cap on administrative ( but not facilities ) expenses for universities . costs for administration are limited to 26 percent of total direct costs . in addition to the contact named above , peter del toro ( assistant director ) , keith o'brien ( analyst - in - charge ) , gerard s. burke , stanley j. czerwinski , catherine myrick , carol l. patey , and george h. schadler iii made key contributions . also contributing to this report were thomas m. beall , amy r. bowser , robert l. gebhart , josephine perez , and robert robinson . we also provided an informational copy to the director of the office of management and budget . the government spends a substantial amount of money on these grants . according to the office of management and budget ( omb ) , state and local governments alone received about $546 billion in federal grants in the total cost of a grant includes two components: fiscal year 2013 . ( 1 ) program costs that directly support the grant's mission and services ; and ( 2 ) administrative costs , such as payroll and clerical support , to run the grant program . it is important for agencies that administer grants to track these costs — including the portion spent to reimburse grantees for their administrative costs — because such tracking allows the agencies to provide accountability for efficient use of resources . further , tracking these costs helps agencies assess the changes in the balance between grant administrative costs and program costs . however , as budgets grow more constrained , this drive for efficiency can create a tension between a program's capacity to deliver services and the actual administrative costs of doing so .