gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 2009 . this is an important and noteworthy development . nonetheless , more information is needed to determine the bureau's overall readiness for address canvassing as the field test was not an end - to - end systems evaluation , did not validate all address canvassing requirements , such as training and help desk support , and did not include urban areas . additionally , the scale of the field test was a fraction of that of the address canvassing operation . the bureau was to conduct a review of the readiness of the handheld computers in january 2009 but has not yet reported the results of that review . finally , the bureau's actual workload for address canvassing — about 144.7 million addresses — is 11 million addresses more than the bureau had planned for , leaving the bureau with too few handheld computers to complete the workload in the time originally scheduled . in response , the bureau will be extending the amount of time listers will be working in the field in affected areas , although not extending the end date of the operation , to compensate for the larger workload . during the dress rehearsal , listers also experienced problems when collecting address data for large blocks having more than 1,000 housing units . according to the bureau , the handheld computer did not have the capacity to efficiently collect data for large blocks . the bureau has taken steps to mitigate this problem . specifically , in january 2009 , the bureau began using laptop computers and software already used in other operations to canvass the 2,086 blocks it identified as large blocks , and by the end of february 2009 , the bureau had completed approximately 80 percent of large - block canvassing . in february 2009 we observed large - block canvassing in atlanta , georgia ; boston , massachusetts ; new york , new york ; san francisco , california ; and washington , d.c. from our preliminary observations , the laptops appear to work well , and listers reported their training was satisfactory . we are in the process of discussing these and other observations with the bureau . the bureau's largest and most costly field operation is nonresponse follow - up . the bureau estimates that it will employ over 600,000 temporary workers to collect data from about 47 million nonresponding households over the course of 10 weeks in 2010 . on april 3 , 2008 , the bureau announced that it would no longer use handheld computers for nonresponse follow - up and would instead change to a paper - based nonresponse follow - up operation . according to the bureau , this change added between $2.2 billion to $3 billion to the total cost of the census . in may 2008 , the bureau issued a plan that covered major components of the paper - based nonresponse follow - up . bureau officials said that they are developing a more detailed plan that would describe 2010 nonresponse follow - up operations and systems , workflow , major milestones , and roles and responsibilities of different census divisions .