pharmacist . pharmacists , academics , and other experts have suggested that an pharmacists , academics , and other experts have suggested that an additional class of nonprescription drugs could increase drug availability , additional class of nonprescription drugs could increase drug availability , because more drugs could be made available without the need to obtain a because more drugs could be made available without the need to obtain a prescription . in the united states , the food and drug administration prescription . in the united states , the food and drug administration ( fda ) , an agency within the department of health and human services ( fda ) , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , has authority to approve drugs prior to their marketing , to ensure ( hhs ) , has authority to approve drugs prior to their marketing , to ensure that they are safe and effective , and to determine their prescription or that they are safe and effective , and to determine their prescription or nonprescription status . although fda has not developed a specific nonprescription status . although fda has not developed a specific proposal , in november 2007 , it held a public meeting to explore the public proposal , in november 2007 , it held a public meeting to explore the public health implications of behind - the - counter ( btc ) availability of certain health implications of behind - the - counter ( btc ) availability of certain drugs . btc drugs would be held behind a pharmacy counter and available without a prescription , but dispensed only after intervention by a pharmacist . the primary purpose of a btc class would be to increase access to drugs to promote public health by making drugs available without a prescription when intervention by a pharmacist or other means can help ensure the safe and effective use of such drugs . similar proposals have been considered in the past and , in 1995 , gao issued a report titled nonprescription drugs: value of a pharmacist - controlled class has yet to be demonstrated ( gao / pemd - 95-12 ) . in that report , we stated that there was little evidence to support the establishment of a btc or similar class of drugs in the united states . the evidence at the time tended to show that countries with a btc or similar drug class were not obtaining major benefits from that class . in light of the fda hearing on btc drugs and the fundamental change that a btc drug class would represent in the u.s. drug classification system , you asked us to update our 1995 report . specifically , we are reporting on ( 1 ) the arguments that have been made supporting and opposing the creation of a btc drug class in the united states ; ( 2 ) changes in drug availability in our five study countries since 1995 and the impact of restricted nonprescription drug classes on drug availability ; and ( 3 ) issues that would be important to the establishment of a btc drug class .