the jsf program is at a crossroads . dod has not been able to deliver on its initial promises , and the sizable investment dod plans to make over the next few years greatly raises the stakes to meet future promises . given the many uncertainties surrounding jsf's development , program officials need more time to gain knowledge before committing to a business case . jsf's failure to adequately match requirements and resources has already resulted in increases in cost , schedule , and performance estimates , and a reduction in dod's buying power . the new business case must also be accompanied by an acquisition strategy that adopts an evolutionary approach to product development — one that enables knowledge - based investment decisions to maximize remaining program dollars . while the warfighter may not receive the ultimate capability initially , an evolutionary approach provides a useful product sooner and in sufficient quantities to start replacing the rapidly aging legacy fighter and attack force . the decisions dod makes now and over the next 2 years will greatly influence the efficiency of its remaining funding — over 90 percent of the $245 billion estimated total program costs . chief among these are the investments needed to increase production to 143 aircraft a year , increasing production expenditures from $100 million a month to $1 billion a month by 2013 . while delays are never welcomed , time taken by dod now to gain more knowledge and reduce risk before increasing its investment may well save time and money later in development and production . now is the time to get the strategy right for delivering on the remainder of the investment . with an evolutionary , knowledge - based plan in place , dod managers will be in a better position to succeed in delivering the warfighter needed capabilities within budgeted resources . given that dod has invested only about 10 percent of the estimated cost to develop and produce the jsf aircraft , and that significant investments are planned in the next few years that can lock the program into a higher - risk acquisition , we recommend the secretary of defense take the following two actions to increase the likelihood of having a successful program outcome by delivering capabilities to the warfighter when needed and within available resources: ( 1 ) establish an executable program consistent with best practices and dod policy regarding evolutionary acquisitions . dod officials should define an affordable first increment , with its own business case that clearly defines the warfighter's most immediate needs and accurately identifies the resources required to deliver on this needed capability . the business case should be established with a high degree of confidence based on known constraints about technology , engineering knowledge , time , and money . for those warfighter needs that cannot be accommodated within this first increment , the program should outline a strategy to meet these needs through subsequent increments , each dependent on having sufficient product knowledge to start system development and demonstration . each increment should be managed as a distinct acquisition with its own business case for supporting the investment .