epa agreed with our recommendation . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for questions about this statement , please contact john stephenson at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include barbara patterson and vincent p. price , assistant directors ; deanna laufer ; and kyerion printup . elizabeth beardsley , pamela davidson , and mehrzad nadji also made important contributions . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . my testimony today summarizes highlights from our report . those sites with sufficiently high scores are eligible for proposal to the npl . the findings of our report are based on an electronic survey of branch chiefs from the 10 epa regions ; data from epa's comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability information system and integrated financial management system ; epa guidance and planning documents ; and interviews with officials from epa headquarters and regional offices , 10 selected states , and the association of state and territorial solid waste management officials . the report contains a detailed overview of our scope and methodology . this work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . as detailed in our report , over 60 percent of the 75 nonfederal npl sites with unacceptable human exposure have all or more than half of the work remaining to complete remedial construction . according to epa regional officials' responses to our survey , epa has plans to control human exposure at all of the 75 sites with unacceptable human exposure ; however , our survey results also show that epa regional officials expect 41 of the sites to continue to have unacceptable exposure until fiscal year 2015 or later . similarly , over 60 percent of the 164 nonfederal npl sites with unknown human exposure have all or more than half of the work remaining to complete remedial construction , according to epa regional officials' responses to our survey . the majority of the sites with unknown human exposure that have all of the work remaining to complete construction are in the remedial investigation phase , which is when epa usually determines a site's human exposure status , according to epa guidance .