we requested comments from the army , but none were provided . we are recommending that the secretary of the army take four actions . to ensure completion of the update to the awps master plan , we recommend that the secretary of the army direct the assistant secretary of the army ( manpower and reserve affairs ) to strengthen oversight of the plan's development , review , and approval . to provide greater assurance of the accuracy of manpower requirements reports produced by awps for use at army industrial sites , we recommend that the secretary of the army direct amc — with assistance as needed from usamaa — to submit awps to usamaa for review and validation as a manpower requirements determination tool , in accordance with army regulations . to complete the army's assessment of unnecessary overlap between awps and lmp and to ensure that a sound business decision is made on how to most cost - effectively provide awps functionality , we recommend that the secretary of the army direct the commanding general , amc , to take the following two actions: identify a specific senior - level amc manager or committee to provide increased leadership involvement and attention of the project team's efforts , to include ensuring that a strong and stable team exists for managing change . establish a fully developed and documented approach for the team's assessment , including a milestone for completing it . it was deployed during three phases beginning in 2003 . at that time , lmp became the primary source of data for awps . since 1998 , we have published several reports that discuss the army's implementation and use of awps . we have reported on , among other issues , the army's compliance with statutory requirements for reporting on the status of awps to congress . our prior reports have also discussed the relationship between awps and lmp . for example , in our october 2002 report on awps , we found that the 2002 awps master plan did not address potential overlap between the functionality provided by awps and that provided by lmp . we reported that army and contractor officials told us that there was some potential overlap and redundancy in the two systems' capabilities . for example , lmp had the same capability as an awps software module that allows users to compare actual resource expenditures against production plans , scheduled workload , and related budgets for specific projects . in our november 2013 report on lmp , we also found that one maintenance depot had created a tool in microsoft excel that extracts data from lmp and develops management reports similar to those created by awps . gao is statutorily required to identify and report annually to congress on federal programs , agencies , offices , and initiatives , either within departments or government - wide , that have duplicative goals or activities . under this mandate , our reviews have identified potential unnecessary overlap and fragmentation , as well as duplication . accordingly , this review evaluates the extent to which the army has ( 1 ) followed certain applicable statutory and regulatory requirements for implementing awps and ( 2 ) assessed whether there is unnecessary overlap between awps and lmp .