postal service . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-2834 or at goldsteinm@gao.gov or david sausville , assistant director , on ( 202 ) 512-5403 or at sausvilled@gao.gov . other contributors to this report were matt cail , roshni dave , joyce evans , brandon haller , anne izod , susan michal - smith , and cynthia taylor . our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess the interagency security committee's ( isc ) progress in fulfilling its responsibilities and ( 2 ) identify key practices in protecting federal facilities and any related implementation obstacles . to assess isc's progress in fulfilling its responsibilities , we interviewed the executive director of isc ; analyzed isc publications and other documents ; considered prior gao work ; and reviewed various laws and policies , including the homeland security act of 2002 . we also reviewed the executive order that established isc , a subsequent executive order that amended it in connection with the transfer of isc's function to dhs , and relevant homeland security policy directives . we also reviewed minutes from isc meetings . we also considered prior gao work on isc . as part of our interviews with isc's executive director , we focused on the challenges isc faces in meeting its major responsibilities . to identify key practices for facility protection and any related implementation obstacles , we conducted a comprehensive literature review of gao and inspector general ( ig ) reports , interviewed officials from the major property - holding agencies , and validated our results using an expert symposium on facility protection . for the analysis of gao and ig reports , we systematically analyzed reports issued between january 1 , 1995 , and march 1 , 2004 . we chose 1995 as a starting point to coincide with the year of the terrorist attack on the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city , oklahoma , and the publishing of the justice department's minimum - security standards . we identified reports by searching gao and ig online databases and consulting with gao and ig contacts using several search terms such as facility security , terrorism , and homeland security . from this initial selection , we identified over 450 reports related to homeland security , which we subsequently reduced to 170 reports that were related to facility protection . thirty - six of the reports were from ig offices at the seven agencies that control over 85 percent of federal facilities in terms of building square footage . these agencies included the departments of defense ( dod ) , energy ( doe ) , the interior ( interior ) , veterans affairs ( va ) and state ( state ) ; the u.s . postal service ( usps ) ; and the general services administration ( gsa ) . we systematically reviewed these reports using a data collection instrument we designed to identify and group key practices according to theme or type of activity .