forensic services . number of capacity - building forensic r&d and validation projects funded . number of forensic technology training tools developed and distributed . number of labs providing continuing education or advanced training to crime analysts . number of crime labs with increased capacity for implementation of new forensic capabilities ( including dna analysis ) . number of capacity - building forensic r&d and validation projects completed and impacting crime labs . number of labs establishing new forensic capabilities . number of labs expanding current forensic capabilities . number of labs experiencing a reduction in time needed for evidence analysis . number of labs experiencing a reduction in backlogged evidentiary sample analysis . help the public safety community make informed decisions about products being marketed for public safety personnel . number of methods for examining evidentiary materials developed . number of standards for equipment and operating procedures developed . law enforcement technology deliverables ( standards , product performance evaluations , product guides ) . develop a firearm that could save the lives of law enforcement officers and members of the public that they encounter while performing their duties . successful demonstration of prototype recognition system for smart gun . failure mode analysis for prototype recognition system for smart gun . incorporation and demonstration of recognition system into firearm ( where applicable ) . thus , surveys such as these are more likely to be intermediate measures ( did information get transferred ? ) than outcome measures ( did information get transferred , acted upon , and achieve a result ? ) in 1998 , nij initiated an effort to report the results of surveys to measure the satisfaction of participants at all conferences , workshops , and seminar series . ost reported on the “grantee level of satisfaction with nij conferences” for fiscal years 1998-2000 . however , in the fiscal years 2001- 2004 gpra performance plans , ost discontinued tracking the surveys because ojp and nij had ceased tracking these data as a performance measure . in fiscal year 2001 , ost attempted to evaluate the effectiveness and value of its techbeat newsletter . the survey sample of 5,500 was taken from a distribution of major readership groups on techbeat's mailing list of 20,674 . according to ost , the response rate for the survey was too low to produce statistically valid results: only 124 completed or substantially completed responses were collected . the surveyors also experienced a very low return on follow - up phone queries . according to the study , the primary reason for the exceedingly low response rate was that so many individuals on the mailing list had either changed jobs or were completely unfamiliar with techbeat . given these results , ost is trying to improve the management and distribution of techbeat . in fiscal year 2001 , ost attempted to launch another effort to measure program results , service quality , and customer satisfaction , but funding for the effort was not provided . ost requested funding for an evaluation to measure the success of its outreach efforts , including those by its technology centers . the evaluation was to determine customer satisfaction with its strategies for outreach and communication and with its products .