unliquidated obligations are those that have not yet been paid . the unliquidated obligations that are no longer needed to pay for goods and services tie up funds that could be used for other permissible purposes . inaccurate obligation data result in misstatement of budgetary information on federal financial statements and in the president's budget and contribute to the failure to provide basic financial accountability . dod has recognized the need for the services to identify and reduce the number and amount of unliquidated obligations by requiring that fund managers review these obligations . they stated that the process of reviewing an obligation can be time - consuming due to a lack of automated tools and , often , a lack of accurate billing information needed to assess the validity of an obligation , especially for older obligations . officials acknowledged that the navy's standard accounting and reporting system provides users with the capability to conduct ad hoc queries of the obligation database , but they claim these tools are not user - friendly because users must be familiar with the system's database - programming code to take full advantage of its capabilities . few of the staff assigned to perform obligation reviews had the required computer training or knowledge to write queries . some of the fund managers also told us that they were reluctant to review the large volume of low dollar unliquidated operating obligations because they felt the expected rate of return was not cost beneficial given the magnitude of resources required to conduct the review . to illustrate the large volume , atlantic fleet officials reported that they had 579,904 unliquidated operating obligations valued $50,000 or less , and officials at the pacific fleet reported 724,266 such unliquidated operating obligations . further , some fund managers stated that it was impossible for them to comply with the requirement to review all such unliquidated operating obligations even once a year , because they did not have enough staff to review the large number of such obligations . officials in the navy comptroller office acknowledged that fund managers have reported difficulties performing obligation reviews . navy officials also acknowledged that inaccurate obligation data compromises the reliability of their financial statements , and therefore it is reasonable that they review their obligations according to the regulations . consequently , the navy has not sought relief from dod obligation review regulations . the navy did not utilize internal control activities necessary to ensure that fund managers performed thorough obligation reviews in accordance with dod regulations . although some major commands had developed written standard operating procedures or checklists to track whether fund managers had reviewed their unliquidated operating obligations , they did not hold managers accountable for the accuracy and completeness of the reviews . fund managers submitted obligation - review confirmation statements to their major commands , but often the commands could not determine specific details about the obligations , including the number of unliquidated operating obligations reviewed , the amount of the obligations reviewed , and the resolution of any problems identified during the review . for example , one major command has a process to review whether fund managers submit the required obligation review paperwork .