these states also have varied experience with disasters . we examined and synthesized documents provided by these officials detailing their experiences with these mitigation programs . we also conducted site visits and interviewed local hazard mitigation officials in georgia , florida , and north carolina because these states have a wide variety of pre - and postdisaster mitigation projects and are very active in both the hmgp and project impact program . we also reviewed studies available from the natural hazards research and applications information center and from fema that addressed the benefits and results of both the hmgp and the project impact program . what are the issues resulting from the increased federal focus on homeland security on conducting hazard mitigation efforts ? to address these issues , we analyzed national hmgp and project impact data , program guidance , and available studies that evaluated these programs . additionally , we discussed the current programs , as well as the new mitigation program outlined in the fiscal year 2003 budget proposal , with emergency management officials in fema's headquarters and three fema regional offices ( atlanta , georgia ; chicago , illinois ; and denver , colorado ) . in addition , we interviewed state hazard mitigation officials from 24 states within 4 fema regions ( regions iv , v , vii , and viii ) to obtain their perspectives on the current fema mitigation programs and on the administration's proposal for a new mitigation program . these states have experienced a varied range of disasters ; consequently , the state mitigation officials represent a wide range of experience with federal hazard mitigation programs . we also conducted site visits in georgia , florida , and north carolina because these states have a wide variety of pre - and postdisaster mitigation projects and are very active in both the hmgp and project impact program . further , we examined and assessed information on state and local preparedness , intergovernmental relations , and issues associated with the establishment of dhs that was available through other work we have recently conducted . see appendix i for more details on our scope and methodology . following a disaster , and upon the request of a state governor , the president may issue a major disaster declaration that triggers a range of assistance from federal agencies . under the provisions of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act , the federal government will assist disaster - stricken states and communities in their efforts to help those in need , remove debris , and rebuild damaged structures , among other things . the costs for this federal disaster assistance have grown significantly since the late 1980s . during the 12-year period ending in 1989 , the expenditures from fema's disaster relief fund totaled about $7 billion ( in fiscal year 2001 dollars ) . however , during the following 12-year period ending in 2001 , as the number of large , costly disasters has grown and the activities eligible for federal assistance have increased , expenditures from the disaster relief fund increased nearly fivefold to over $39 billion ( in fiscal year 2001 dollars ) .