coolant . to remove heat from the core , a coolant — typically water , a gas , or liquid metal — is circulated through the core . the coolant both prevents the core from overheating ( which could damage or melt the fuel ) and it carries energy , in the form of heat , outside the core for electricity production , typically by generating steam that then drives a steam turbine . reactor technologies are classified as either thermal or fast reactors ( although some technologies are “epithermal” and fall in between the two types ) and by the materials used for the moderator or coolant . for example , a pressurized water reactor is a thermal reactor using water as both a coolant and moderator , and a gas - cooled fast reactor is a fast reactor using gas ( carbon dioxide or helium ) as a coolant . site requirement . according to ne officials , laboratory staff , and ngnp industry alliance representatives , the epact 2005 requirement that the ngnp reactor prototype be located at the idaho national laboratory is another barrier to proceeding with the project . representatives of the ngnp industry alliance said that part of the economic benefit of the reactor prototype would be the use of the high - temperature process heat that results from operating the high - temperature gas - cooled reactor . alliance representatives said that building the reactor at idaho national laboratory foregoes the economic benefit because industries that could potentially use process heat are not located near the laboratory , making the overall prototype reactor less economically attractive . instead , they told us that the ngnp prototype reactor should be located where the petrochemical or other industries that use process heat could benefit from it . this is consistent with a finding in the nuclear energy advisory committee's 2011 phase 1 review of the ngnp project . in its review , the committee stated that the business case to optimize ngnp use for process heat applications and electricity indicates that a site in proximity to a wide range of industrial uses is more appropriate and that a siting at the idaho national laboratory will not support a partnership agreement with industry . if industry cannot realize an economic benefit from the prototype reactor , it is unlikely that industry would support the reactor being built at the idaho national laboratory . fiscal constraints and competing priorities . ne officials , laboratory staff , industry representatives , and nuclear energy advisory committee members that we interviewed told us that ne's recent funding levels are inadequate to move forward with the ngnp prototype reactor . ne officials and the ngnp industry alliance both estimate that ne's share of ngnp project could amount to as much as $2 billion over the remainder of the project , in which costs would be shared with industry . under the ngnp industry alliance's proposal , doe would provide between approximately $170 million and $330 million annually over the first 6 years of the proposed plan . this compares to the total funding for advanced reactor concepts subprogram of about $60 million in 2014 .