( see fig . more than 25 countries lie within the transit zone . the president has designated eight of these as “major drug transit countries” based on the estimated volume of illicit drugs that pass through their territory each year . these countries are the bahamas , the dominican republic , ecuador , guatemala , haiti , jamaica , panama , and venezuela . drug trafficking organizations and associated criminal networks are extremely adaptive . they shift routes and operating methods quickly in response to pressure from law enforcement organizations or rival traffickers . they ship drugs through the transit zone primarily by sea , though their methods have become more evasive in recent years . they typically use go - fast boats and fishing vessels to smuggle cocaine from colombia to central america and mexico en route to the united states . go - fast boats are capable of traveling at speeds over 40 knots , are difficult to detect in open water , and are often used at night . when drug traffickers travel in daylight , they often use boats painted blue , or that can be quickly covered with a blue tarpaulin , thereby becoming virtually impossible to see . even when detected , go - fast boats can often outrun conventional ships deployed in the transit zone . traffickers also use “mother ships” in concert with fishing vessels to transport illicit drugs into open waters and then distribute the load among smaller boats at sea . in addition , traffickers use evasive maritime routes and change them frequently . some boats travel as far southwest as the galapagos islands in the pacific ocean before heading north toward mexico , while others travel through central america's littoral waters , close to shore , where they can hide among legitimate maritime traffic . in addition , the joint interagency task force - south ( jiatf - south ) , under defense's u.s. southern command , has reported an increase in suspicious flights — particularly departing from venezuela . since late 2004 , almost all significant bilateral investigations with jamaica have included a wire intercept component using dea - funded facilities . in the bahamas , according to state , intelligence gathering and surveillance equipment provided by state / inl enabled local law enforcement to dismantle two bahamas - based drug trafficking organizations in 2006 . dea has also helped governments draft legislation to broaden the scope of investigative tools available to law enforcement organizations . for example , guatemala's organized crime bill , put into effect in 2007 , authorizes wire intercepts and undercover operations , and allows drugs to be delivered under controlled circumstances in order to identify the traffickers involved — referred to as controlled delivery . dea also encouraged legislation in jamaica to authorize wire intercepts and fingerprinting of suspects . similarly , legislation in venezuela enhanced police investigative powers in 2005 by allowing controlled deliveries . in addition , with u.s. technical and financial assistance , several countries are operating information centers to collect , analyze , and disseminate statistical and case - related data to aid local and foreign law enforcement officials in criminal investigations .