bond funding costs . we used bond yield spreads — the difference between the yield or rate of return on a bond and the yield on a treasury bond of comparable maturity — as our measure of bank holding company funding costs because they are a direct measure of what investors charge bank holding companies to borrow money and because they are sensitive to credit risk and hence expected government support . this indicator of funding costs has distinct advantages over certain other indicators used in studies we reviewed , including credit ratings , which do not directly measure funding costs , and total interest expense , which mixes the costs of funding from multiple sources . alternative measures of size . size or systemic importance can be measured in multiple ways , as reflected in our review of the literature . based on that review and the comments we received from external reviewers , we used four different measures of size or systemic importance: total assets , total assets and the square of total assets , whether or not a bank holding company was designated a global systemically important bank by the financial stability board in november 2013 , and whether or not a bank holding company had assets of $50 billion or more . extensive controls for bond liquidity , credit risk , and other key factors . to account for the many factors that could influence funding costs , we controlled for credit risk , bond liquidity , and other key factors in our models . we included a number of variables that are associated with the risk of default , including measures of capital adequacy , asset quality , earnings , and volatility . we also included a number of variables that can be used to measure bond liquidity . finally , we included variables that measure other key characteristics of bonds , such as time to maturity , and key characteristics of bank holding companies , such as operating expenses . our models include a broader set of controls for credit risk and bond liquidity than some studies we reviewed and we directly assess the sensitivity of our results to using alternative controls on our estimates of funding costs . multiple model specifications . however , we found that the outcomes of our econometric models varied with the various controls we used to capture size , credit risk , and bond liquidity . this variation indicates that uncertainty related to how to model funding costs has an important impact on estimated funding cost differences between large and small bank holding companies . as figure 1 shows , most models found that larger bank holding companies had lower bond funding costs than smaller bank holding companies during the 2007-2009 financial crisis , but the magnitude of the difference varied widely across models , as indicated by the range of results for each year . for example , for 2008 , our models suggest that bond funding costs for bank holding companies with $1 trillion in assets and average credit risk were from 17 to 630 basis points lower than bond funding costs for similar bank holding companies with $10 billion in assets .