( fig . 1 shows the overlapping memberships of nato , eu , map , and pfp members. ) each partner participates in activities to the extent it desires and assembles a unique annual work program by selecting from a variety of activities listed in nato's annual partnership work program , a compendium of activities offered by donor countries . for those states that have formally expressed their interest in joining the alliance , nato has developed a membership action plan to help them become better candidates . ( map countries are identified in figure 1. ) the map builds upon partnership activities , helps ready these states for the full range of nato missions , and requires additional planning by the partner country and review by nato . countries provide assistance to partner states primarily through bilateral arrangements in order to meet the requirements identified in the work program . since the beginning of the alliance in 1949 , nato has held out the prospect of membership to other nations as changing political and strategic circumstances warranted . in 2000 , dod commissioned two studies to analyze the objectives , activities , and accomplishments of warsaw initiative programs and identify the lessons learned from program implementation and results . the studies , conducted by dfi international , reviewed programs that represented $409 million of the approximately $590 million in warsaw initiative funding . by combining the cost data that we collected from dod and the state department with the results of these studies , we determined that , in aggregate , about $367 million , or 90 percent , of the funding associated with the programs examined , was deemed effective or successful in promoting the objectives of the warsaw initiative . the first study , which focussed on the partner states of central and eastern europe , showed that 91 percent of the resources associated with the programs examined were exceptionally or significantly effective . figure 5 shows in greater detail the findings of this study . the second study , which focussed on the central asian and caucasus partner states along with russia , ukraine , and moldova , showed that 67 percent of the resources associated with the programs examined were successful or partially successful . figure 6 shows in greater detail the findings of this study . in addition , both studies concluded that the warsaw initiative programs need to be better focused on u.s. strategic and regional objectives and to better take into account the capacities of the recipient states to absorb or apply the programs . for example , the second study noted that certain programs emphasizing nato interoperability are not well suited for the central asian states . to prepare our overview of previous nato accessions , we reviewed historical texts , and for the most recent accession , interviewed numerous u.s. and international officials and scholars . we also obtained u.s. and nato documents on the accession process . to describe the cost and contents of warsaw initiative programs , we obtained comprehensive cost and program data by recipient country and year from dod and state . we interviewed dod and state department country desk officers , program managers , and fiscal officers .