reg . acts , practices , or courses of business . at that time , the rule generally required , among other things , that advisers with custody hire an independent public accountant to conduct an annual surprise examination to verify custody of client assets . in 2003 , sec amended the rule to require advisers to adopt new controls to protect client assets and relieve certain advisers from the surprise examination requirement . in response to the madoff and other recent frauds , sec amended the rule again in 2009 to improve the safekeeping of client assets — in part by expanding the surprise examination requirement's reach . as noted by sec in its 2009 final rule adopting release , surprise examinations provide “another set of eyes” on client assets and thus additional protection against their misappropriation . under the amended rule , sec continued to provide an exception from the surprise examination requirement to certain advisers , including advisers that have custody solely because of their use of related but “operationally independent” custodians to hold client assets . pub . the requirements of and costs associated with the sec custody rule , including any related record - keeping requirements , for registered investment advisers ; and sec's rationale for not requiring advisers using related but operationally independent custodians to undergo surprise examinations , and the number and characteristics of such advisers . to address these objectives , we reviewed and analyzed the advisers act and related regulations ; proposed and final amendments made to sec's custody rule , including comment letters ; and relevant gao , sec , industry , and academic studies on investment advisers . we also analyzed publicly available form adv data filed by investment advisers to determine , among other things , the number of sec - registered investment advisers that reported complying with certain custody rule requirements , including the surprise examination requirement , and assess the characteristics of certain investment advisers . we interviewed sec staff about the controls and procedures used to ensure the reliability of the data and found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . to obtain data on costs of complying with the sec custody rule , particularly its surprise examination and internal control report requirements , we selected 12 investment advisers based on the number of their client accounts and amount of assets under custody . we interviewed eight of the advisers and four accounting firms that had conducted surprise examinations for the 12 selected advisers to obtain data on surprise examination costs and , if applicable , internal control reports . to obtain information about the requirements , costs , and other issues associated with the sec custody rule , we interviewed , among others , federal and state regulators and representatives from various industry and other associations . ( see app . i for more information about our scope and methodology. ) we conducted this performance audit from september 2012 through july 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .