( see fig . the decline in variable - rate premiums in 2002 may be due to a number of factors . for example , all else equal , an increase in the rate used to determine the present value of benefits reduces the degree to which reports indicate plans are underfunded , which reduces variable - rate premium payments . the job creation and worker assistance act of 2002 increased the statutory interest rate for variable - rate premium calculations from 85 percent to 100 percent of the interest rate on 30-year u.s. treasury securities for plan years beginning after december 31 , 2001 , and before january 1 , 2004 . investment income is also a large source of funds for the single - employer insurance program . the law requires pbgc to invest a portion of the funds generated by flat - rate premiums in obligations issued or guaranteed by the united states , but gives pbgc greater flexibility in the investment of other assets . for example , pbgc may invest funds recovered from terminated plans and plan sponsors in equities , real estate , or other securities and funds from variable - rate premiums in government or private fixed - income securities . according to pbgc , however , by policy , it invests all premium income in treasury securities . as a result of the law and investment policies , the majority of the single - employer program's assets are invested in u.s. government securities . ( see fig . since 1990 , except for 3 years , pbgc has achieved a positive return on the investments of single - employer program assets . ( see fig 4. ) according to pbgc , over the last 10 years , the total return on these investments has averaged about 10 percent . for the most part , liabilities of the single - employer pension insurance program are comprised of the present value of insured participant benefits . pbgc calculates present values using interest rate factors that , along with a specified mortality table , reflect annuity prices , net of administrative expenses , obtained from surveys of insurance companies conducted by the american council of life insurers . in addition to the estimated total liabilities of underfunded plans that have actually terminated , pbgc includes in program liabilities the estimated unfunded liabilities of underfunded plans that it believes will probably terminate in the near future . pbgc may classify an underfunded plan as a probable termination when , among other things , the plan's sponsor is in liquidation under federal or state bankruptcy laws . the single - employer program has had an accumulated deficit — that is , program assets have been less than the present value of benefits and other liabilities — for much of its existence . ( see fig . in fiscal year 1996 , the program had its first accumulated surplus , and by fiscal year 2000 , the accumulated surplus had increased to almost $10 billion , in 2002 dollars . however , the program's finances reversed direction in 2001 , and at the end of fiscal year 2002 , its accumulated deficit was about $3.6 billion .