operational considerations . if congress were to grant ihs advance appropriation authority , it would need to make operational decisions regarding what amount of ihs funding would be provided in advance appropriations , with input from omb and ihs as appropriate . specifically , congress could consider the following questions: ( 1 ) what proportion of ihs's estimated budget would be provided in the advance appropriation — the full amount , or less ( as is the case for va ) ? for example , would congress expect to adjust the advance appropriation amount through a “second bite,” as is the case with va ? congressional flexibility considerations . we reported in 2009 that consideration of any proposal to change the availability of the appropriations va receives for health care should take into account the impact of any change on congressional flexibility and oversight . these same considerations hold merit regarding potential changes to the appropriation status of any federal agency , including ihs . specifically , advance appropriation authority reduces flexibility for congressional appropriators , because it reduces what is left for the overall budget for the rest of the government — meaning the total available for appropriations for a budget year is reduced by the amount of advance appropriations for that year , when budgets have caps . agency capacity and leadership considerations . ihs officials told us they believe the agency's current budget planning processes would be adequate for estimating advance appropriation budget requests , because ihs begins planning for its budget request 3 years in advance . officials added that ihs plans its budget so far in advance to have sufficient time to work with tribes in formulating recommendations for its budget request . ihs officials said that a downside to planning so far in advance is that they do not necessarily have the most current information while formulating the budget request . in addition , we noted prior to va receiving advance appropriation authority that advance appropriation authority could potentially exacerbate existing challenges when developing or managing a budget , generally , due in part to the higher risk of uncertainty when developing estimates that are an additional 12 months out from the actual budget year ( eg , 30 months out instead of 18 months ) . we raised certain capacity and leadership concerns based on our previous work when we added ihs to our high - risk list in 2017 . further , in june 2018 , we found that while ihs had taken some actions to partially address these concerns , additional progress was needed to fully address these management weaknesses . for example , ihs still does not have permanent leadership — including a director of ihs — which is necessary for the agency to demonstrate its commitment to improvement . additionally , while the agency has made some progress in demonstrating it has the capacity and resources necessary to address the program risks we identified in our reports , there are still vacancies in several key positions , including in the office of finance and accounting .