we do not state this in our report . pub . 109-171 , § 6034 , 120 stat . 4 , 74 ( 2006 ) ( codified at 42 u.s.c . in september 2014 , the center for program integrity was reorganized to integrate the medicare and medicaid program - integrity functions across the center for program integrity , so that all center for program integrity units are focused on both programs . to achieve medicare – medicaid integration , the medicaid integrity group was also reorganized and integrated with medicare staff so that the medicaid integrity group no longer exists as a separate identifiable unit . states through the medicaid integrity institute in april 2014 . hhs oig oversees medicaid program integrity through its audits , investigations , and program evaluations . it is also responsible for enforcing certain civil and administrative health - care fraud laws . states have primary responsibility for reducing , identifying , and recovering improper payments . of the approximately 9.2 million beneficiaries in the four states that we examined , thousands of cases from the fiscal year 2011 data analyzed showed indications of potentially improper payments , including fraud , to medicaid beneficiaries and providers . the numbers on beneficiaries and providers may not reflect the total incidence of potentially improper payments , including fraud , because it was not possible to fully investigate claims that did not have a valid ssn . for example , we were unable to match beneficiaries and providers without valid ssns to the full dmf , making it difficult to fully investigate such cases for other indicators of improper payments or fraud . in addition to beneficiaries , we found hundreds of medicaid providers who were potentially improperly receiving medicaid payments . as described below , these cases show indications of certain types of fraud or improper benefits . providers with suspended or revoked medical licenses . all physicians applying to participate in state medicaid programs must hold a current , active license in each state in which they practice . during enrollment , states are required to screen out - of - state licenses to confirm the license has not expired and that there are no current limitations on the license . additionally , states are required to provide cms with information and access to certain information respecting sanctions taken against health - care practitioners and providers by their own licensing authorities . using data from the federation of state medical boards ( fsmb ) , we found that approximately 90 medical providers in the four selected states had their medical licenses revoked or suspended in the state in which they received payment from medicaid during fiscal year 2011 . medicaid approved the associated claims of these cases at a cost of at least $2.8 million . invalid addresses for providers . a drop - box or mailbox scheme is a common fraud scheme in which a fraud perpetrator will set up a medical - oriented business and will use a cmra as his or her official address . the four states we examined for our review required providers to provide the physical service location of their business when they apply to provide medicaid services .