the department partially concurred with our report . to determine how increasing the housing allowance would satisfy the preference of servicemembers , we analyzed the results of the survey , focusing our analyses on the stated preference reported by servicemembers living in military and civilian housing . we compared our results to those reported in a dod - sponsored report by rand and discussed the results with officials from the office of secretary of defense . dod's comments are presented in their entirety in appendix ii . dod did not raise any questions or concerns about our conclusion that higher housing allowances should increase the demand for civilian housing by military personnel . the department , however , indicated it did “not concur that improvements to housing allowances , which are effectively pay increases , would not have a positive effect on retention.” that statement , however , mis - characterizes what we actually said . we stated that “dod should not expect a substantial increase in personnel retention solely from its initiative to increase the housing allowance.” while we agree that increasing compensation may have a positive effect on the overall level of retention and stated so in our report , dod does not have a problem with overall retention . instead , dod's retention problems are focused in certain occupations , career levels , and grades . we have reported before that such specific retention problems should be addressed with more targeted retention incentives aimed at particular segments of the force that are experiencing retention shortfalls . housing allowances , and other across - the - board increases , do little to address specific retention problems . dod also raised a concern about the use of the data from dod's 1999 survey of active duty personnel , indicating that individual responses to survey questions are highly subjective and that information from one survey administered almost two years ago was not sufficient evidence . while we agree that survey responses are subjective , that is the strength of survey data — it provides the views of actual servicemembers rather than those of policymakers . dod's survey of active duty personnel was a well - designed omnibus survey sent to a large sample that was projectable to military personnel across dod . these survey results provide the most recent and most reliable data available to the department on the views of military personnel across the services . dod stated that improvements to housing allowances are essentially pay increases and would therefore have a positive effect on retention . dod stated that important characteristics that influence the relationship between housing allowances and retention were not analyzed . however , dod did not identify what those characteristics were . nevertheless , to recheck our conclusion that satisfaction with the housing allowance has only a marginal impact on retention , we used a statistical technique called partial correlation analysis to screen out the effects of variables known to be related to retention , such as years of service and overall satisfaction .