administrator . like other agency heads , the director is responsible for acquiring and using the human , financial , and information technology resources needed to achieve its goals and mission . the director should , for example , be capable of setting priorities based on funding levels . further , because the bureau's product is information , the director should ensure that the bureau leverages technology , such as the internet , to improve the collection , processing , and dissemination of census information . collaborator . it will be important for the director to continually expand and develop working relationships and partnerships with those in governmental , political and professional circles to obtain their input , support , and participation in the bureau's activities . for example , it will be important for the director to continue working with local government officials to have them play a more active role in taking the census . we previously found that leveraging such data as local response rates , census socio - demographic information , as well as other data sources and empirical evidence , might help control costs and improve accuracy by providing information on ways the bureau could more efficiently allocate its resources . for example , some neighborhoods might require a greater level of effort to achieve acceptable results while in other areas those same results might be accomplished with fewer resources . the 2010 census had several census - taking activities tailored to specific population groups . as one example , the bureau budgeted around $297 million on paid media to raise awareness and encourage public participation in the census . to determine where paid media efforts might have the greatest impact , the bureau developed predictive models based on 2000 census data and other sources . other efforts included mailing a bilingual english / spanish questionnaire in some areas , and sending a second “replacement” census questionnaire to about 53 million households in areas with historically lower response rates . preliminary bureau evaluations suggest that some of these targeted efforts contributed to an increased awareness of the census and were associated with higher questionnaire mail - back response rates . for the 2020 census , the bureau is considering expanding its targeting efforts to activities such as address canvassing , an operation where bureau employees go door - to - door across the country verifying street addresses and identifying possible additions or deletions to its address list . this operation is important for building an accurate address list . in the 2010 census , address canvassing was conducted at the vast majority of housing units . for the 2020 census , the bureau believes it might be able to generate cost savings by using existing address records for those neighborhoods that have been stable , and only canvass those areas where significant changes have occurred . we previously found that studying the value added of a particular operation , such as the extent to which it reduced costs and / or enhanced data quality , could help the bureau make more cost - effective use of its resources . as one example , in addition to address canvassing , the bureau has several other operations to help it build a complete and accurate address list .