iii ) . cms said that it did not believe our findings presented a complete and accurate picture of its part d communications activities . cms discussed several concerns regarding our findings on its written documents and the 1-800-medicare help line . however , cms did not disagree with our findings regarding the medicare web site or the role of ships . cms also said that it supports the goals of our recommendations and is already taking steps to implement them , such as continually enhancing and refining its web - based tools . cms discussed concerns regarding the completeness and accuracy of our findings in terms of activities we did not examine , as well as those we did . cms stated that our findings were not complete because our report did not examine all of the agency's efforts to educate medicare beneficiaries and specifically mentioned that we did not examine the broad array of communication tools it has made available , including the development of its network of grassroots partners throughout the country . we recognize that cms has taken advantage of many vehicles to communicate with beneficiaries and their advisers . however , we focused our work on the four specific mechanisms that we believed would have the greatest impact on beneficiaries — written materials , the 1-800-medicare help line , the medicare web site , and the ships . in addition , cms stated that our report is based on information from january and february 2006 , and that it has undertaken a number of activities since then to address the problems we identified . although we appreciate cms's efforts to improve its part d communications to beneficiaries on an ongoing basis , we believe it is unlikely that the problems we identified in our report could have been corrected yet given their nature and scope . cms raised two concerns with our examination of a sample of written materials . first , it criticized our use of readability tests to assess the clarity of the six sample documents we reviewed . for example , cms said that common multisyllabic words would inappropriately inflate the reading level . however , we found that reading levels remained high after adjusting for 26 multisyllabic words a medicare beneficiary would encounter , such as social security administration . cms also pointed out that some experts find such assessments to be misleading . because we recognize that there is some controversy surrounding the use of reading levels , we included two additional assessments to supplement this readability analysis — the assessment of design and organization of the sample documents based on 60 commonly recognized communications guidelines and an examination of the usability of six sample documents , involving 11 beneficiaries and 5 advisers . second , cms expressed concern about our examination of the usability of the six sample documents . the participating beneficiaries and advisers were called on to perform 18 specified tasks , after reading the selected materials , including a section of the medicare & you handbook . cms suggested that the task asking beneficiaries and advisers to calculate their out - of - pocket drug costs was inappropriate because there are many other tools that can be used to more effectively compare costs .