prohibited transactions . according to irs , abuses frequently are not reflected on any filed tax return and are difficult to detect within the general 3-year statute of limitation period . when certain prohibited transactions occur , the ira loses its tax - favored status and is treated as distributing all of its assets at the fmv on the first day of the year when the prohibited transaction occurred . once irs examiners detect a prohibited transaction , the taxpayer can dispute when the income should have been reported . there are few judicial opinions regarding prohibited transactions , according to irs officials . they also said that the 2013 tax court ruling in peek v. commissioner ( see text box ) sets a useful precedent for increased irs enforcement of the prohibited transaction in more complex , higher dollar value cases . building on peek , sb / se is working on honing procedures for examiners to use in determining whether an ira case may have violated prohibited transactions that are similar to the peek case . irs examination officials said that the process would help irs make decisions about the validity of transactions without having to go to dol for every case . they said that peek will help them more confidently identify prohibited transactions and encourage custodians as well as ira owners and their advisors to be more aware of what is noncompliant . as of september 2014 , irs said the fact - pattern was an ongoing effort . two individuals , lawrence peek and darrell fleck , each established traditional iras , rolled over funds from existing retirement accounts , set up a new corporation , and sold all of the stock of the corporation to the iras . they then used the funds from the sale of the stock to buy the assets of a business and executed personal loan guaranties with respect to that purchase . thereafter , peek and fleck converted their traditional iras into roth iras funded by the same stock . the roth iras subsequently sold the now - significantly appreciated stock of the corporation and treated the gain as deferred . irs asserted deficiencies against peek and fleck on the grounds that the loan guaranties were prohibited transactions . the tax court agreed and held that internal revenue code ยง 4975 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( b ) prohibits taxpayers from making loan guaranties either directly to their iras or indirectly to their iras through an entity owned by the iras . the court further held that the iras ceased to qualify as iras when the prohibited transactions originally occurred and therefore the roth iras were also void because the prohibited transaction continued as to those accounts . the court also upheld accuracy - related penalties imposed by irs . peek and fleck appealed the tax court decision . as of october , 10 , 2014 , the case before the tenth circuit court of appeals was still pending . in 2009 , the imt proposed several legislative changes to address enforcement challenges irs encounters in auditing ira activity .