products . products . *aphis: animal and plant health inspection service ; fas: foreign agricultural service . what is agricultural biotechnology ? agricultural biotechnology is a collection of scientific techniques , such as genetic agricultural biotechnology is a collection of scientific techniques , such as genetic engineering , used to modify plants , animals , or microorganisms by introducing in them engineering , used to modify plants , animals , or microorganisms by introducing in them desired traits , including characteristics from unrelated species . for example , traits may desired traits , including characteristics from unrelated species . for example , traits may be introduced to facilitate pest management and improve yield or nutritional value . be introduced to facilitate pest management and improve yield or nutritional value . to date the principal biotech products marketed have been certain genetically to date the principal biotech products marketed have been certain genetically engineered field crops . the united states is by far the world's largest producer of engineered field crops . the united states is by far the world's largest producer of biotech crops . biotech crops . argentina: 17% ( soybeans ) canada: 10% ( canola ) . china: ~1% ( cotton ) . u.s: 72% ( soybeans , corn , cotton , & others ) *based on usda national agricultural statistical service's june 2000 acreage report . photo source: usda . biotechnology . agreements . agreements . codex: sets international food safety standards recognized under the wto sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) agreement . active discussions related to biotech are taking place in several codex committees . usda manages overall u.s. participation in codex . usda and fda lead u.s. delegations to codex committees . biosafety protocol: environmental agreement under the u.n. convention on biological diversity , covering the transshipment and use of living modified organisms . protocol takes effect upon ratification by 50 countries . the united states has not ratified the convention nor signed the protocol . state department represented u.s. interests at biosafety protocol negotiations . consistent with wto disciplines . wto disciplines . wto: provides institutional framework for multilateral trade . trade disciplines established under the sps and technical barriers to trade ( tbt ) agreements and the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) are related to biotech trade issues . ustr represents u.s. interests at wto . some foreign countries have not approved for marketing certain biotech products that have been approved in the united states . resistance to new product approvals in the eu has affected u.s. exports and biotech trade in other parts of the world . product approval regulations must be clear , transparent , timely , science - based , and predictable . u.s. regulators have concluded that approved biotech foods on the market now are as safe as their conventional counterparts . photo source: usda . strict labeling requirements could impact u.s. exports because they could reduce consumer demand and increase costs . mandatory labeling should only be implemented when the new biotech product represents a significant change from the conventional variety or poses a threat to consumer safety . fda has recently proposed voluntary labeling guidelines . various countries have taken action to enact mandatory labeling requirements ( shaded areas on map ) .