testing . the aegis bmd program office planned to conduct an intercept attempt against a short - range ballistic missile — flight mission 6 ( fm - 6 ) — and to participate in other events that exercise the system's lrs&t functionality and connectivity with the bmds . design reviews . fielding . the aegis bmd program planned to install the initial version of the operational computer program and make associated hardware upgrades on three aegis destroyers enabling them to perform the lrs&t mission . in addition , the program planned to continue its activities leading to the initial delivery of sm - 3 missiles during fiscal year 2005 . the program planned to conduct design reviews of the final block 2004 aegis weapon system software , the final block 2004 missile configuration , and the sm - 3 missile's shipboard launch system . in fiscal year 2004 , the aegis bmd program completed the upgrade of three aegis destroyers for the lrs&t mission . in addition , the program was completing the final assembly of the first five sm - 3 missiles for the block 2004 engagement capability , which were delivered in early fiscal year 2005 . the program is largely on track to upgrade software , expand missile inventory , and conduct flight tests to deliver an enhanced capability for block 2004 by the end of december 2005 . however , funding modifications and ship availability delayed final missile deliveries and ship upgrades . in particular , although the program expected to field nine sm - 3 missiles by the end of block 2004 , only eight will be delivered by this time . also , the program expected to upgrade three cruisers by the end of block 2004 , but only two will be completed by this time . specific progress made in fiscal year 2004 relative to fielding , testing , and design is given in the narrative below and summarized in tables 7 to 12 . the aegis bmd program has plans to eventually upgrade 18 aegis - equipped navy ships ( 15 destroyers and 3 cruisers ) with enhanced planning , surveillance , tracking , and engagement functions to make them capable of performing the bmd mission . training . while initial training of operators has been completed , more is needed . for weapon systems in general , the warfighter does not have a military capability without trained operators , and training cannot begin until a weapon system is delivered ( or at least far along in development ) . policy . usstratcom must receive an execution order from the secretary of defense before the ldo capability is declared operational . this order , which would reflect dod policy , is to include a clear identification of command and control relationships . usstratcom plans to advise the secretary of defense on the military utility of the system and could advise against declaring the system operational if , for example , more testing were needed to increase the command's confidence in the system's effectiveness . also , the concept of operations ( conops ) was not finalized , and issues such as the integration of defensive and offensive operations still had to be worked out .