postal service . violators of federal hazardous materials regulations ( 49 cfr parts 171-180 ) may be subject to a civil penalty of up to $25,000 for each violation and , in appropriate cases , a criminal penalty of up to $500,000 and / or imprisonment of up to 5 years . faa collects data on dangerous goods air incidents , discrepancies , and enforcement actions through two databases . its airport and air carrier information reporting system ( aairs ) collects basic incident and discrepancy information such as the mode , date , and location of the incident or discrepancy , the carrier and shipper involved , the hazard class of the spilled material , and the consequences of the incident or discrepancy . ( see table 1. ) faa's enforcement information system ( eis ) collects information on closed dangerous goods enforcement cases . what do dot and the postal service do to enforce federal regulations for shipping dangerous goods by air ? we focused our review primarily on the shipments of dangerous goods onboard cargo aircraft , in part , because more types and quantities of dangerous goods are permitted on cargo aircraft than on passenger aircraft . to address these questions , we analyzed recent reports by dot on its dangerous goods programs and on the threat that carrying such goods can pose , particularly when the shipments are undeclared . we reviewed research on methods that might be used to estimate the frequency of undeclared shipments , and we consulted with both gao and academic experts in these methods . to determine the extent to which undeclared shipments may occur , we interviewed officials of four major carriers that handle over 60 percent of annual air freight traffic in the united states , and we visited the premises of three of these carriers to review their procedures for identifying and preventing undeclared dangerous goods shipments . we also reviewed the results of a joint effort by the federal aviation administration ( faa ) and the u.s. customs service , which has the authority to inspect and search international shipments , to detect , among other things , undeclared dangerous goods shipments . we interviewed postal service , faa , and other dot officials with various oversight responsibilities for dangerous goods transportation . to evaluate faa's enforcement strategy , we examined the agency's assessments in 30 cases . these cases were randomly selected to fairly represent the full range of over 2,000 cases in the database . what are the key mechanisms the federal government and private industry have in place to prevent dangerous goods shipments from compromising aviation safety ? while the number of cases we tested was too small for us to estimate the extent to which faa's enforcement strategy was followed in the entire database , our examination allowed us to describe the types of practices that occur at critical points in the penalty assessment process . our detailed scope and methodology appears at the end of this report . dot regulates tens of thousands of dangerous goods , which can include poisons , pesticides , radioactive materials , and explosives . about 20 percent of these goods may not travel by air at all .