gao - 08-391 . in may 2011 that , without advance notice from commerce on upcoming liquidation instructions , it can be very difficult for cbp to make workforce planning and staffing decisions . cbp officials at headquarters and at ports we visited stated that liquidation instructions arrive with little warning but need to be acted on immediately due to the 6-month deadline for liquidating entries . they said that this sudden shift in workload diverts key personnel from efforts to address evasion to focus on manually liquidating thousands of entries instead . in the absence of advance notice from commerce on upcoming liquidation instructions , cbp attempts to roughly estimate where its workload peaks will occur on the basis of the 18-month time frame within which commerce typically completes liquidation instructions . however , cbp officials stated that no such estimation is possible in cases involving litigation , which are not subject to time frames . according to cbp , cases involving litigation are particularly burdensome because of the considerable length of time it can take to resolve some cases , during which an extremely large number of entries can accumulate at the ports — all of which cbp eventually has to attempt to liquidate within the 6-month deadline . however , commerce does not currently inform cbp when a court reaches a decision on a case in litigation — information that would enable cbp to conduct some workload planning . according to cbp officials , since cbp is not a party to such cases , it would be helpful if commerce provided them with some notification once decisions are reached . commerce officials stated that they do not know when courts will reach decisions on cases in litigation , but said that they could work with cbp to identify opportunities to share information regarding the status of litigation . in response to a cbp request , commerce recently provided cbp some information for the first time to help with workload planning . in june 2011 , commerce officials provided their counterparts in cbp headquarters with a list of instructions planned for issuance over the next 6 months . cbp officials at headquarters acknowledged receiving the list from commerce , stating that , although the list did not address their need to know when courts reach decisions on cases involving litigation , they found it useful for general workload planning purposes . they noted that they would like to receive this type of list from commerce on a quarterly basis to have more up - to - date information on hand to incorporate into their workload planning decisions . commerce officials stated that they would be willing to work with cbp to develop a schedule for sharing this list on a regular basis . cbp has encouraged the use of higher bonding requirements , called single transaction bonds ( stb ) , to protect ad / cv duty revenue from the risk of evasion ; however , it has not ensured that a port requiring an stb shares this information with other ports in case an importer withdraws its shipment and attempts to make entry at another port to avoid the stb .