this is not always the case . for example , if health care in a particular case - mix category is not being provided efficiently , using expenditure data alone would result in a higher than necessary case - mix weight . this would lead to excess resource allocation for the case - mix category . on the other hand , using expenditure data only would result in a lower case - mix weight than appropriate if health care providers are not using more expensive treatments when needed to provide clinically appropriate care . this would lead to insufficient resource allocation for the case - mix category . as a result , setting case - mix weights may begin with consideration of current expenditures , but ultimately must use the best available data to reflect efficiency and clinically appropriate care . the small number of case - mix categories in vera does not accurately adjust for network differences in veterans' health care needs vera uses only three case - mix categories — complex , basic vested , and basic non - vested — to adjust for differences in health care needs and related resource requirements for veterans . these three case - mix categories are based on 44 patient classes va uses to classify its patients . using all 44 patient classes as case - mix categories would more accurately adjust for differences in needs and related resource requirements because the average costs of patients in the classes within the vera categories vary significantly and can be dramatically higher or lower than their capitation amounts for the current three case - mix categories ( see table 4 ) . for example , the national average patient cost for domiciliary careone type of complex carein fiscal year 2000 was roughly $17,000 less than the $42,153 capitation amount for complex care , while the average patient cost for ventilator - dependent care  another type of complex carewas about $121,000 more than the complex care capitation amount . our analysis shows that considerable variation exists among networks in the type of workload represented by vera's three case - mix categories , which limits vera's ability to allocate comparable resources for comparable workload . vera provides more resources to networks , relative to their costs , that have proportionately more workload in less expensive patient classes , such as domiciliary care , than other networks . vera provides fewer resources to networks , relative to their costs , that have more workload in more expensive patient classes , such as ventilator - dependent care . using va's current 44 patient classes rather than the three case - mix categories vera used in fiscal year 2001 would result in a significant movement of resources for some networks because of the variation by network in the type of workload ( see fig . this would move resources from networks having proportionately fewer patients in expensive patient classes to networks having proportionately more patients in expensive patient classes , resulting in an average movement of resources of 2 percent per network . in 1998 , va conducted a similar analysis using 54 patient classes for allocation and found that this would have moved a significant amount of resources among networks , an average of 4 percent per network .