hospital in 2011 . twenty - three percent of contract health care professionals in the national capital region worked in one of two off - base clinics , the fairfax health center and the dumfries health center . based on available data and interviews with dod officials , we determined that the costs associated with the provision of care by contract health care professionals at on - base facilities and off - base facilities were not directly comparable for a variety of reasons . first , dod does not collect and maintain standardized data on health care professionals that would allow for comparisons of the cost of facilities across the military departments , or even within a military department from one facility to another . for example , labor categories are not standardized across dod . labor costs , including salary , benefits , overtime , and other costs vary by military department and by contract , and the definition of an fte employee varies by military department . second , dod's task force report on the future of military health care concluded that there were significant issues with the military health system cost accounting that affect the correct calculation of unit costs . for example , reported workload data have been characterized as unreliable . dod and military department officials we spoke with confirmed this assessment during our review . third , the financial and data systems used by mtfs are not set up to differentiate between the cost of care provided by contract health care professionals versus the cost of care provided by civilian and active duty health care professionals . finally , market - based salaries for health care professionals vary by geographic location and by specialty . for example , the salary for a chiropractor in washington , d.c. is significantly higher than the salary for a chiropractor in the portsmouth , virginia area . therefore , comparing the costs associated with contract health care professionals at off - base facilities to any contract health care professionals at on - base facilities that were not working in the same geographic area would not result in an appropriate comparison . dod medical services contracting personnel are subject to dod - wide training requirements , and health care experience varies for these personnel . the military departments provide cors , but usually not contracting officers , with specialized training in contracting for health care professionals in addition to dod's requirements . the training provided to contracting officers is generally not targeted to any specific area of acquisition , including health care . contracting officers are federal employees with the authority to bind the government by signing a contract . contracting officers across dod are subject to the defense acquisition workforce improvement act ( dawia ) requirements , which specify mandatory acquisition training and experience standards for dod's acquisition workforce . dod requires all contracting officers to meet the same dawia requirements , regardless of any specialization . the training offered by the defense acquisition university ( dau ) provides a foundation for acquisition and career field knowledge , and is not targeted to specific jobs , including the award and administration of contracts for health care professionals .