performance problems . the optn flags for the mpsc's review transplant programs that are not achieving optn performance standards for survival rates or transplant activity , but these programs are not considered to be out of compliance with optn policies . instead , the optn works with these programs until they meet the standards , sometimes sending peer review teams on - site to consult with the programs , or until problems are otherwise resolved ( for example , if a program closes voluntarily ) . optn officials said that programs with low survival rates typically need to show improvement in outcomes before being released from review by the mpsc and emphasized that this can take some time . of 72 cases the optn flagged for low survival rates in 2005 , about 40 percent remained under review by the mpsc as of august 2007 . although the optn conducted numerous types of monitoring activities , these activities did not incorporate methods capable of promptly detecting problems at transplant programs that prolonged the time that patients waited for transplants . for example , the optn regularly flagged programs for review that did not perform any transplants in a specified period of time . while helpful in detecting completely inactive programs , this particular method did not identify more subtle problems , such as a transplant program that was understaffed and was turning down organs offered for patients at markedly high rates . at the two transplant programs with high - profile problems affecting patient access to transplants , enough transplants were conducted that the programs were not flagged as inactive programs . in addition , the transplants that did occur were successful enough that the programs were not flagged as experiencing performance problems at the time the problems came to light . however , far fewer transplants were conducted than would be expected given the numbers of patients on the waiting list , reflecting problems with understaffing that ultimately affected patients' access to transplants at these programs . even though a targeted method for detecting these problems was not in place , separate pieces of information , if pieced together , could have alerted the optn to at least one of the high - profile incidents . the optn , however , missed opportunities to link these separate sources of information . for example , optn staff who handle patient transfers were aware that an hmo was attempting to transfer hundreds of patients to its new transplant program at an unprecedented rate and was experiencing problems with the transfers . however , they did not alert other appropriate optn staff to the possible need for a compliance review or to look into the situation by , for example , reviewing available data that indicated far lower - than - expected numbers of transplants at the new program . the problem eventually came to light after a whistleblower alerted the news media . in addition to having insufficient methods to detect some of the high - profile cases , the optn was not always timely in conducting those monitoring activities that it performs on - site , namely routine on - site reviews and peer review site visits .