, turnover . irs officials said tin matching service users who found the registration process burdensome were generally those who reported to irs that they were not use to filling out forms on - line and creating and using passwords . the officials also said that some tin matching users reported being uncomfortable having to provide personal information to register . ssa officials said ssnvs is used mostly by larger employers , and a relatively small number of them reported that they found the service burdensome . ssa officials did say , however , that ssa received about 89,000 calls through june 2007 from individuals about registration . ( 3 ) how well do irs's procedures address any areas of noncompliance ? in addition , the committee asked us to provide basic demographic characteristics of aeitc recipients and their employers and to identify legislative and administrative changes made since our 1992 report , some of which were discussed by irs in its response to that report's recommendations . the information is presented in appendixes i and iii through v. to answer these questions , we obtained a data file from irs containing all form w - 2 “wage and tax statements” that reported aeitc in tax years 1999 through 2004 . we performed data reliability tests on this file to determine whether the data were sufficiently reliable for our intended purposes and determined that they were . this process involved , among other things , checking the validity of the social security number ( ssn ) on the form w - 2 , determining whether the aeitc amount was above the yearly maximum limit , and creating subpopulations in which to conduct our analyses . using the form w - 2 data and data from other sources , such as irs's individual return transaction file that contains tax return information , we compiled relevant demographic characteristics data and compared aeitc data with eitc data when possible . we also reviewed administrative and legislative changes as well as relevant reports and considered these along with our data analyses . to examine actions intended to increase use and determine the potential for increases in future aeitc use , we reviewed various reports and literature and interviewed irs officials and individuals we determined to be experts . we also used the form w - 2 and other data to identify areas of noncompliance by comparing the data to the aeitc requirements . in addition , we examined irs's procedures for processing individual income tax returns with aeitc and interviewed irs officials to determine how irs addressed noncompliance . finally , we explored possible remedies for the noncompliance we identified through literature searches and interviews with various department of the treasury , irs , and social security administration ( ssa ) officials . it was not within the scope of our work to fully evaluate the potential cost and benefits of these options for reducing noncompliance . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from december 2005 through july 2007 . appendix ii provides more detail on the scope and methodology we used to conduct our work .