outreach . the 2010 report recommended that dol launch a communications program focused on outreach to native american veterans on tribal land by establishing a public information campaign to share information about vets programs through the use of the web , direct mail , newspapers , and social media . however , dol officials told us that they have not initiated such a campaign due to limited funding . program flexibility . a dol official said that the agency has not pursued the recommendation to provide additional program flexibility , explaining that under the jvsg program , states already have some flexibility under current law to permit them to build solutions to fit their needs . the report recommends that dol identify , on a program - by - program basis , available flexibilities to meet the needs of native american veterans living on tribal lands . while dol has indicated that it is open to identifying any such opportunities that exist under current law , to date it has taken little action in this area . economic development . with regard to economic development , the 2010 report noted that programs to support economic development — such as financing and support for new businesses — lie outside vets's authority . however , the report also noted that economic development should be a major focus across federal programs addressing employment concerns for native american veterans . to date , dol officials told us they had taken no action on this issue and emphasized that , with regard to economic development , dol's focus is on the role that skills can play . since delivering the report in 2010 , dol has not developed a strategy that specifically establishes roles and responsibilities , goals , and time frames for implementation of the report's recommendations . our past work identified key practices for implementing organizational change efforts to improve an agency's programs , including establishing a coherent mission and integrated strategic goals to guide the effort ; setting a timeline to build momentum and show progress from day one ; and dedicating a team to manage the implementation process . although there is no established set of requirements for developing a plan to implement a new effort , components of sound planning are important because they define what organizations seek to accomplish and identify specific activities to obtain desired results . according to senior dol officials , dol has prepared a draft internal memorandum that describes some of the findings from listening sessions conducted with tribal leaders and contained a few recommended action items that address some of the 2010 report recommendations . however , according to dol officials , the memorandum does not address each of the six 2010 report recommendations . it also does not identify costs , roles and responsibilities , or project time frames . dol could expand on its efforts to implement the 2010 report's recommendations to improve employment service delivery to native american veterans on tribal land , even within its constrained budget environment . for detailed information on opportunities for dol to better implement the 2010 report recommendations , see appendix ii . collaboration .