demand . the expected , potential profitability of a spectrum license influences the level of demand for it . as with all assets , companies base their capital investment decisions on the expected net return , or profit , over time of their use . the same holds true for spectrum . currently , the demand for licensed spectrum is increasing , and a primary driver of this increased demand is the significant growth in the use of commercial - wireless broadband services , including third and fourth generation technologies that are increasingly used for smart phones and tablet computers . below are some of the factors that would influence the demand for licensed spectrum: clearing versus sharing: spectrum is more valuable , and companies will pay more to license it , if it is entirely cleared of incumbent federal users , giving them sole use of licensed spectrum ; spectrum licenses are less valuable if access must be shared . sharing could potentially have a big impact on the price of spectrum licenses , especially if a sharing agreement does not guarantee service when the licensee would need it most . for example , knowing in advance that service would be unavailable once a month at 3 a.m. may not significantly influence price , but if the times when the service will be unavailable are unknown , the effect on price could be significant . in 2012 , the president's council of advisors on science and technology advocated that sharing between federal and commercial users become the new norm for spectrum management , especially given the high cost and lengthy time it takes to relocate federal users and the disruptions to agencies' missions . certainty and timing: another factor that affects the value of licensed spectrum is the certainty about when it becomes available . seven years after the auction of the 1710-1755 mhz band , federal agencies are still relocating systems . according to an economist with whom we met , one lesson from the 1710-1755 mhz relocation effort is that uncertainty about the time frame for availability reduces the value of the spectrum . any increase in the probability that the spectrum would not be cleared on time would have a negative impact on the price companies are willing to pay to use it . as such , the estimated 10-year timeframe to clear federal users from the entire 1755-1850 mhz band , and potential uncertainty around that time frame , could negatively influence demand for the spectrum . the 2012 amendments to the csea include changes designed to reduce this uncertainty by requiring federal agencies that will be relocating ( or sharing spectrum ) to submit transition plans with timelines for specific geographic locations , with interagency review of those plans aimed at ensuring timely relocation ( or sharing ) arrangements . available wireless services: innovation in the wireless broadband market is expected to continue to drive demand for wireless services . for example , demand continues to increase for smart phones and tablets as new services are introduced in the marketplace . these devices can connect to the internet through regular cellular service using commercial spectrum , or they can use publicly available ( unlicensed ) spectrum via wi - fi networks to access the internet .