( app . ii discusses oeca's enforcement process and activities in greater detail. ) as reflected in gao's human capital checklist , our past work has demonstrated that effective performance - based management depends on senior managers' willingness and ability to strategically manage all of the agency's resources — including its human capital — to achieve its missions and goals . specifically , it requires aligning strategic and program planning systems with explicit strategies for identifying ( through workforce planning ) the needed mission - critical competencies , and for recruiting , hiring , and training leaders and staff to fill identified competency gaps . these are critical components of effective human capital management and among the building blocks to achieving an organization's mission and strategic goals ( see app . epa's human capital strategy is a promising initial effort to develop a framework for managing the agency's workforce . nevertheless , it does not include all of the key elements that we have identified as essential components of an effective human capital strategy . in this regard , epa's strategy does not ( 1 ) fully integrate its human capital objectives with its strategic environmental goals ; ( 2 ) identify the specific activities , milestones , and resources needed to implement the strategy ; and ( 3 ) establish results - oriented performance measures to track the strategy's implementation and success . by including these elements in its strategy , epa could better ensure that its workforce is deployed to effectively meet its strategic goals . ( app . iii summarizes the current status of epa's human capital management practices and its efforts to implement its human capital strategy ) . epa and federal agencies in general have not given adequate attention to human capital management in the past . however , epa is among the agencies that have become more acutely aware of challenges facing the government in the human capital area and have taken steps to improve their approaches to building and managing their workforces . epa's strategy recognizes the importance of better managing the agency's human capital . as we noted in our human capital checklist , an agency should develop strategies to enhance the value of its employees and focus its efforts on the agency's shared vision — its mission , vision for the future , core values , and goals and objectives . overall , epa's strategy is detailed and addresses most of the issues that we identified in our checklist . for example , the strategy clearly identifies the agency's vision for its people , its core values , and six major human capital goals for the next 2 years , such as attracting and retaining a highly skilled workforce and improving teamwork and collaboration among its employees . in addition , the strategy ( 1 ) discusses implementation plans , including actions for achieving each of its six human capital goals ; ( 2 ) identifies the units within the agency that are responsible for developing and carrying out the implementation plans ; and ( 3 ) for the most part , directly links the implementation plans to each human capital objective ( see table 1 ) .