stack . in 1970 , there were only 2 stacks higher than 500 feet in the united states , but this number had increased to more than 180 by 1985 . while constructing a tall stack is a dispersion technique that helps to reduce pollution concentrations in the local area , using tall stacks does not reduce total emissions that can potentially be transported to downwind states . the 1977 amendments to the clean air act discouraged the use of dispersion techniques to help attain naaqs . unlike tall stacks , pollution controls help to reduce the actual emissions from power plants by either reducing the formation of these emissions or capturing them after they are formed . at coal power plants , these controls are generally installed in either the boiler , where coal is burned , or the duct work that connects a boiler to the stack . a single power plant can use multiple boilers to generate electricity , and the emissions from multiple boilers can sometimes be connected to a single stack . figure 2 shows some of the pollution controls that may be used at coal power plants: fabric filters or electrostatic precipitators ( esp ) to control particulate matter , flue gas desulfurization ( fgd ) units — known as scrubbers — to control so emissions , and selective catalytic reduction ( scr ) or selective non - catalytic reduction ( sncr ) units to control no emissions . the reduction in emissions from a coal power plant by the use of pollution controls can be substantial , as shown in table 1 . the installation of pollution control equipment can also be expensive . according to a massachusetts institute of technology study of coal power plants , it may cost anywhere from $215,000 per megawatt to $330,000 per megawatt to install controls at a coal power plant for particulate matter , so . for a typical coal power plant with a capacity of 500 megawatts , this means that it could cost from $107 million to install these controls at a newly built facility up to $165 million to retrofit these controls at an existing facility . additionally , pollution controls can require additional energy to operate , known as an energy penalty . according to our analysis of eia data , which we updated with our survey results , we found a total of 284 tall smokestacks were operating at 172 coal power plants in 34 states , as of december 31 , 2010 . while about half of the tall stacks began operating more than 30 years ago , there has been an increase in the number of tall stacks that have begun operating in the last 4 years , which several stakeholders attributed to the need for new stacks when retrofitting existing plants with pollution control equipment . as of december 31 , 2010 , we found a total of 284 tall stacks were operating at 172 coal power plants in the united states . these tall stacks account for about 35 percent of the 808 stacks operating at coal power plants in the united states , and they are generally located at larger power plants .