recruitment . to achieve its strategic plan objective of a diverse workforce , in his april 2008 testimony , dhs's acting chco stated that recruitment strategies have been implemented at the department and component levels to improve diversity of the dhs talent pool . dhs officials told us that the department partners with several minority - serving institutions and participates in several intern , scholarship , and fellowship programs ; officials provided a recruitment brochure . these officials also indicated that in october 2007 , the dhs began a veterans' outreach program as a means of recruiting a diverse workforce . this outreach strategy consists of ( 1 ) a web site for one - stop employment and other information , ( 2 ) an advisory forum of external veterans as stakeholders , and ( 3 ) training in veterans' preference and reemployment rights for eeo and human capital specialists . dhs has also created an ses - level director of recruiting and diversity within the chief human capital office . employee involvement . employees can make valuable contributions in driving diversity throughout an organization . our work on leading diversity management practices identified several forms these contributions can take , including mentoring and community outreach with private employers , public schools , and universities . dhs officials described actions the department is taking to provide opportunities for employees at various levels throughout the department to receive mentoring . in addition , dhs officials stated that they have developed formal partnerships with minority professional service organizations , including the urban league's black executive exchange program , where dhs provides speakers that participate in outreach programs at historically black colleges and universities . dhs officials indicated they are pursuing similar partnerships with the national association of hispanic federal executives , the african american federal executive association , and the asian american executive network . succession planning . succession planning is a comprehensive , ongoing strategic process that provides for forecasting an organization's senior leadership and other needs ; identifying and developing candidates who have the potential to be future leaders ; and selecting individuals from among a diverse pool of qualified candidates to meet executive resource needs . succession planning and management can help an organization become what it needs to be , rather than simply recreate the existing organization . leading organizations go beyond a “replacement” approach that focuses on identifying particular individuals as possible successors for specific top - ranking positions and engage in broad , integrated succession planning and management efforts that focus on strengthening both current and future capacity . they anticipate the need for leaders and other key employees with the necessary competencies to successfully meet the complex challenges of the 21st century . for dhs , in addition to the changes that will occur as a result of the upcoming new administration , several factors including recent turnover and expected retirements provide opportunities for dhs to affect the diversity of its workforce and highlight the importance of succession planning . recently , we reported that the overall attrition rates for permanent dhs employees ( excluding ses and presidential appointees ) at 8 percent and 7 percent in 2005 and 2006 , respectively , exceeded the 4 percent average rate for all cabinet - level agencies .