the fi pays the claim . the time for this step can be measured by the length of time between when the fi receives a claim from an external provider and when the payment is made . ppaca made significant changes to the medicaid program and included new health care coverage options that may benefit american indians and alaska natives . in 2014 , medicaid eligibility will expand in states opting to participate , such that all individuals with incomes at or below 138 percent of the federal poverty level will be eligible for the program , including previously ineligible categories of individuals , such as childless adults . are alternate health care resources available to the patient ? many users of ihs services are also eligible for other sources of payment for care , including medicaid , medicare , and private insurance . the chs program is typically the payer of last resort . therefore , before a service is approved for chs payment , the patient must apply for and use all alternate resources that are available and accessible . services from an ihs facility are also considered a resource , so chs funds cannot be used for services reasonably accessible and available at ihs facilities . did the chs program receive timely notification of services provided from a non - ihs facility ? in non - emergency cases , the local chs program should be notified and the service approved for payment prior to the patient receiving care . in cases where the patient was not referred for care by an ihs provider , such as with emergency room services , the chs program must be notified within 72 hours of when the service was delivered . at some ihs facilities , the amount of chs funding available was only sufficient to cover cases with the highest medical priority — priority 1 — emergent or acutely urgent care services that are necessary to prevent immediate death or serious impairment of health . ( see table 1 for a description of the medical priority levels and related services. ) after considering these questions , local chs programs review each case based on the availability of funding and may defer or deny requests to pay for services when program funds are not available . if the chs program determines that a service can be funded , it issues a purchase order for the service . in general , three entities are involved in the chs payment process: ( 1 ) the local chs program , ( 2 ) the provider , and ( 3 ) ihs's fiscal intermediary ( fi ) . the timing of the chs program's and the provider's involvement depends on whether the service was prompted by a referral from an ihs provider prior to the date of service — called ihs referrals , or prompted by the patient seeking care without first obtaining a referral from an ihs provider — these are typically emergency services and called self - referrals . ihs referrals are cases in which an ihs - funded provider refers a patient for care to an external provider . the local chs program receives the referral and evaluates it against the eligibility requirements .