concerns about food safety oversight are not new . gao and others have consistently reported on a lack of adequate oversight of food safety by fda , and have provided many recommendations for better leveraging fda's limited resources and suggestions for additional authorities that would allow fda to better fulfill its responsibilities . in 1998 , we reported that limitations in fda's authority and its need to more effectively target limited resources could adversely affect its ability to ensure food safety . a decade later , the story remains the same and has only taken on a greater sense of urgency due to changing demographics and consumption patterns that , according to fda , have put more of the u.s. population at risk of contracting foodborne illnesses . populations at high risk of foodborne illnesses — older adults , young children , pregnant women , and immune compromised individuals — now make up 20 to 25 percent of the u.s. population . in addition , u.s. consumers are increasingly eating raw or minimally processed foods , which are often associated with foodborne illnesses . for example , the consumption rate of leafy greens — the category of produce most likely to be associated with an outbreak — increased 180 percent between 1992 and 2005 , according to the u.s. department of agriculture . compounding the challenges , the number of fda - regulated domestic food establishments has increased more than 10 percent in the last five years and the number of food import entry lines has tripled in the past ten years . to respond to the need for better oversight of food safety , fda released its food protection plan in november 2007 , which articulates fda's framework for overseeing the safety of food and outlines three core elements — prevention , intervention , and response — that are the focus of fda's efforts to improve oversight . at the same time , a twelve - agency working group presented to the president its action plan for import safety , which contains , among other things , recommendations for improving the safety of food imports entering the united states . both plans spell out numerous actions fda plans to take to enhance food safety , including writing new food protection guidelines for industry and helping foreign countries improve their regulatory systems . the plans also request new legislative authorities , such as enhanced access to a food company's records during food safety emergencies . also , in november 2007 , fda's science board , an advisory board to the agency , released a report entitled , fda science and mission at risk . since 2004 , we have made 21 recommendations to fda to improve monitoring and enforcement processes , and fda has implemented 3 of them . for example , in october 2004 , we recommended that fda develop a sound methodology for district staff to verify that companies have quickly and effectively carried out recalls . at the time of our review , we found that fda was not calculating the recovery rate for recalls . as a result , the agency did not know how much food was actually recovered , although the agency told us recovery was an important indicator of a successful recall .