iii ) . tsa has arranged for leadership training for screening supervisors through the department of agriculture graduate school and has developed leadership and technical training courses for screening supervisors . however , some fsds reported the need for more training for screening supervisors and lead screeners . the quality of screening supervisors has been a long - standing concern . in testifying before the 9 / 11 commission in may 2003 , a former faa assistant administrator for civil aviation security stated that following a series of covert tests at screening checkpoints to determine which were strongest , which were weakest , and why , invariably the checkpoint seemed to be as strong or as weak as the supervisor who was running it . ( 2 ) how does tsa ensure that screeners complete required training ? ( 3 ) what actions has tsa taken to measure and enhance screener performance in detecting threat objects ? in conducting our work , we reviewed tsa documentation related to screener training requirements and performance testing . we also analyzed data from our survey responses from all 155 fsds about screener training , supervision and performance . we also visited 29 airports of various sizes and geographic locations to obtain a cross - section of all airports , including the 5 airports with private - sector screeners . to gain a better understanding of training and performance issues , during these visits , we interviewed fsds , members of their management teams , passenger and checked baggage screeners , and airport officials . to determine what efforts tsa has taken to assess and to enhance screener performance in detecting threat objects , we reviewed related reports from the department of transportation and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) inspector general , congressional research service , and tsa , as well as prior gao reports . we obtained and reviewed tsa's covert test data and results of the annual recertification testing . ( results of the covert testing are classified and will be the subject of a separate classified gao report. ) we discussed methods for inputting , compiling , and maintaining the data with tsa officials . we also assessed the methodology of tsa's covert tests and questioned oiapr officials about the procedures used to ensure the reliability of the covert test data . when we found discrepancies between the data oiapr maintained in spreadsheets and the data included in the hard copy reports we obtained from tsa , we worked with oiapr to resolve the discrepancies . further , we visited tsa headquarters to review tsa's annual recertification testing modules and discuss tsa's process for validating the recertification exams . as a result , we determined that the data provided by tsa were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . we also reviewed tsa's performance measures , targets , and indexes . finally , we interviewed tsa headquarters officials from several offices in arlington , virginia , including aviation operations , workforce performance and training , strategic management and analysis , and internal affairs and program review .