part 23 certification training . officials from all 14 fusion centers we contacted stated that fusion center staff have completed the requisite online certification training , and that it was helpful in making their staff aware of the regulations governing their criminal intelligence systems . this would in turn be responsive to our recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security , the attorney general , the program manager for the ise , and other interested congressional committees and subcommittees . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report or wish to discuss the matter further , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 , or larencee@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . according to our interviews with officials in 14 fusion centers , the individuals designated to be privacy / civil liberties officials varied in terms of their position and legal experience . for example , in the 13 fusion centers with privacy / civil liberties officials , 3 of these officials were center directors and 6 were analysts . the remaining 4 fusion centers designated attorneys from other bureaus or agencies within their respective state or local governments , such as state attorneys' general offices , as their privacy / civil liberties official . these officials stated that because they either did not have the appropriate legal expertise within the fusion center or had an existing working relationship with a state bureau or agency , designating officials outside their center as the privacy / civil liberties official was the best option available in achieving this baseline capability . among the 9 centers that had designated fusion center personnel as the privacy / civil liberties official , none of these personnel was an attorney ; however , officials in 3 of these centers stated that their privacy / civil liberties officials had access to other legal counsel within the state police agency or city police department , for example , to help clarify laws and regulations governing privacy and civil liberties protections and to assist with the development of the centers' policies . fusion center officials we interviewed reported several challenges in designating privacy / civil liberties officials , including concerns that some officials had other operational duties at the fusion center or may not have sufficient legal expertise to ensure implementation of privacy and civil liberties protections . for example , of the nine fusion centers with directors or analysts serving as the privacy / civil liberties official , two had officials whose sole duty was to oversee development of the center's privacy and civil liberties policy and implementation of privacy and civil liberties protections . to what extent are dhs and doj supporting fusion centers in establishing privacy and civil liberties protections ?