gao - 09-295r . washington , d.c.: february 27 , 2009 . defense management: actions needed to overcome long - standing challenges with weapon systems acquisition and service contract management . gao - 09-362t . washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2009 . washington , d.c.: november 1 , 2005 . defense acquisitions: fundamental changes are needed to improve weapon program outcomes . gao - 08-1159t . only in very rare instances have programs been terminated for poor performance . when dod consistently allows unsound , unexecutable programs to begin with few negative ramifications for poor outcomes , accountability suffers . as section 204 proposes , the strengthening of the nunn - mccurdy provision — by including the potential termination of programs that experience critical cost growth — could facilitate a change in dod's behavior by preventing the acceptance of unrealistic cost estimates as a foundation for program initiation and placing more accountability on senior dod leadership for justifying program continuation . programs may thus be forced to be more candid and up front about potential costs , risks , and funding needs , and the likelihood of delivering a successful capability to the warfighter at the cost and in the time promised may grow . prohibits systems engineering contractors from participating in the development or construction of major weapon systems on which they are advising dod , and requires tightened oversight of organizational conflicts of interest by contractors in the acquisition of major weapon systems . the defense industry has undergone significant consolidation in recent years which has resulted in a few large , vertically integrated prime contractors . this consolidation creates the potential for organizational conflicts of interest where , for example , one business unit of a large company may be asked to provide systems engineering work on a system being produced by another unit of the same company . as the defense science board has recognized , these conflicts of interest may lead to impaired objectivity , which may not be mitigated effectively through techniques such as erecting a firewall between the employees of the two units . while the federal acquisition regulation currently covers some cases of potential organizational conflicts of interest involving the systems engineering function , there may be a need for additional coverage in this area . in general , we would support efforts to enhance the oversight of potential organizational conflicts of interest , particularly in the current environment of a heavily consolidated defense industry . establishes an annual awards program to recognize individuals and teams that make significant contributions to the improved cost , schedule , and performance of defense acquisition programs we support the creation of an annual awards program to recognize individuals and teams for improving the cost , schedule , and performance of defense acquisition programs . we have reported that meaningful and lasting reform will not be achieved until the right incentives are established and accountability is bolstered at all levels of the acquisition process . the need for incentives emerged as a significant issue in our recent discussions with acquisition experts examining potential changes to the acquisition processes enumerated in last year's defense authorization act . washington , d.c.: september 25 , 2008 .