inconvenience . nontransferable tickets can be inconvenient because the buyer may need to present identification , a debit or credit card , or both , to gain entry to the venue , which can create delays . nontransferable tickets also can create challenges for consumers buying tickets for others ( including as a gift ) because the ticket terms may require the buyer and original purchase card be present to gain entry . however , a primary ticket seller and a promoter told us these obstacles can be overcome — for example , through mechanisms allowing buyers to transfer tickets upon request , and by using processes to speed venue entry ( such as automated kiosks ) . economic inefficiency . when nontransferable tickets are priced below the prevailing market price in the primary market , this creates excess demand , and tickets are sold without regard to consumers' willingness to pay . traditional economics maintains that an efficient market would result in tickets going to those willing to pay the highest price , which nontransferability inhibits by restricting a secondary market . in addition , some academics have noted that consumers may be less willing to buy nontransferable tickets because they do not offer the “insurance” that comes with the ability to resell them . potential impingement on property rights . some consumer groups and secondary market participants have argued that nontransferable ticket policies impinge on consumers' property rights . these parties argue that once consumers buy a ticket , they should be able to do whatever they like with it . effect on competition . the new york state attorney general's office and some economics literature have cautioned that use of nontransferable tickets by primary ticketing companies can impede competition in the secondary market by making these companies' own resale exchanges the only way to transfer tickets . several states have caps on the price at which tickets can be resold , while others have repealed caps and some studies have questioned their enforceability . for example , kentucky generally prohibits the resale of event tickets for more than either face value or the amount charged by the venue , and massachusetts prohibits resale by brokers of most tickets for more than $2 above face value , with the exception of relevant service charges . new jersey allows a maximum markup of 20 percent or $3 ( whichever is greater ) for nonbrokers and a maximum markup of 50 percent for registered brokers , but does not limit resale prices for nonbrokers for sales over the internet . a number of other states — including minnesota , missouri , new york , and connecticut — repealed their price cap laws in the 2000s . however , the new york state attorney general's 2016 report recommended bringing back a price cap , through a “reasonable limit” on resale markups . price caps are generally intended to protect consumers from high markups and increase the fairness of ticket distribution so that the wealthiest consumers do not have disproportionate access to tickets . in theory , price caps offer consumers the advantages of nontransferable tickets without the disadvantages: they limit high secondary - market prices but still allow consumers to transfer tickets to others or resell tickets they cannot use .