va benefits . va provides billions of dollars in monthly disability compensation to veterans with disabling conditions caused or aggravated by their military service . in recognition of cases where the benefit does not adequately compensate veterans who are unable to maintain substantially gainful employment , va may provide supplemental compensation through its total disability individual unemployability ( tdiu ) benefit . we found that 54 percent of disabled veterans receiving tdiu benefits in fiscal year 2013 were 65 years or older . by comparison , other benefit programs , such as social security disability insurance , consider retirement age a cause for ineligibility and convert benefits for those reaching their full retirement age to a social security retirement benefit . we recommended that va develop a plan to study whether age should be considered when deciding if veterans are unemployable . va concurred with our recommendation and began reviewing disability eligibility policies and procedures in april 2015 , including consideration of age in claim decisions . the review was on going as of february 2017 . if it were determined that tdiu benefits should only be provided to those veterans younger than their full social security retirement age , va could achieve significant cost savings — $15 billion from 2015 through 2023 , according to a cbo estimate . in fiscal year 2016 , the social security administration ( ssa ) spent about $979.7 billion , roughly 23 percent of federal outlays . we have identified a number of opportunities for ssa to improve the integrity of its programs and achieve cost savings . its two largest programs — old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) , which provides retirement benefits , and disability insurance ( di ) , which provides benefits to individuals who cannot work because of a disability — together paid out more than $905 billion in fiscal year 2016 . benefits provided under these programs are subject to several provisions that offset benefits for individuals who receive both social security benefits and similar benefits under another program , such as state and local pensions or workers' compensation . in some of these cases , ssa is required to offset or reduce the amount it pays to account for these other benefits . we have reported that ssa could take additional steps to better enforce these rules and avoid paying duplicative benefits . social security offsets . ssa needs accurate information from state and local governments on retirees who receive pensions from employment not covered under social security . ssa needs this information to fairly and accurately apply the government pension offset ( gpo ) , which generally applies to spouse and survivor benefits , and the windfall elimination provision ( wep ) , which applies to retirement and disability benefits . congress could consider giving irs the authority to collect the information that ssa needs on government pension income to administer the gpo and the wep accurately and fairly . implementing this action could save $2.4 billion to $7.9 billion over 10 years , if enforced both retrospectively and prospectively , based on estimates from cbo and ssa . the estimated savings would be less if ssa only enforced the offsets prospectively as it would not reduce benefits already received . disability and unemployment benefits .