we support this provision . by granting the cao clear lines of authority , accountability , and responsibility for acquisition decision - making , sara takes a similar approach as leading companies in terms of the responsibility and decision - making authority of these individuals . comptroller general david walker testified earlier this month that strategic human capital management must be the centerpiece of any serious government transformation effort and that federal workers can be an important part of the solution to the overall transformation effort . in july 2001 , he recommended that congress explore greater flexibilities to allow federal agencies to enhance their skills mix by leveraging the expertise of private sector employees through innovative fellowship programs . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 03-716t . to view the full report , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact william t. woods at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or woodsw@gao.gov . mr. chairman and members of the committee: thank you for inviting the general accounting office ( gao ) to participate in today's hearing on the proposed services acquisition reform act of 2003 ( sara ) . over the past several years , the federal acquisition environment has changed dramatically . spending for services has increased significantly and now represents more than 60 percent of all federal contract spending . at the same time , there has been a reduction in the size of the acquisition workforce , and the use of alternative contracting approaches has been growing . the purpose of sara is to provide federal agencies with additional tools for addressing these developments . we fully support this objective , and look forward to continuing to work with this committee and others in finding ways to promote more efficient and effective acquisitions . in my testimony today , i will: summarize recent trends in contract spending and in the acquisition discuss our views on selected provisions of sara based on relevant gao reports . we recently issued several reports on acquisition spending and workforce trends . these reports show that spending on services acquisitions is increasing at a time when the acquisition workforce is decreasing . our report on spending and workforce trends in federal procurement shows that federal agencies continue to buy far more services than goods . since 1997 , spending on services has grown 11 percent . in fiscal year 2001 , over 60 percent of the more than $220 billion in goods and services purchased by the federal government was for services . at six agencies , procurement of services exceeded 75 percent of their total spending on contracts ; at one agency , the department of energy , nearly 100 percent of total spending via contracts was for services ( see fig . spending on services could increase even further , at least in the short term , given the president's recent request for additional funds for defense and homeland security . the degree to which individual agencies are currently contracting for services and the growth of services spending underscore the importance of ensuring that service acquisitions are managed properly .