this report contains recommendations to you . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . we requested supporting documentation for each of these transactions . hud was able to provide us with adequate support for 645 transactions totaling about $189,000 . hud was unable to provide adequate support for the remaining 295 transactions ( 31 percent of total transactions requested ) totaling over $364,000 ( 66 percent of total dollars requested ) . in these instances , we were unable to determine what was purchased , for whom , and why . some examples of the questionable vendor transactions for which we did not receive adequate support included over $27,000 to various department stores such as best buy , circuit city , dillard's , jcpenney , lord & taylor , macy's , and sears ; over $8,900 to several music and audio stores including sound craft systems , j&r's music store , guitar source , and clean cuts music ; and over $9,700 to various restaurants such as legal sea food , levis restaurant , the cheesecake factory , and tgi fridays . additional examples of questionable or potentially improper purchases we found include $25,400 of “no show” hotel charges for hud employees who did not attend scheduled training and $21,400 of purchases from vendors who appear to have been out of business prior to the purchase . because hud was unable to provide adequate documentation for these purchases , we consider them to be a questionable use of government funds and therefore potentially improper purchases . we also have concerns about hud's accountability for computer and related computer equipment bought with purchase cards because of the large volume of transactions for which it did not have appropriate documentation . for example , our testing revealed that hud employees used their purchase cards to buy portable assets , such as computer equipment and digital cameras , totaling over $74,500 for which they have provided either no support or inadequate support . as mandated by 31 u.s.c . 3512 , commonly known as the federal managers' financial integrity act of 1982 , the comptroller general issues standards for internal control in the federal government . these standards provide the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control and for identifying and addressing major performance and management challenges and areas at greatest risk of fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . according to these standards , internal control comprises the plans , methods , and procedures used to meet missions , goals , and objectives . control activities are the policies , procedures , techniques , and mechanisms that enforce management's directives and help ensure that actions are taken to address risks . control activities are an integral part of an entity's planning , implementation , review , and accountability for stewardship of government resources and achieving effective results . they include a wide range of diverse activities . some examples of control activities include controls over information processing , physical control over vulnerable assets , segregation of duties , proper execution of transactions and events , and access restrictions to and accountability for resources and records . during our review , we found that hud was not blocking any mccs .