gao - 02-849 . washington , d.c.: september 16 , 2002 . ( see fig . in addition to los angeles county , there were other counties with a significant percentage of ssi residency overpayments: queens county , n.y. ( 5.2 percent ) ; new york county , n.y. ( 5.0 percent ) ; kings county , n.y. ( 4.8 percent ) ; san diego county , calif. ( 4.1 percent ) ; and bronx county , n.y. ( 3.5 percent ) . moreover , of approximately 3,000 u.s. counties , 50 accounted for 77 percent of all residency overpayments detected by ssa during this time . ( see fig . ssa's data also showed that individuals born outside the u.s. accounted for at least 87 percent of all ssi residency overpayments between 1997 and 2001 . residency overpayments were most common among recipients who were born in latin america , the caribbean , and south / southeast asia , but included other areas as well , such as the middle east . recipients from the philippines accounted for the greatest amount of residency violations or $24 million of all ssi residency overpayments during this period . ssa data also showed that recipients from just 14 countries and 1 u.s. territory accounted for about 73 percent of all residency overpayments during this period . these include the dominican republic , ( 12.3 percent ) , mexico ( 7.6 percent ) , puerto rico ( 7.5 percent ) , india ( 7.1 percent ) , and iran ( 3.4 percent ) . ( see fig . puerto rico is a united states territory . ssa's ability to detect and deter residency violations has been impeded by three kinds of weaknesses . first , the agency has relied heavily on self - reported information from recipients to determine domestic residency , often without independently verifying such information . second , ssa has made insufficient use of its existing tools for identifying potential violations , such as its risk analysis system to screen for high - risk cases . ssa has also not made optimal use of redetermination reviews , home visits , monetary penalties , and administrative sanctions to deter future violations . finally , the agency historically has not made adequate use of independent data sources from other federal agencies or private organizations to detect nonresidency of ssi recipients . ssa has relied on self - reported information , such as documents and statements from recipients , to establish proof of u.s. residency . our prior work has shown that about 77 percent of all payment errors in the ssi program were attributable to recipients who do not comply with reporting requirements . in our recent review , about half the ssa field staff we interviewed reported that they relied on recipients to self - report important information with respect to travel outside the u.s. ssi program guidelines have generally directed ssa staff to accept recipients' assertions concerning residency unless they have reason to question the accuracy of their statements .