all of these servicemembers were separated . we also found that 38 percent of enlisted servicemembers at the installations we visited stated that they wanted to consult with legal counsel prior to their separation . according to legal officials at the installations we visited , enlisted servicemembers may seek legal counsel to discuss the implications of a personality disorder separation , seek advice on how to stay in the military , or obtain information on their eligibility for department of veterans affairs' benefits , such as health and educational benefits , after separation . for enlisted navy servicemembers whose separation packets we reviewed , 5 percent selected to submit statements and 5 percent selected to consult with counsel prior to separation . based on our review of enlisted servicemembers' separation packets for the installations we visited , we found that the majority of servicemembers requested copies of their separation packets , which are sent to the commander with separation authority . specifically , 289 of 312 enlisted servicemembers in our review at the four installations — 93 percent — requested copies of their separation packets , while 66 percent of enlisted navy servicemembers in our review requested copies of their separation packets . we also found that no enlisted servicemembers — either at the installations we visited or among the enlisted navy servicemembers whose separation packets we reviewed — requested a hearing before an administrative board prior to their separation . however , this change did not affect the results of our compliance review because we determined compliance based on whether servicemembers' separation packets contained a notification letter and not on who notified the servicemember . dod also pointed out that its policy does not state that servicemembers must receive formal counseling from their supervisors about their problem with functioning in the military , as we stated in our draft report . according to dod , the policy does not state who should provide the formal counseling to the servicemember ; however , we were told by a dod separation policy official that the counseling should be done by the servicemember's supervisor . we revised our draft report to clarify our discussion of this requirement . this also did not change the results of our compliance review because we assessed compliance based on whether servicemembers' separation packets contained a counseling form and not on who counseled the servicemember . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . dod's written comments are reprinted in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , the air force , and the navy ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and appropriate congressional committees and addressees . we will also provide copies to others upon request . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .