competing requirements . reservists must complete training requirements similar to the active core training requirements , such as general military training and physical training , as well as satisfying any other reserve requirements . reservists must also consider and manage their civilian careers along with their military obligations . limited training assets . resources , such as classrooms and computer simulation systems and networks for joint training ( such as those that enable live , virtual , and constructive participation ) , are not readily available to national guard members and reservists . lack of training predictability . since reserve components are currently not included in the scheduling of joint training events , planning for joint training opportunities is much more difficult and erratic . along with these unique training requirements , national guard bureau officials stated that some of the national guard's missions , such as homeland defense and responding to natural disasters , should be included as a part of the jntc initiative that currently are not . as a result of the absence of formal reserve component representation in the development of the jntc initiative , the unique characteristics of the reserve component have not been incorporated into the initiative's development of joint training requirements . according to joint forces command officials , the inclusion of unique reserve component training needs into the jntc initiative is a long - term goal . to date , there has been no specific effort made by the joint forces command to develop joint tasks or technical enhancements associated with the needs and missions of the reserve components . the jntc initiative's priority remains on active services and combatant commands , as the development of joint tasks and technical enhancements has been primarily for existing active service and combatant command training programs . according to joint forces command officials , the process for the development of joint articles has involved the active services and combatant commands and focused on developing tasks for combat missions , such as close air support , joint force targeting , and joint fires . although reserve members deploying to overseas operations are expected to perform these combat tasks as appropriate , joint forces command officials have stated that the development of joint articles has not significantly focused on tasks unique to the reserve components , such as disaster relief and homeland defense . further , the reserve components were not included in the team responsible for the development of joint articles . additionally , the development of the joint training and experimentation network has established permanent capability throughout the continental united states at active service and combatant command facilities . the joint network has been coordinated with existing active training networks , such as the navy's continuous training environment , according to navy officials , and the air force's distributed mission operations center . according to office of the assistant secretary of defense , reserve affairs officials , interfaces with reserve and guard networks have not yet occurred . the continued lack of focus on the joint training needs of the reserve components will limit their ability to enhance their joint training skills . the joint forces command has begun to develop a process of accrediting training programs and joint tasks to facilitate the jntc goals .