this report contains a recommendation to you . the head of a federal agency is required under 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform not later that 60 days after the date of this letter and to the senate and house committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this letter . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the honorable joseph w. westphal , acting secretary of the army ; and the honorable mitch daniels , director , office of management and budget . copies will also be made available to others upon request . this is because the hardware functions of the system are software - controlled . in order to exercise this control , the software has to be written to “recognize” the behavior of the new components so the right software commands are issued and the hardware will do what it is supposed to do at the right time . additionally , while making changes to hardware components and software , the contractor discovered carcinogenic beryllium oxide residue on the system during humidity testing . to address this problem , the contractor is now developing and testing aluminum component casings for beryllium casings that had already been developed . substituting aluminum for beryllium is troublesome because ( 1 ) aluminum is weaker and heavier than beryllium and ( 2 ) the weight of the radar countermeasures system was already more than 20 pounds over the army's requirement even with use of the lighter beryllium casings . we conducted our work from september 2000 through april 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . department officials told us that the insertion of the hardware modifications is not substantial enough to constitute a significant design change and that little risk is associated with the integration of the new hardware with the software and the aircraft . ward at ( 202 ) 512-4343 . ( see figure 1. ) these components are expected to provide state - of - the - art - radar warning and jamming capabilities and to perform better than the army's currently fielded radar warning receivers and radar jammers . the advanced - threat radar - warning receiver will provide enhanced situational awareness by more precisely detecting , identifying , locating , and tracking multiple radio - frequency threat systems . likewise , the advanced - threat radar jammer is expected to counter multiple and simultaneous modern radio - frequency threats . in addition , the system can be reprogrammed to defeat different threat systems , and its modular open architecture allows for reconfiguring its components so that applications on multiple aircraft types are possible . for acquiring electronic warfare systems such as the new radar countermeasures system , departmental guidance states that developmental testing provides decisionmakers with knowledge about whether the system is ready to begin low - rate initial production — the next step in the acquisition process after engineering and manufacturing development . developmental testing begins in a controlled environment by testing individual components of a system in the laboratory .