this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the commission may have at this time . for further information regarding this statement , please contact barry w. holman at ( 202 ) 512-5581 . individuals making key contributions to this statement include nelsie alcoser , shawn arbogast , raymond bickert , andrew edelson , mike kennedy , glenn knoepfle , nancy lively , warren lowman , tom mahalek , david mayfield , richard meeks , hilary murrish , charles perdue , robert poetta , jim reifsnyder , james reynolds , and laura talbott . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the following example illustrates this point . a proposal initially developed by the headquarters and support activities joint cross - service group to move the army materiel command from fort belvoir , virginia , to redstone arsenal , alabama , had more than a 100-year payback period with a net cost over a 20-year period . however , the proposal did not include some expected savings that if included , would have reduced the payback period to 32 years . concurrently , the group developed a separate proposal to relocate various army offices from leased and government - owned office space onto fort sam houston , texas , which would have resulted in a 3-year payback period . the headquarters group decided to combine these two stand - alone proposals into one recommendation , resulting in an expected 20-year net present value savings of about $123 million with a 10-year payback . fifteen of the headquarters and support activities joint cross - service group's recommendations include a one - time savings of over $300 million from moving activities from leased space onto military installations . these recommendations , if approved , would reduce total dod leased space within the national capital region from 8.3 million square feet to about 1.7 million square feet , or by 80 percent . while our prior work generally supports the premise that leased property is more expensive than government - owned property , the recommendations related to vacating leased space also raise questions about a limitation in projected savings and impact on local communities . the one - time cost savings represents costs expected to be avoided in the future by moving from leased facilities into government owned and protected facilities rather than upgrading existing leased space to meet dod's antiterrorism / force protection standards . according to a dod official , after the june 1996 khobar tower bombing incident in dhahran , saudi arabia , the department created a task force of mostly engineers to develop minimum force protection standards for all dod - occupied locations . the official also stated that the standards were not the result of a formal threat assessment . the force protection standards for leased buildings apply only where dod personnel occupy at least 25 percent of the net interior usable area ; only to the portion of the building occupied by dod personnel ; to all new leases that are executed on or after october 1 , 2005 , and to leases renewed or extended on or after october 1 , 2009 .