other changes . two duration reduction states issued bonds to repay their loans . on the benefits side , one state lowered its benefit amount , according to crs . in addition , 8 of the 9 duration reduction states made changes to program eligibility . these included changes to requirements for individuals regarding earnings or employment history , as well as changes to rules addressing conduct for which an individual could be disqualified . in one state , eligibility changes were enacted to reverse previous expansions of eligibility under federal law , such as eligibility for those who claimed ui on the basis of part - time employment . actions taken to address program integrity were reported by all 7 of the 9 duration reduction states that provided information , and included activities to address overpayments , detect fraud , and impose penalties for noncompliant employers . state officials reported that these actions were taken in response to both federal and state initiatives . the 4 states we examined that did not reduce duration also reported making similar program changes in raising employer taxes , tightening eligibility , and strengthening program integrity . specifically , 3 of the 4 comparison states reported increasing employer taxes . of the 3 comparison states that had loans , two — indiana and tennessee — reported increasing employer taxes ( see app . iii ) . the third state with a loan , ohio , was considering changes to its ui program , including to employer taxes . the fourth state , washington , did not require a loan , and officials told us that the state's taxable wage base — the maximum amount of an employee's wages subject to tax — was raised through a provision in state law that took effect automatically , while employer taxes were reduced . regarding eligibility , 3 of the 4 comparison states reported recent actions to tighten eligibility , such as by strengthening work requirements . states reported taking actions to strengthen program integrity , such as efforts to address overpayments . the 4 comparison states varied in the extent to which they considered reducing maximum duration . indiana , ohio , and tennessee were similar to the duration reduction states , for example , in terms of having had weak trust fund balances before the recession . however , ui officials in indiana told us that benefit amounts for some claimants had already been reduced in 2011 , and no further actions have been taken on the benefit side . in ohio , which has a large outstanding loan balance , state ui officials told us that a bipartisan group of legislators was considering changes to the program , including a potential reduction in maximum duration . officials in tennessee and washington told us that duration reduction had not been considered in their states . according to information provided by an official in one comparison state , eligibility changes were enacted to reverse previous expansions of eligibility under federal law , such as eligibility based on part - time employment . in the duration reduction states , those ui claimants who would have been eligible to receive benefits beyond the new maximum receive less in total benefits in the absence of federal ui programs .