economically disadvantaged students . with these two key goals in mind , states were required to set challenging with these two key goals in mind , states were required to set challenging standards for both academic content and achievement and to determine standards for both academic content and achievement and to determine whether schools made adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) toward meeting whether schools made adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) toward meeting those standards . for a school to make ayp , it must meet or exceed the those standards . for a school to make ayp , it must meet or exceed the state's annual proficiency targets and meet or demonstrate progress on a state's annual proficiency targets and meet or demonstrate progress on a target on another measure — graduation rates in high school or attendance target on another measure — graduation rates in high school or attendance or other measures in elementary and middle schools . if schools do not or other measures in elementary and middle schools . if schools do not meet these requirements , their students may be eligible to receive tutoring meet these requirements , their students may be eligible to receive tutoring or transfer to another school . or transfer to another school . states set proficiency targets using status models that calculate the percentage of students with test scores that meet or exceed these targets 1 year at a time . with status models , states or districts determine whether schools make ayp based on annual performance while generally not taking into account how much better or worse the school did as compared to the previous year . these states were chosen based on a variety of factors , including expert recommendation , their use of different growth models , geographic diversity , and data availability . in this report , we included improvement models as a type of growth model in order to provide a broad assessment of options that may be available for states . for massachusetts , for one urban district and one suburban district , we selected the median school ( as measured by the schools' index values ) among schools that had shown growth but had not made adequate yearly progress in the 2004-2005 school year . for tennessee , for one urban district and one rural district , we selected schools that were used in the state's growth model pilot project proposal . state officials from massachusetts provided individual student data to gao from the two selected school districts . gao reviewed the state's adequate yearly progress and growth model calculations and replicated school - level index and calculations from student and statewide data . state officials from tennessee provided analyses its contractor had performed , also using individual student data . in both cases , gao conducted an assessment of the reliability of these data and found the data to be sufficiently reliable for illustrating how growth models measure progress toward key goals of nclba . these assessments included electronic testing of data fields and interviews with state officials and in tennessee's case , the contractor as well .