they also authorize enforcement actions . sec and cftc are headquartered in washington , d.c. sec has a combined total of 11 regional and district offices ; cftc has 5 regional offices . within sec and cftc , the divisions of enforcement are responsible for investigating possible violations of the securities and futures laws , respectively . with their commissions' approval , they litigate or settle actions against alleged violators in federal civil courts and in administrative actions . typically , enforcement staff investigate alleged violations of law , prepare a memorandum for the commissioners that describes alleged violations , and , if appropriate , make recommendations for further action . when the commissions decide that a case warrants further action , they can authorize filing a civil suit against the alleged violator in federal district court or instituting a proceeding before an administrative law judge . if either the court or the administrative law judge finds that a defendant has violated securities or futures laws , it can issue a judgment ordering sanctions such as fines and disgorgements and , in the case of futures violations , restitution ; it can also bar or suspend violators from the securities and futures industries . the collection process for delinquent debt begins when all or part of a fine or disgorgement becomes delinquent because the violator has failed to pay some or all of the amount due by the date ordered by the court or administrative law judge . if the court or administrative law judge has not specified a payment date and no stay has been entered , sec considers the debt delinquent 10 days after the court enters the judgment . cftc officials told us that absent an appeal , they consider the debt delinquent 15 or 60 days after the administrative law judge or court entered the judgment in administrative and civil cases , respectively . sec and cftc collect delinquent monetary judgments primarily through post - judgment litigation , negotiating payments with defendants , and making referrals to the department of treasury or the department of justice . in accordance with the debt collection improvement act of 1996 , sec and cftc have each entered into an agreement with the department of treasury to improve collections . under this act , federal agencies are required to submit all nontax debts that are 180 days delinquent to treasury's fms . the act also requires that fms either take appropriate steps to collect the debt or terminate collection actions . in addition to using traditional methods to collect these debts , such as sending demand letters and hiring private collection agencies , fms can use top . under top , fms identifies federal payments , such as tax refunds , that are owed to individuals and applies the payments to their outstanding debt . all cases referred to fms for collection are also eligible for referral to and servicing under top . fms also uses collection agencies to negotiate compromise offers with individual debtors . a compromise offer is an agreement between a federal agency and an individual debtor , in which the federal agency agrees to discharge a debt by accepting less than the full amount .