these data were site specific . for example , during the month of december 2005 , the pmo - dts reported that at wright - patterson air force base , 2,880 travel vouchers were processed by dts , and the air force reported that another 2,307 vouchers were processed through the legacy system — the reserve travel system ( rts ) . of those processed through rts , air force dts program officials stated that 338 travel vouchers should have been processed through dts . dts air force program officials further stated that they submitted to the pmo - dts the number of travel vouchers processed through rts each month . these data are used by the pmo - dts to update the dts voucher analysis model . however , neither the air force nor the pmo - dts have verified the accuracy and reliability of the data . therefore , the accuracy of the utilization rates reported for the air force by the pmo - dts is not known . however , it has not determined ( 1 ) whether the rationale for that requirement is valid and ( 2 ) under what conditions flights that are not part of the gsa city pair program should be displayed . for example , we found that several dts flights displayed to the user “overlap” other flights . while these actions are a positive step forward , they do not address the fundamental problem that dts's requirements are still ambiguous and conflicting — a primary cause of the previous problems . until a viable requirements management process is developed and effectively implemented , the department ( 1 ) cannot develop an effective testing process and ( 2 ) will not have reasonable assurance the project risks have been reduced to acceptable levels . in our earlier testimony and report , we noted that dod did not have reasonable assurance that the flights displayed met the stated dod requirements . although dod stated in each case that our concerns had been addressed , subsequent tests found that the problems had not been corrected . requirements represent the blueprint that system developers and program managers use to design , develop , and acquire a system . requirements should be consistent with one another , verifiable , and directly traceable to higher - level business or functional requirements . it is critical that requirements be carefully defined and that they flow directly from the organization's concept of operations ( how the organization's day - to - day operations are or will be carried out to meet mission needs ) . improperly defined or incomplete requirements have been commonly identified as a cause of system failure and systems that do not meet their cost , schedule , or performance goals . requirements represent the foundation on which the system should be developed and implemented . as we have noted in previous reports , because requirements provide the foundation for system testing , significant defects in the requirements management process preclude an entity from implementing a disciplined testing process . that is , requirements must be complete , clear , and well documented to design and implement an effective testing program . these are commonly referred to as “no touch” transactions .