( see fig . dhs data show that dhs denied 77,132 of the almost 28.6 million applications for vwp travel submitted through esta from 2008 through 2010 . reasons for denials included applicants' responses to the eligibility questions , as well as dhs's discovery of other information that disqualified applicants from travel under the vwp . examples are as follows: dhs denied 19,871 applications because of applicant responses to the eligibility questions . dhs denied 36,744 pending applications because of the results of manual reviews of passenger data . vwp country government and travel industry officials praised widespread u.s. government efforts to provide information about the esta requirements . after announcing esta , dhs began an outreach campaign in vwp countries and for foreign government embassy staff in the united states , with the assistance of other u.s. agencies , to publicize the requirement . dhs officials said they spent $4.5 million on esta outreach efforts . although none of the six embassies we visited tracked the costs associated with outreach , each embassy provided documentation of their use of many types of outreach efforts listed in table 2 . vwp country government officials and travel industry officials we met said that although they were initially concerned that esta implementation would be difficult and negatively affect airlines and many vwp passengers , implementation went more smoothly than expected . reasonable implementation time frames . most of the vwp country airline officials with whom we met said that the esta implementation time frames set by dhs were reasonable . in 2008 , dhs introduced esta and made compliance voluntary . the following year , dhs made esta mandatory but did not levy fines if airlines did not verify passengers' esta approval before boarding them . this allowed the u.s. government more time to publicize the requirement , according to dhs officials . enforcement began in march 2010 . according to most of the officials we interviewed from 17 airlines in the six vwp countries we visited , the phased - in compliance generally allowed passengers sufficient time to learn about the esta requirement and allowed most airlines sufficient time to update their systems to meet the requirement . esta officials said that the phased - in compliance also provided time to fix problems with the system before enforcing airline and passenger compliance . dhs responsiveness to travel industry feedback . vwp travel industry officials said that dhs officials' efforts to adapt esta in response to feedback have clarified the application process . since initial implementation of esta in 2008 , dhs has issued updates to the system on 21 occasions . according to dhs officials , many of these changes addressed parts of the application that were unclear to applicants . for example , dhs learned from some travel industry officials that many applicants did not know how to answer a question on the application about whether they had committed a crime of moral turpitude because they did not know the definition of “moral turpitude.” in september 2010 , dhs released an updated esta application that included a definition of the term directly under the question . further , updates have made the esta application available in 22 languages instead of only english .