state . state officials told us that to some extent the discrepancies came about because funding for peacekeeping and u.s. contributions to international organizations was not included in the fiscal year 2014 data on foreignassistance.gov . state officials also noted that data published on foreign aid explorer are considered to be more fully reported because they are submitted to usaid by state's bureaus , which manually enter detailed data ; by comparison , state's data for foreignassistance.gov are generated from the agency's accounting system . in addition , state's accounting system at present includes transactions reported by state's main office in washington , d.c. , but does not include transactions of overseas locations . usda . in addition to discrepancies in the aggregate funding data , we found that for some of the high - priority data fields the information was either missing or inconsistent with definitions that state developed based on the iati standard . we analyzed fiscal year 2014 data for six of the data fields prioritized by iati — implementing organization , award title , award description , award status , award location , and award sector — to determine if agencies populated these data fields with information and if the information was consistent with state's definitions . according to state , data fields prioritized by iati should be populated because they provide key information necessary to track a specific activity . we analyzed the content of the six data fields using a probability sample of 106 transactions drawn from the fiscal year 2014 data . we found that for three data fields — implementing organization , award location , and award sector — information was provided and was consistent with state's definition for a majority or all of the transactions ( see table 5 ) . for the other three data fields — award title , award description , and award status — the information was missing or inconsistent with the definitions for the majority of the transactions in the sample . for example , for award title , 82 percent of the transactions were either missing information or had information that was inconsistent with the definition for this data field . we also found that for award title , agencies often provided program or sector descriptors , and for award description , agencies routinely provided shorthand descriptions , acronyms , or terminology that could only be understood by officials at the agency that made the award . for example , an award description would contain “train , eval & oth related act” or “aidstar sector ii award.” only three transactions in our sample contained award descriptions that were somewhat consistent with the definition of a brief narrative that provided an understanding of the undertaking for which the award was funded , its objectives , and the hypothesis of the award's development impact . the lack of clarity for data fields , such as award description , could make it difficult for domestic and international users of foreignassistance.gov to understand the data . state officials told us that our findings were consistent with their observations of the data .