this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to respond to any questions from you or other members of the subcommittee . the corps is responsible for these activities at spring valley . defense is required under the environmental restoration program to consult with epa , which has its own authority to act at the site under the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 ( sometimes referred to as “superfund” ) . under the program , defense's activities must also be consistent with a statutory provision that addresses , among other things , participation by the affected states — in this case , the district of columbia . under the corps' program guidance for fuds , the district of columbia has a role in defining the cleanup levels at the spring valley site . in carrying out their roles , the government entities have , over time , formed an active partnership to make cleanup decisions . for example , the corps leads the effort to identify hazards , but in many cases it uses the recommendations of the district of columbia and epa to look for hazards buried at certain sites . while the entities have not agreed on all cleanup decisions , officials acknowledge that , by having formed a partnership , a means exists to foster communication and collaboration , and officials of all three entities stated that the partnership is operating effectively . my testimony is based on our report that you are releasing today . at your request , and as agreed with your offices , the report provides information on the ( 1 ) specific roles and responsibilities of the government entities involved at the spring valley site , as authorized by statute , regulation , or guidance , and as actually carried out , ( 2 ) progress the government entities have made toward identifying and removing hazards at the site , ( 3 ) health risks government entities have determined are associated with the hazards at the site and the impact of these risks on cleanup decisions , and ( 4 ) estimated cost and schedule of the remaining cleanup . in addition , you asked us to provide a list of sites in the district of columbia where hazards resulting from federal activities have been found . that list , which we compiled from information provided by the corps , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and the district of columbia's department of health , is included in our report . these three agencies are the primary government entities involved in the spring valley cleanup . the principal government entities involved at the spring valley site are carrying out their roles and responsibilities in cleaning up the site primarily under the defense environmental restoration program ( environmental restoration program ) , which was established by the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 . under the environmental restoration program , defense is authorized to identify , investigate , and clean up environmental contamination at formerly used defense sites ( fuds ) . continued progress at the site will depend , in part , on the effectiveness of this partnership over the duration of the cleanup period .