( see fig . the aggregate position of these plans has further diminished because of investment market declines and the recession beginning in 2007 . multiemployer plans also face demographic challenges: reductions in the number of plans , an aging workforce , and few opportunities to attract new employers and workers into plans . the number of plans has decreased fairly steadily since the 1980s , likely reflecting plan mergers . ( see fig . meanwhile , although the number of total participants in multiemployer plans has slowly increased , the proportion of active participants to retirees and separated vested participants has decreased , largely because of an aging workforce . ( see fig . for example , multiemployer plans had 1.6 million fewer active participants in 2006 than in 1980 , according to pbgc . future growth of multiemployer plans is largely predicated on growth of collective bargaining . yet collective bargaining has declined in the united states since the early 1950s . according to the bureau of labor statistics , union membership — a proxy for collective bargaining coverage — accounted for 7.2 percent of the u.s. private sector labor force in 2009 . in contrast , in 1990 , union membership in the private sector accounted for about 12 percent , and in 1980 , about 20 percent . without a new stream of contributions , plans will increasingly have to tap into assets to meet benefit obligations and , everything else being equal , and this will generally lower the plans' funded status . the conditions that plans currently face increase the risk of insolvency and the likelihood pbgc will be forced to provide financial assistance . pbgc's ability to assist multiemployer plans is contingent upon its insurance program having sufficient funds to do so . pbgc's net position for its multiemployer pension insurance program has steadily declined since its highest point in 1998 as program liabilities outpaced asset growth . ( see fig . in fiscal year 2009 , the multiemployer program reported an accumulated deficit of $869 million . this unfunded amount is often referred to as an orphaned liability . many companies experienced slowdowns or closed their doors . while recent reports point to a recovering economy , some industries in which multiemployer plans are common have experienced high unemployment , limiting the stream of contributions coming into the plans . in 2004 , we reported that the multiemployer system , in comparison with private single - employer plans , operates under a framework that redistributes risk toward employers and participants and away from government and potentially the taxpayer . in addition , we noted that this framework can create important incentives for interested parties to resolve financial difficulties . however , we also found that weak economic conditions in the early 2000s and declines in interest rates and equities markets increased the financial stress on the overall multiemployer plan framework , and each of the key stakeholders . we also identified several challenges to the long - term health of these plans , including the lack of employer funding flexibility compared with single - employer plans and the overall decline of collective bargaining . today , 6 years later , the economic climate within which multiemployer plans must operate is far worse .