conferences . because of the unique challenges of afghanistan , the movement of supplies and equipment in support of operations there is likely to be the most complex logistics operations the u.s. military has undergone in recent history . the challenges are daunting , and the transportation system is heavily strained in maintaining current operations . now , with the addition of 30,000 more u.s. troops on the horizon , coupled with an increase in contractors and a potential increase in coalition forces , these challenges will only be magnified , and a system that is struggling to keep pace with current operations could be further strained . it will , therefo re , one of be critical for dod to develop adequate contingency plans to mitigate the effects of these and other unforeseen challenges , and to react quickly to overcome significant problems as they occur . failure to effectively manage the flow of materiel could delay combat units' receipt of the critical items they need to perform their mission , and costly backlogs of cargo could accumulate throughout the supply system , risking loss of accountability and control over billions of dollars in assets . we expect to report more fully on these and other issues at a later date . for further information about this statement , please contact william m. solis at ( 202 ) 512-8365 or solisw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement include cary russell , assistant director ; vincent balloon ; john bumgarner ; carole coffey ; melissa hermes ; lisa mcmillen ; geoffrey peck ; bethann ritter ; michael shaughnessy ; sarah simon ; angela watson ; cheryl weissman ; stephen woods ; and delia zee . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . pure packing has similarly improved dod's efficiency . these preliminary observations are based on the work we have performed to date . in conducting our audit work , we examined agency guidance , including dod joint publication 4-0 , joint logistics ( july 18 , 2008 ) , which provides the doctrinal framework for how logistics are to be delivered to support joint operations across the range of military operations , and u.s. central command guidance on the use of supply routes to afghanistan . dod's ability to provide timely logistics support to units deploying to afghanistan or already in theater depends on its ability to synchronize these activities into one seamless process . according to joint doctrine , distribution is the operational process of synchronizing all elements of the logistic system to deliver the “right things” to the “right place” at the “right time” to support the joint force .