v for information on such records ) . after conducting its research , jsrrc provides the regional office a summary of its findings but does not evaluate evidence , render opinions , make conclusions , or decide the merits of a claim . vba's establishment of a claims - processing timeliness performance goal demonstrates that high - quality service should result not only in correct decisions , but also decisions rendered in a reasonable length of time . the experience of several regional offices suggests that vba could improve its timeliness in deciding the ptsd claims of many veterans nationwide if vba systematically utilized an electronic library of historical military records such as the one compiled by the chicago regional office . the average time for the joint services records research center to respond to such requests is about 1 year ; by contrast , officials in some regional offices have found that using the online library compiled by the chicago regional office enabled them to find sufficient evidence in a matter a few weeks to grant the ptsd claims of many veterans . subsequently , the star unit began tracking the receipt of cases randomly selected for review . for our current work , we followed up with the star unit to determine the extent to which regional offices now send to the star unit all cases selected for quality review . we obtained data from the star unit and concluded that the numbers of cases requested , received , and reviewed for the first half of fiscal year 2006 provided nationwide data that were sufficiently reliable for our reporting purposes . even so , the star unit did not receive about 6 percent of the cases selected for review during the first half of fiscal year 2006 ; therefore , because the star unit might have found additional vcaa development errors if it had had the opportunity to review these cases , the percentage of cases actually containing veterans claims assistance act ( vcaa ) development errors may have been larger than indicated by the fiscal year 2006 data reported by the star unit . also , as part of our review of va's internal assessments of regional offices' compliance with vcaa requirements for obtaining military service records , we assessed the reliability of data recorded in the veterans appeals control and locator system ( vacols ) by the board of veterans' appeals on the results of its reviews of veterans' appeals on compensation decisions made by regional offices . we obtained data as of january 31 , 2006 , on all compensation cases decided by the board since november 1 , 2004 , when the board began recording in vacols whether its remands of decisions to vba for rework were due to regional office deficiencies . to assess the reliability of the vacols data , we interviewed knowledgeable board officials , performed electronic testing of pertinent vacols data elements , and reviewed existing information about the data and the system that produced them . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we analyzed these data to create summary statistics on the disposition of compensation cases and issues decided by the board .