the program was established in 2007 . to receive forgiveness , borrowers must make 120 on - time , scheduled , monthly payments while employed full - time by a qualified public service organization , such as a government or nonprofit organization . borrowers must also be working for a public service organization at the time they apply for forgiveness and when the remaining balance on their loan is forgiven . because only payments made after october 1 , 2007 qualify , no borrowers are eligible to receive loan forgiveness before october 2017 . qualifying repayment plans include ibr , paye , icr , 10-year standard repayment , or another plan if the payments equal or exceed the 10-year standard payment amount . however , borrowers enrolled in ibr , paye , and icr are more likely to have balances remaining to be forgiven after 120 payments , because the 10-year standard repayment plan is set to fully pay all loan principal and interest in 10 years or less . the amount of loans that may be forgiven is not capped . in january 2012 , education established a process to certify borrowers' public service employment and loans for pslf ( see fig . education's loan servicer responsible for pslf communicates with borrowers who request certification about their employment , repayment plan , and qualifying payments , including counseling borrowers about any changes needed in order to qualify for the program . monthly payments gradually increase . extended: borrowers have a fixed term of 25 years or less . monthly payments may be fixed or graduated , and borrowers must have more than $30,000 in loans . education also offers repayment plans that base monthly payments on income and family size for direct loan borrowers who meet certain eligibility requirements . they are: income - contingent repayment ( icr ) ; income - based repayment ( ibr ) ; and pay as you earn ( paye ) . key features of these income - driven repayment plans include lower monthly payments , repayment periods of up to 25 years , and forgiveness of any remaining loan balances at the end of the repayment period . ( see table 2. ) the plans have provided progressively more generous repayment and forgiveness terms to help borrowers manage their federal student loan debt , and additional changes are expected . see appendix i for more detail on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from november 2013 to august 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . under the direct loan program , education issues several types of student loans . they are subsidized and unsubsidized stafford loans , plus loans , and consolidation loans . the federal government sets limits on the maximum interest rate , loan origination fee and other charges , and annual and aggregate amounts that can be borrowed ( see table 1 ) .