scheduling trials . the constitution guarantees a right to trial , but a judge can exercise some influence over the parties' decision to opt for a trial . he or she may urge them to engage in settlement discussions as an alternative to trial . alternatively , he or she may indicate a strong willingness to accept a plea bargain with the caveat that opting for trial may entail the full weight of the sentencing guidelines if the defendant is convicted on all counts . one factor that has the clear potential to affect how a judge approaches the issue of whether to proceed to trial is courtroom availability . a judge who has unlimited access to a courtroom is likely to be less inclined , other factors being equal , to avoid scheduling a trial than another judge whose courtroom access is limited and whose courtroom calendar already may be crowded with previously scheduled proceedings . in both instances , the chief judge expressed a strong view that courtroom availability should not be a factor in the decision whether to schedule oral argument or whether to proceed with a trial if the judge believes that the substantive elements of the issue or the case at hand otherwise demand it . to the extent that courtroom availability does play into such decisions , serious questions are raised about the effective administration of justice . types of district judges sharing courtrooms on a regular basis: active judges . senior judges with 10 years or less in senior status . senior judges with more than 10 years in senior status . approximate length of time courtroom sharing has been ongoing at the facility: over 10 years . to the extent that courtroom sharing imposes constraints on the courtroom time a judge has available to him or her , the administration of justice may be compromised if such constraints are weighed among the factors for denying oral argument or restricting the amount of time the litigants seek to argue their case . types of district judges sharing courtrooms on a regular basis: active judges . senior judges with 10 years or less in senior status . senior judges with more than 10 years in senior status . reported experiences of active and / or senior judges at facilities where courtroom sharing was occurring: positive experiences: none reported . negative experiences: judges prefer having their own courtrooms because resources , such as books and files , can be kept in the courtroom and are always there when needed . a shared courtroom may not be adjacent to chambers and , thus , may restrict easy access to law clerks and equipment for printing transcripts . courtroom sharing can also affect the ease with which a courtroom's equipment , such as that used for real - time reporting , can be set up . in addition , with courtroom sharing , it may not be possible to identify and provide advance notice of the specific courtroom where the proceeding is to take place . without this information , lawyers and the public will be confused about where to go to attend the appropriate proceeding . general comments: all the judges share out of necessity and believe it affects their efficiency and the efficiency of their staffs .