both agencies expressed agreement with this recommendation . in addition , at an april 19 , 2007 , hearing on our report convened by the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee , chairman joseph lieberman and ranking member susan collins directed the agencies to provide the committee a deadline by which they plan to transmit this assessment to the congress in fulfillment of this recommendation . chairman lieberman also asked the agencies to prepare and disseminate this assessment independent of any annual reports to the congress . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact me , john stephenson , at 202-512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . contributors to this testimony include steve elstein , assistant director ; chase huntley ; micah mcmillan ; alison o'neill ; kate robertson ; and lisa van arsdale . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . others argue that increases in losses have been driven by changes in climate . to address the issue , munich re — one of the world's largest reinsurance companies — and the university of colorado's center for science and technology policy research jointly convened a workshop in germany in may 2006 to assess factors leading to increasing weather - related losses . the main implication of the exposure growth for both the programs is that the magnitude of potential claims , in absolute terms , is much greater today than in the past . the largest insured losses in the data we reviewed were associated with catastrophic weather events . notably , crop insurers and other property insurers both face catastrophic weather - related risks , although the nature of the events for each is very different . however , nfip and fcic officials explained that these efforts were informal exercises , and were not performed on a regular basis . in the case of crop insurance , drought accounted for more than 40 percent of weather - related loss payments from 1980 to 2005 , and the years with the largest losses were associated with drought . virtually anything that is insured is vulnerable to weather - related events . assessments by leading scientific bodies suggest that climate change could significantly alter the frequency or severity of weather - related events , such as drought and hurricanes . leading scientific bodies report that the earth warmed during the twentieth century — 1.3 degrees fahrenheit ( 0.74 degrees celsius ) from 1906 to 2005 according to a recent ipcc report — and is projected to continue to warm for the foreseeable future .