as previously discussed , updating has continued . when resnc issued the 2007 guidance , it did not update the remis data entry screens to match the guidance — that is , it did not identify the required data fields using the standard indicators . this inconsistency between the new guidance and the remis screens created the following two opportunities for users to be confused: the 2007 guidance required users to enter disposal dates in the rd - 70 screen , but the disposal date field in this screen lacked the standard indicators used to identify a required data field . recognizing that users could be confused about whether they should enter the disposal date into the rd - 70 screen , resnc officials said they are discussing ways to resolve the confusion . the 2007 guidance instructed remis users to enter data in the rd - 82 screen , “if desired.” although use of this screen was optional , it was the only screen with a required data field for the disposal date , identified by the standard indicators . according to officials in three of the four districts we contacted , they used the rd - 82 screen to enter the disposal date . moreover , real estate officials in all four districts noted that the rd - 82 screen is the only remis screen that requires the disposal date . conversely , resnc officials told us that they believe that other remis screens already collect the data captured by the rd - 82 screen . consequently , resnc officials are evaluating the need for the rd - 82 screen . unclear guidance affects the reliability of disposal data because it could lead to differences in how users process disposals in remis . until the corps develops clear and consistent remis guidance and screens for processing land disposals , the reliability of future disposal data could be at risk . although resnc officials view remis as a user - friendly database that requires minimal training to use , we found data reliability issues indicating that users may not be receiving the training necessary to enter disposal data in a reliable manner . the standards for internal control in the federal government state that federal managers should demonstrate a commitment to the competence of their employees and provide employees with the training they need to accomplish their assigned duties . according to resnc officials , remis users received introductory training when the corps implemented the database in 1992 . in addition , resnc officials provided introductory training to 3 of 32 districts that use remis in 2006 and 2007 . specifically , they provided training to the kansas city district in 2006 and to the norfolk and memphis districts in 2007 upon requests from those districts for their new staff . with limited instructors and funding , resnc plans to train the new england district and at least one other district in 2008 . to its credit , resnc has sponsored two informational conferences since 2005 for the districts' systems administrators — those who maintain the remis database for their respective districts — and other remis users .