gao - 09-68 . washington , d.c.: november 24 , 2008 . the aging of the federal workforce . earlier this year we reported on the looming challenge facing federal agencies as retirements of federal workers threaten to leave critical gaps in leadership and institutional knowledge . in fact , we reported that about one - third of federal career employees on board at the end of fiscal year 2007 were eligible to retire by 2012 , a trend especially pronounced among the agencies' executives and supervisors — with nearly two - thirds of career executives projected to be eligible for retirement by 2012 . facing such a potential exodus of its most experienced employees , the forest service — like other federal agencies — will need to focus on strategic workforce planning to help forecast who might retire , when they might retire , and the impact of their retirement on the agency's mission and , using this information , develop appropriate strategies to address workforce gaps . our nation's long - term fiscal condition . we have reported that our nation , facing large and growing structural deficits , is on an unsustainable long - term fiscal path . as a result , all federal agencies may be called upon to carry out their responsibilities with static or even shrinking budgets over the long term — making it especially important that the forest service address the challenges we have identified and ensure that it is spending its limited budget effectively and efficiently . effective and efficient spending will also be critical in the short term , as the agency identifies projects to undertake with funds provided under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 . mr. chairman , these issues are not new . in fact , not only are we repeating many of the same issues we have brought up over the years , but some of our concerns date back well over a decade . the forest service's mission is , without question , a difficult one: managing millions of acres of diverse lands for often competing purposes while ensuring that current uses do not impair long - term productivity . this is an enormous and complex task , and we do not seek to minimize its difficulty . increased human settlement in or near wildlands . rapid development in the outlying fringe of metropolitan areas and in rural areas is increasing the size of the wildland - urban interface , defined as the area where structures and other human development meet or intermingle with undeveloped wildland . experts estimate that almost 60 percent of all new housing units built in the 1990s were located in the wildland - urban interface and that this growth trend continues . they also estimate that more than 30 percent of housing units overall are located in the wildland - urban interface , including about 44 million homes in the lower 48 states , and that the interface covers about 9 percent of the nation's land . this development has significant implications for wildland fire management because it places more structures at risk from wildland fire at the same time that it increases the complexity and cost of wildland fire suppression .