( see fig . by not ensuring compliance with the limits on subcontracting requirement , there is an increased risk that an inappropriate degree of the work is being done by large businesses , raising questions about the value added by the anc firm . according to contracting officials we spoke with , assessing the value added by a prime contractor is especially challenging in emergency situations , where requirements are critical and urgent in nature , such as those for recovery from hurricane katrina . we have similarly reported that the circumstances created by these situations can make it difficult to balance the need to deliver goods and services quickly with the need for appropriate controls . our past work has cautioned , however , that limited predictability must not be an excuse for poor contracting practices . in some cases , the response to hurricane katrina suffered from inadequate planning and preparation to anticipate requirements for needed goods and services . the scale of operations and the government's stated inability to provide program management after katrina drove the decision to award contracts with large scopes of work that , in certain cases , led to multiple layers of subcontractors and increased costs . gao's past work in reviewing orders and contracts for the katrina recovery effort found that the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) disclosed increased costs associated with multiple supplier layers . in reviewing orders and contracts for portable public buildings in mississippi , which were awarded in 2005 , we found that usace ordered 88 buildings that were purchased and sold through two to three layers of suppliers , resulting in prices 63 percent to 133 percent higher than manufacturers' sales prices . in one example , 45 of the 88 portable public buildings were purchased from a contractor who in turn purchased the buildings from a distributor , who in turn purchased them from another distributor , who had purchased the 45 buildings from the manufacturer . each layer added an additional fee , resulting in usace agreeing to a price that was 63 percent higher than the manufacturer's price . dod auditors have noted additional concerns in some katrina contracts they reviewed . for example , a november 2006 army audit report stated that unclear requirements for four post - katrina debris removal contracts awarded by usace — for $500 million each with an option for an additional $500 million — resulted in prices renegotiated in unfavorable circumstances . according to the report , the urgency to award contracts quickly did not give usace contracting personnel sufficient time to develop a well - defined acquisition strategy — one that defined desired outcomes and risks related to the acquisition to ensure contracts were structured in the government's best interest . contracting officials were less diligent about complying with acquisition regulations regarding best value contracts and reasonable pricing . fixed - price contracts were renegotiated at higher prices without the benefit of a dcaa review . usace's decision to use four large contracts also resulted in multiple tiers of subcontractors to accomplish the work , with each tier adding costs . post - award audits performed by dcaa found substantial overcharges by the debris contractors .