the eligibility query . this tool is used by pharmacies to obtain part d billing information from the medicare eligibility database . when filling a prescription for a beneficiary who does not have proof of part d enrollment or eligibility , a pharmacy submits a request for billing information using the eligibility query . it takes until october 15 before the pdp notifies mr. smith of his enrollment and until october 16 before all the necessary information is available to his pharmacy . if mr. smith had sought to obtain prescription drugs prior to october 16 , the pharmacy would have had difficulty getting the pdp billing information needed to process claims on his behalf . the reason this gap occurs is that some of the enrollment and pdp assignment processing steps are done at scheduled intervals , such as once a month or once a week . according to cms , because of the challenges some state medicaid agencies have in compiling the dual - eligible file , cms requires the file be submitted just once a month . cms waits until it receives the monthly dual - eligible files from all state medicaid agencies before determining each individual beneficiary's subsidy level and making the pdp assignment for these beneficiaries . state medicaid agencies that submit their dual - eligible file to cms early in the monthly cycle do not have their beneficiaries' subsidy levels determined or the assignments to a pdp made any sooner than the last state to submit its file . deeming and pdp assignment can take up to 10 days . similarly , cms's system of notifying the pdp of a beneficiary assignment is on a weekly cycle , beginning on saturday . thus , regardless of what day in the week cms's enrollment transaction system receives a beneficiary's pdp assignment and processes that enrollment , the information is not communicated to the pdp until the following saturday . it takes up to another week before the beneficiary receives a membership card or other membership documentation from the pdp or the pharmacy has computerized access to the part d information needed to properly process a claim if an eligibility query is used to obtain billing information . thus , the time elapsed from the date the state notified mr. smith of his eligibility for medicaid to the date mr. smith was notified by his assigned pdp of his part d enrollment was at least 35 days . other new dual - eligible beneficiaries may incur out - of - pocket costs at the pharmacy that are too high for their dually eligible status because of the time it takes information on the beneficiary's new status to reach their pdp . to illustrate this case , we present the hypothetical example of mrs. jones , a medicare beneficiary who becomes eligible for medicaid but had already enrolled in a pdp . ( see fig . therefore , we have recommended actions that cms should take to better protect beneficiaries and ensure efficient use of medicare program funds . to clarify our message and to reflect information obtained through agency comments , we modified portions of this discussion and provided the revised sections to cms for supplemental comments .