ibid . growth may simply shift to another part of the region or nation . third , the project's economic impact also depends on how it was financed . deficit financing — borrowing — provides an increase in the total amount of spending , which will have economic effects . in contrast , financing the project through taxes means that existing government and household spending to some extent is simply directed a certain way , rather than increasing the total amount of such spending . analyzing the impact of the project in the context of these variables — the unemployment rate when the project is being built and project financing — was beyond the scope of the studies we reviewed . the net impact on housing prices is also difficult to assess . first , the analyses — done several years ago — may not fully capture the effects of recent declines in the housing market . second , impacts on the housing market throughout the metropolitan area would , to some extent , reflect population shifts — some house prices may go up as a consequence of improved access to transit , while prices in other less desirable locations may go down . however , shifting the location of households and business activity does not necessarily expand the overall economy . also , benefits to homeowners and commuters from the project would significantly overlap , since they are to some extent the same people ; that is , the change in a homeowner's real estate value is the result of the improvement in travel time . finally , even though the project was cancelled , all of the anticipated economic activity was not necessarily lost . for example , according to port authority officials , the port authority redirected funds it had allocated to the arc project to other projects in the region , which could increase employment and economic activity tied to those projects . likewise , funds that new jersey planned to allocate to the arc project were reallocated to the state's highway trust fund , which would then support economic activity related to highway projects . however , these highway projects would not necessarily be in the new york city region . the arc environmental study estimated the project would have created limited , but mostly positive environmental effects . ( see fig . the primary positive effect would have been a long - term reduction in air pollution , although it is difficult to predict how much this reduction in pollutants would affect the entire new york city region . air quality effects are of particular relevance in the development of transit projects . fta , pursuant to law , includes whether a project is in an area that has not attained air quality standards required by the clean air act as a factor in selecting projects for the new starts program . according to the environmental protection agency , the entire new york city region is out of compliance with certain ambient air quality standards that are designed to protect public health . the project would reduce automobile trips and thereby decrease emissions that contribute to existing air quality problems in the region and related public health problems .