other technologies . some states reported implementing other technologies that support program access . specifically , according to our survey , 11 states ( 21 percent ) have implemented an integrated voice response ( ivr ) system , a telephone system that provides automated information , such as case status or the benefit amount , to callers but does not direct the caller to a live person . in addition , 11 states ( 21 percent ) are using document management / imaging systems that allow case records to be maintained electronically rather than in paper files . all five of the states we reviewed have implemented in at least certain areas of their state mail - in procedures , on - line services , call centers , waiver of face - to - face interview at recertification , and document management / imaging systems . three of the five states ( florida , texas , and washington ) have implemented an integrated voice response system and two ( florida and utah ) have implemented a waiver of the face - to - face interview at initial application . states have taken a variety of actions to help households use on - line services and call centers , such as sending informational mailings , holding community meetings , and employing call center staff who speak languages other than english as shown in figures 5 and 6 . states are using community - based organizations , such as food banks , to help households use alternative methods . all states implementing on - line services ( 14 ) and about half of states with call centers ( 10 of 19 ) use community partners to provide direct assistance to households . among the states we reviewed , four provide grants to community - based organizations to inform households about the program and help them complete the application process . for example , florida closed a third of its local assistance offices and has developed a network of community partners across the state to help households access food stamps . florida state officials said that 86 percent of the community partners offer at least telephone and on - line access for completing and submitting food stamp applications . community partner representatives in washington , texas , and pennsylvania said that they sometimes call the call center with the household or on their behalf to resolve issues . pennsylvania provides grants to community partners to help clients use the state's on - line services . in addition to the assistance provided by community - based organizations , h&r block , a private tax preparation firm , is piloting a project with the state of kansas where tax preparers who see that a household's financial situation may entitle them to food stamp benefits can electronically submit an application for food stamps at no extra charge to the household . insufficient information is available to determine the results of using alternative methods to access the food stamp program , but state and federal officials report that alternative methods are helping some households . few evaluations have been conducted that identify the effect of alternative methods on food stamp program access , decision accuracy , or administrative costs .