app . 37 ( 2008 ) , vacated vazquez - flores v. shinseki , 580 f.3d 1270 ( fed . cir . see footnote 24 . va has taken several actions to improve decision timeliness at both the claim and appellate levels . for example , over the past few years , va has hired a significant number of disability claims staff to process disability workloads . from fiscal years 2005 to 2009 , va increased vba's claims processing staff by 57 percent , from 7,550 to 11,868 . this increase includes 417 staff that vba hired in fiscal year 2009 using funds from the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) . of the people hired using arra funds , about three - fourths are temporary employees who assist in developing disability claims and perform other administrative tasks to free experienced staff to complete more complex claims processing tasks . during the same period , va increased the board's staff by 20 percent , from 433 to 519 , without using arra funds . as required under section 225 of the veterans' benefits improvement act of 2008 ( pub . 110-389 ) , gao is in the process of evaluating va's training programs for claims processors . this evaluation builds on prior work in which we found that increased focus on evaluation and accountability would enhance training and performance management for claims processors . see gao , veterans' benefits: increased focus on evaluation and accountability would enhance training and performance management for claims processors , gao - 08-561 ( washington , d.c.: may 27 , 2008 ) . rating specialists , becoming proficient often takes longer — about 3 years — because of the complexity of the job , in part given the variety of cases and rating issues . training new staff also reduces productivity in near term because experienced staff must take time to train and mentor them and , therefore , may have less time to process their own claim workloads . according to a vba training official , vba has developed curricula that use practical application of key concepts to accelerate the learning curve for new staff . va expects that the staff hired with arra funding will help increase the number of claims processed and reduce average processing times in 2010 . however , even though their responsibilities are expected to be limited to less complex claims processing tasks , these additional staff could also pose human capital challenges in the near term while they are being trained and deployed . vba has also expanded its practice of redistributing regional offices' disability workloads . although this expansion could improve the timeliness of its decisions , vba has not collected data to evaluate the effect of this practice . since 2001 , vba has created 15 resource centers that are staffed exclusively to process claims or appeals from backlogged regional offices at distinct phases in the claims process . from 2001 to 2002 , vba created 9 resource centers to exclusively rate claims ( rating centers ) from other offices . since 2007 , vba has created 4 additional resource centers to exclusively develop claims ( development centers ) for rating .