bond forfeiture . a program may require well operators to post a bond to ensure compliance with requirements applicable to the well . if an operator fails to comply with these terms , a state may be able to seize the bond to cover the costs of returning the well to compliance . for example , if ohio officials find that an operator has failed to comply with , among other things , certain orders , regulations , or its permit , it may declare the operator's bond to be forfeit . under the safe drinking water act , epa must enforce state requirements if violations have not been enforced by states in a timely and appropriate manner . epa's strategy sets forth standards for timely and appropriate enforcement action in response to significant violations . specifically , state and epa - managed programs are expected to resolve significant violations within 90 days of discovering the violation or take a formal enforcement action against the well operator . according to the strategy , a formal enforcement action , among other things , is legally enforceable , explicitly requires the well owner to take corrective action , and specifies a timetable for completion . when epa becomes aware that an operator is violating a state program requirement , a provision in the act requires epa to notify the state and , if the state does not take appropriate action within 30 days , to intervene by issuing an administrative order or commencing a civil action . similarly , epa regions should take timely and appropriate enforcement actions in states with epa - managed programs . state and epa - managed programs are required to submit periodic reports to epa headquarters with information on enforcement actions taken against well operators . one of the required reports is to provide quarterly information on individual significant violations by well operators that have not been resolved and that may have the potential to threaten underground sources of drinking water . epa uses the 7520-4 form to collect this information . according to epa's 1987 reporting requirements — underground injection control program guidance ( program reporting ) , epa uses the 7520-4 forms to evaluate the timeliness and appropriateness of a state or epa - managed program's enforcement response . our analysis of a sample of significant violations from selected state and epa - managed programs found that a subset of significant violations that should have been reported on the 7520-4 forms were not reported , and that the forms contained incomplete and inconsistent information . specifically , we sampled 134 notices of violation from selected state and epa - managed programs , of which 93 included significant violations ( see app . vi for a list of the enforcement cases we reviewed in the seven state and epa - managed programs ) . table 7 shows the number and types of violation notices we assessed from our sample of 134 notices of violation , for fiscal years 2008 through 2013 , for each state and epa - managed program in our review .