iv. ) because tatis does not capture training and technical assistance provided by the remaining three nrcs , other federal resource centers , and hhs's regional offices , hhs officials do not have a complete picture of the assistance requested by states and provided to them . for example , the nrc for substance abuse is not required to enter data into tatis , but nrc records show that it provided 47 on - site technical assistance visits to 16 states in fiscal year 2005 , making it among one of the most frequent providers of on - site federal assistance . a second limitation is that the eight nrcs do not always enter information into tatis as required , raising concerns about the ability of hhs to determine how often states use its various resources and for what purpose . for example , an official from one of the eight nrcs we interviewed said that his center is not as conscientious as it should be about entering all of the required data into tatis . hhs officials said that without this information , it is difficult to determine how best to allocate technical assistance resources to help maximize states' ability to address child welfare issues . states have been facing some of the same child welfare challenges for many years , and predict that some emerging challenges will have impacts in the next several years . the federal government has funded hundreds of programs to meet families' mental health , substance abuse treatment , and other social service needs that could help prevent child maltreatment and keep families together . however , the inability to query the federal government's central source of information — the cfda — to identify which services across program and agencies are available in various locations makes it difficult to determine the extent of services available at the local level to serve children and families in the child welfare system . hhs has provided state child welfare systems an array of training and technical assistance that states report as helpful for improving their child welfare programs . maximizing the value of its training and technical assistance is compromised , however , because hhs's information system does not capture all training and technical assistance provided to states from various hhs - sponsored providers , and compliance with the reporting requirements has not been enforced . in the absence of complete and timely information , hhs may be limited in its ability to determine how best to allocate technical assistance resources to help maximize states' ability to address child welfare issues . we are making the following three recommendations to the secretary of health and human services for improving awareness of and access to various social services , and improving the department's ability to manage technical assistance provided to state child welfare agencies . develop a strategy to centralize information on federal assistance programs that are available to meet child welfare program and service needs and that can be accessed by state and local child welfare staff and providers . this strategy could follow a previous administration recommendation to develop an internet - based search for services through the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) that is linked to grantees by zip code .