gao - 09-430t . washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2009 . 2010 census: little time remains to address operational challenges . gao - 09-408t . washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2009 . the bureau is making plans for how to allocate the remaining funding . to date , a fraction of the money for the communications campaign has been obligated ; as of february 28 , 2009 , the bureau reported obligating $48 million out of the $216 million to be spent for this campaign . according to bureau officials , the funds have been obligated for a variety of communications activities , including research initiatives such as the census barriers , attitudes and motivator surveys ; promotional materials for partnership specialists and regions ; and census in schools . the design of the bureau's communications campaign appears to be comprehensive and integrated . further , the bureau generally appears to be addressing some of the factors that will be important for success , including ( 1 ) incorporating lessons learned from 2000 and ( 2 ) targeting resources to where they are most needed . the bureau also plans to track response rates in 2010 and quickly deploy resources to those areas in need of a boost . if each of the various components of the communications campaign is implemented as planned , they will help position the bureau to improve participation in the census and address the differential undercount . importantly , however , the various programs we examined are generally in the planning or early implementation stages . while the communications campaign has made important steps forward , considerable work lies ahead in moving from the planning to the operational phases . further , while money from the economic stimulus package could help augment marketing of the census , less clear is the extent to which these additional funds will improve response behavior or which component of the campaign will yield the best results . moving forward , to help ensure a more accountable and results - oriented communications campaign , it will be important for the bureau to continue to apply lessons learned from the 2000 census to the implementation of the 2010 communications effort , as well as develop and meet specific performance goals . moreover , consistent with the american recovery and reinvestment act , it will be important for the bureau to first develop a spending plan for the money it receives under the act , identifying , among other things , ( 1 ) cost estimates of the activities being funded , ( 2 ) the objectives and outcome - related goals of the planned spending , and ( 3 ) how the spending will help achieve those goals . as always , we will continue to track the implementation of the bureau's communications campaign as well as other key census - taking operations on behalf of congress , and provide congress with regular updates . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony , please contact robert goldenkoff at ( 202 ) 512-2757 or at goldenkoffr@gao.gov .