scorecards . pod tracks district utilization of federal and private bed spaces through quarterly scorecards . according to usms officials , they encourage districts to utilize federal and private bed space , and the quarterly scorecard system is their way of checking on the district's performance in cost - efficient bed space allocation . these scorecards reflect which private and federal facilities are being underutilized , and at what percent or rate . the scorecard lists each federal and private facility , the usms allocation or number of bed spaces for each facility , and the actual amount of adp in that facility ( usms's use ) . scorecards are color coded green , yellow , and red based on whether the district is meeting the usms allocated amount of adp in the facility . if a facility on the score card is under its allocation , or “in the red,” pod does an assessment of which facilities that district is using to house prisoners . while pod officials stated they cannot dictate to a u.s . marshal which facility to use for a specific prisoner , they noted that if they find , for example , that a district is using an iga or a higher priced facility rather than a facility with guaranteed minimum bed spaces , then pod officials call the district to provide coaching on utilizing allocated bed space . to determine medical costs , we obtained district - level medical services information , medical guard services costs per district , and medical - related transportation costs per district , which we summed to obtain district level costs . in addition to monitoring utilization levels at detention facilities , usms also calculates a cost avoidance amount based on the amount of space it should be using at these facilities , and the amount of space currently being occupied by its prisoners . according to usms officials , it performs calculations to determine its potential cost avoidance numbers for private and federal facilities as part of its ongoing monitoring and prisoner reassignment efforts . usms officials noted that their current monitoring and prisoner reassignment efforts are ad hoc , but the agency is currently working to formalize its use of the scorecards and its facility utilization review process . usms officials stated that they are currently working to formalize the scorecard system and monitoring , and expect to be able to begin monthly reviews in june 2016 . internal control . the inconsistencies we identified included inconsistencies in reported costs by facility managed by state and local facilities and calculated costs based on the reported per diem costs and the average daily population attributed to the facilities . further , we identified missing or inconsistent facility designations that led to differing costs by facility . however , we were able to address these inconsistencies and determined that they did not greatly impact cost data for district prisoner operations . we also found detention population data were missing for less than five days for each fixed - rate facility ( including private facilities and two state and local fixed - rate facilities ) .