of the offender . currently , offenders are eligible for safety valve relief only if they have been assessed no more than one criminal history point under the sentencing guidelines.you have asked us to consider a change to the statute whereby offenders would be eligible for safety valve relief regardless of their criminal history score provided that none of their criminal history involves a conviction for which the sentence imposed exceeded one year and one month,5 and further provided they meet the remaining safety valve criteria ( the "policy option" ) . ii . offenders convicted of an offense for which the sentence imposed exceeded one year and one month are assessed three points under the sentencing guidelines . see ussg §4a 1.1 ( a ) . if ) prie, , f1~ l ; ."u&ldinc. to what extent does bop have mechanisms to identify opportunities for cost efficiencies and to take corrective actions that may improve cost efficiency ? what potential changes , both within and outside of bop's authority , could lead to cost reductions or improved efficiencies in bop operations , and what might be the potential impact of these changes ? to address the first question , we obtained historical obligation data from bop's financial management information system for fiscal years 2009- 2013 — a 5-year time frame to provide us with an adequate understanding of trends in bop obligation levels — to identify the major costs incurred by bop for its salaries and expenses account , which generally represents we have assessed the reliability of these 98 percent of bop's budget.data and determined them to be reliable for the purposes of this report . this assessment included performing checks on the data received and interviewing officials responsible for compiling and maintaining these data . we also collected data ( eg , cost savings estimates prepared by bop ) and documentation , such as memos and concept papers approved by executive staff from fiscal years 2009 through 2013 ; through review of these data and documents and interviews with relevant agency officials , we determined that these data are also reliable for the purposes of this report . in addition , we interviewed central office - , regional - , and institutional - level officials to identify to the extent possible all existing cost efficiency and savings initiatives adopted by bop and their impact on its overall budget . to address the second question , we reviewed the processes and tools at bop during the same time period ( fiscal years 2009-2013 ) that are used to identify , implement , and promote cost - efficiency and savings initiatives throughout its institutions , such as executive staff meetings and a catalog compiling cost - savings initiatives . with respect to identifying additional opportunities to realize cost efficiencies or reduce costs , using our financial analysis as context , we analyzed elements of bop's internal control system related to the control objective of achieving operational efficiencies and interviewed relevant officials to assess whether bop has designed a management structure and processes to routinely assess its administrative and operational activities for possible corrective action .