pt . to improve the effectiveness of the forest service's efforts to track and deter unauthorized grazing , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture direct the chief of the forest service to take the following three actions: amend the regulations on range management — 36 c.f.r . pt . 222 — to provide for nonmonetary settlement when the unauthorized or excess grazing is non - willful and incidental , or follow the existing regulations by determining and charging a grazing use penalty for all unauthorized and excess use when it is identified as provided by 36 c.f.r . § 222.50 ( a ) and ( h ) ; record all incidents of unauthorized grazing , including those resolved informally ; and adopt an unauthorized grazing penalty structure that is based , similar to blm's , on the current commercial value of forage . we provided the departments of agriculture and the interior with a draft of this report for their review and comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix iv , the forest service generally concurred with our findings and recommendations . in its comments , the forest service stated that it has taken preliminary steps toward updating its guidance to field units , including guidance for unauthorized grazing penalties similar to blm's . in its written comments reproduced in appendix v , the department of the interior generally concurred with our findings and recommendations . in its comments , the department of the interior stated that it will revise its guidance to better describe procedures for following existing regulations , to provide procedures for documenting and recording all unauthorized grazing incidents , and will ensure that its guidance is consistent with its regulations . the department of the interior also provided technical comments that were incorporated , as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of agriculture and the interior , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or fennella@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe what is known about the frequency and extent of unauthorized grazing , and its effects , and ( 2 ) examine the bureau of land management's ( blm ) and the u.s. forest service's efforts to detect , deter , and resolve unauthorized grazing . to describe the frequency and extent of unauthorized grazing , we analyzed the agencies' unauthorized grazing data , and to describe the effects of such grazing , we reviewed documentation , interviewed agency officials and stakeholder group representatives , and conducted site visits at agency field office locations .