national strategy . the national strategy includes a chapter on federal interagency coordination that outlines steps the commission has taken and discusses the fdic's money smart education program , which multiple federal agencies have used . several of the strategy's calls to action involve interagency efforts , including joint conferences and other initiatives . in addition , to meet a requirement of the financial literacy act that the commission identify and propose means of eliminating areas of overlap and duplication , the commission asked federal agencies to provide information about their financial literacy activities . after reviewing these resources , the commission said it found minimal overlap and duplication among federal financial literacy programs . it noted that even when different agencies' programs appeared similar , closer inspection revealed important differences in things like the target audience , delivery platform , or specific content . as a result , the commission did not propose the elimination of any federal activities . the national strategy includes a call to action that the treasury department and gsa will conduct a similar survey of overlap and duplication every 6 months . to meet a requirement of the act that it assess the availability , utilization , and impact of federal financial literacy materials , the commission asked each agency to evaluate the effectiveness of its own materials and programs . the commission reported that each agency deemed its programs and resources to be effective and worthy of continuance . however , rather than using an unbiased evaluator , the agencies assessed their own programs , which did not benefit from the use of independent third - party analysis . web site . as we have seen , the my money web site , developed through an interagency subcommittee , serves as a single portal for federal financial literacy and education resources . the web site centralizes all web - based federal financial education resources , making it easier for consumers to find this information . hotline and tool kit . the my money hotline allows consumers , particularly those who do not use the internet , to access printed financial literacy materials from multiple federal agencies . moreover , given the large number of federal agencies involved in financial literacy , a concerted effort to streamline federal efforts is essential . as we have reported , in 2004 , about 20 different federal agencies operated about 30 different programs or initiatives related to financial literacy . the federal government's effort in this area could potentially benefit by focusing federal financial literacy resources on those agencies with the most expertise and best track records . the commission has faced several challenges in coordinating the efforts of the 20 federal agencies that form the commission . in prior work , we have identified barriers to coordinating programs and initiatives across the federal government , including competing missions , concerns about protecting resources , and a lack of clearly articulated roles and responsibilities . these barriers may have affected the commission's efforts to coordinate federal programs . each of the commission's participating federal agencies has different missions and responsibilities and thus different perspectives and points of view on issues of financial literacy .