the fifth circuit has questioned the inference . the eighth circuit has rejected the inference that employees engaged in collective bargaining are forgoing wages in consideration for retiree health benefits . the seventh circuit has also rejected the inference altogether , observing that the courts in this circuit do not distinguish between collective bargaining agreements and erisa plans for this purpose . claims of some retirees that modification or termination of their retiree health benefits constitutes a breach of fiduciary duty have , by and large , been denied . however , the supreme court articulated a standard for fiduciary liability in certain limited instances , finding that an employer acted as a fiduciary when it intentionally misled employees about the future and security of benefits . the third circuit has detailed four elements retirees must demonstrate to succeed in a breach of fiduciary duty claim: proof of fiduciary status , misrepresentations by the company , company knowledge of the confusion created , and resulting harm to the employees . the decision in erie county retirees association v. county of erie raises a new issue in evaluating retiree health benefits and could affect an employer's continued provision of these benefits . erie county selected a health plan for medicare - eligible retirees that limited choice of a primary care physician and reimbursed for services , except emergencies , only if authorized by the primary care physician . however , unlike a traditional indemnity plan , there were no deductibles and few or no copayments . for former employees not yet medicare - eligible , the county selected a hybrid point - of - service plan under which a retiree could choose an hmo option ( and accept its benefits and limitations ) or a traditional indemnity option . the medicare - eligible retirees filed suit against erie county , contending that the health coverage offered to them was inferior to that offered to retirees under 65 , and therefore they were discriminated against based on section 4 ( a ) of the age discrimination in employment act ( adea ) . the third circuit ruled that erie county treated its medicare - eligible retirees differently from other retirees with respect to their compensation , terms , condition , or privileges of employment because of age , establishing a claim under the adea . the court also ruled that , under the act , the employer could provide different benefits to medicare - eligible retirees only if ( 1 ) they provided equal benefits to those provided to retirees not yet eligible for medicare or ( 2 ) the employer's costs for medicare - eligible retirees and retirees not yet eligible for medicare were equal . the case was sent back to the trial court for a determination on the county's compliance with this “equal benefit or equal cost” rule . the 10 standardized medigap policies , called plans a through j , differ by the benefits they provide .