this issue is long - standing . for example , we reported in 2005 that because of the small number of department oversight staff , only limited support was provided to programs to assist them in completing their submissions for oversight reviews . however , an operational requirements document had not been developed even though a $1.3 billion contract had been awarded for the investment . in addition , the cargo advanced automated radiography system investment had not yet received a follow - on review by the irb . in another example , in a december 2006 decision memorandum , the irb directed ice's major investment automation and modernization to update its acquisition program baseline , its cost - benefit analysis and its life - cycle cost analysis . automation and modernization has since updated its acquisition program baseline , but its cost analyses were last updated in 2005 . current and former cpo and cfo representatives noted that staffing has not been sufficient to review investments in a timely manner and conduct follow - up to ensure decisions are implemented . they indicated that support was needed to undertake a number of functions , including: designing the investment review process , collecting and reviewing investment documentation , preparing analyses to support investment decisions , and organizing review meetings , as well as conducting follow - up for major investments . according to dhs representatives , from 2004 to 2007 there were four full - time equivalent dhs employees plus support from four contractors to fulfill those responsibilities . many acquisition decision memos provided specific deadlines for components to complete action items , but according to cpo and cfo representatives irb action items were not tracked . without follow - up , the irb did not hold components and major investment program offices accountable for addressing oversight concerns . dhs's investment review process requires that component heads establish processes and provide the requisite resources to manage approved investments adequately . the memorandums indicate documentation that must be completed , issues that must be addressed , and related completion dates before investment approval is given . the memorandums also identify any limits or restrictions on the program until those actions are completed . further , the undersecretary for management signed an interim acquisition management directive in november 2008 to improve acquisition management and oversight pending results from a formal dhs executive review . dhs's annual budget process for funding major investments has not been appropriately informed by the investment review process — largely because the irb seldom conducts oversight reviews and when it has , the two processes have not been aligned to better ensure funding decisions fulfill mission needs . while dhs's investment review framework integrates the two processes — an approach similarly prescribed by gao and omb capital planning principles — many major investments received funding without determining that mission needs and requirements were justified . in addition , two - thirds of dhs major investments did not have required life - cycle cost estimates , which are essential to making informed budget and capital planning decisions .