we do not agree . as stated in our report , to effectively manage it investments an agency should ( 1 ) have basic , project - level control and selection practices in place ( stage 2 processes ) and ( 2 ) manage its projects as a portfolio of investments ( stage 3 processes ) . although dla has executed most of the key practices associated with stage 2 processes , the agency acknowledges that it has not implemented any of the stage 3 processes . therefore , our caption as written describes dla's it investment management capabilities appropriately . in addition , dod recommended that we change the caption “dla lacks a plan to guide improvement efforts” to “dla lacks a published plan to guide improvement efforts.” dod stated that this change is needed because dla has developed some elements of an implementation plan . we do not agree . our point is that dla did not have a complete process improvement plan , not that it has yet to publish the plan that it has . as we describe in the report , a complete plan should , at a minimum , ( 1 ) be based on a full assessment of process strengths and weaknesses , ( 2 ) specify measurable goals , objectives , milestones , and needed resources , ( 3 ) clearly assign responsibility and accountability for accomplishing well - defined tasks , and ( 4 ) be documented and approved by agency leadership . in contrast , dla's planning document was based on a preliminary assessment of only stage 2 critical processes and lacked several of the critical attributes listed above . moreover , dod stated in its comments that dla has not completed a formally documented and prioritized implementation plan to resolve stage 2 and 3 practice weaknesses and has yet to complete the self - assessment and gap analysis necessary to define planned action items . accordingly , it is clear that dla has not satisfied the tenets of a complete plan , and thus our caption is accurate as written . dod provided additional comments that we have incorporated as appropriate in the report . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the subcommittee on defense , senate committee on appropriations ; the subcommittee on readiness and management support , senate committee on armed services ; the subcommittee on defense , house committee on appropriations ; and the subcommittee on military readiness , house committee on armed services . we are also sending copies to the director , office of management and budget ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ; the deputy under secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness ; and the director , defense logistics agency . copies will be made available to others upon request . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact us at ( 202 ) 512-3439 and ( 202 ) 512-7351 , respectively , or by e - mail at hiter@gao.gov and mcclured@gao.gov . an additional gao contact and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix ii .