we are not endorsing any of these actions . these actions were identified by experts for consideration . in addition to the contact named above , anne k. johnson ( assistant director ) , kevin bray , candace carpenter , stephen cleary , michelle duren , ellen fried , kirsten lauber , benjamin t. licht , marya link , rekha vaitla , walter vance , and sarah veale made key contributions to this report . ii. ) when we added the federal oversight of food safety to our list of high - risk areas in january 2007 , we found that a challenge for the 21st century was to find a way for federal agencies with food safety responsibilities to integrate the myriad food safety programs and strategically manage their portfolios to promote the safety and integrity of the nation's food supply . we noted that we had detailed problems with the fragmented federal food safety oversight system and had found that the system had caused inconsistent oversight , ineffective coordination , and inefficient use of resources . we stated that congress and the executive branch could and should create the environment needed to look across the activities of individual programs within specific agencies and toward the goals that the federal government is trying to achieve . to that end , in the january 2007 high - risk update , we reported that we had recommended that a mechanism be put in place to facilitate interagency coordination on food safety regulations and programs . we also suggested that congress and the executive branch work together to develop a government - wide performance plan for food safety . a number of actions have been taken since we added federal oversight of food safety to our high - risk list in 2007 . in march 2009 , the president established the food safety working group ( fswg ) to coordinate federal efforts and develop goals to make food safer . in january 2011 , the fda food safety modernization act ( fsma ) was enacted , representing the largest expansion and overhaul of u.s. food safety authorities since the 1930s . also in january 2011 , the statutory framework for performance management in the federal government , originally set out in the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) , was updated by the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) . gprama adds new requirements for addressing crosscutting efforts in federal strategic and performance planning that help drive collaboration and address fragmentation . for example , gprama requires agencies' strategic plans and performance plans to contain a description of how the agencies are working with other agencies to achieve their goals and objectives . gprama requirements apply at the departmental or agency level , not to organizational components . in march 2011 , we recommended that omb , in consultation with the federal agencies having food safety responsibilities , develop an annually updated government - wide performance plan for food safety . we stated that a performance plan offers a framework to help ensure agencies' goals are complementary and mutually reinforcing and to help provide a comprehensive picture of the federal government's performance on food safety .