component did not exist . = number of requests processed ; days = median days to process ; ± = change from 2004 to 2005 no . 2004 2005 2004 2005 ± 12 – ~ other change ( change in reporting , new component , etc. ) = number of requests processed ; days = median days to process ; ± = change from 2004 to 2005 no . 2005 16 – 12,972 11,385 2005 2004 2005 ± – ~ other change ( change in reporting , new component , etc. ) these three agencies have since provided their plans . we discussed the content of this statement with officials of the department of justice , including the director of the office of information and privacy . we conducted our review in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , except that we did not verify the accuracy and reliability of the data in agencies' annual reports in time to be included in this testimony . as a result , our findings on the status of foia implementation as reflected in agencies' annual reports are preliminary and may change when we complete our assessment of data reliability . we performed our work from april to july 2006 . foia establishes a legal right of access to government records and information , on the basis of the principles of openness and accountability in government . before the act ( originally enacted in 1966 ) , an individual seeking access to federal records had faced the burden of establishing a right to examine them . foia established a “right to know” standard for access , instead of a “need to know,” and shifted the burden of proof from the individual to the government agency seeking to deny access . foia provides the public with access to government information either through “affirmative agency disclosure” — publishing information in the federal register or the internet , or making it available in reading rooms — or in response to public requests for disclosure . public requests for disclosure of records are the best known type of foia disclosure . any member of the public may request access to information held by federal agencies , without showing a need or reason for seeking the information . not all information held by the government is subject to foia . the act prescribes nine specific categories of information that are exempt from disclosure: for example , trade secrets and certain privileged commercial or financial information , certain personnel and medical files , and certain law enforcement records or information ( attachment 1 provides the complete list ) . in denying access to material , agencies may cite these exemptions . the act requires agencies to notify requesters of the reasons for any adverse determination ( that is , a determination not to provide records ) and grants requesters the right to appeal agency decisions to deny access .