throughout this report . grants represent one form of federal assistance consisting of payments in cash or in kind to a state or local government or a nongovernmental recipient for a specified purpose . a senior official with the sc2 initiative told us that the national resource network is intended to be the platform for federal agencies to share lessons learned and best practices with municipalities in economic and fiscal distress . given that detroit is one of the cities that has taken part in the sc2 pilot , its national resource network website might be a natural fit to share lessons learned from the efforts of the white house working group on detroit . officials indicated that they were not aware of plans for a formal evaluation of the efforts of the white house working group , including an effort to document and share good practices . although the informal operation of the white house working group helped connect detroit with resources and expertise it needed to help address its fiscal crisis , if federal officials do not assign formal responsibility for documenting lessons from detroit's experience in a timely manner , opportunities to leverage that knowledge may be lost . moreover , such efforts need not be resource intensive , given that the infrastructure to share the information already exists . cities facing serious financial crisis or in chapter 9 bankruptcy provide a special challenge to the federal government and its grant - making agencies . on one hand , the losses of human capital , financial , and organizational capacity that can accompany such serious financial distress present municipalities with significant challenges to their ability to effectively obtain and manage federal grants . in light of this challenge , and the responsibility that federal grant - making agencies have to the american taxpayer to ensure that grant funds are spent efficiently and appropriately , all the agencies we reviewed used — or had recently incorporated — risk assessments when conducting their grant monitoring and oversight activities . although not specifically fashioned for cities in fiscal crisis , such risk assessments consider a variety of factors that are likely to be impacted by a municipality in such a situation . on the other hand , cities facing financial crisis are examples of organizations that particularly need the assistance and support the federal government and federal grants can provide . in response to the detroit bankruptcy , both the white house working group and individual agencies have taken actions such as improving collaboration , providing grant flexibilities , and offering direct assistance and training . detroit's emergence from the chapter 9 process and the new and sometimes innovative relationships it has developed with its federal partners are a promising start . however , the federal government has not developed a mechanism for documenting lessons from detroit's experience , and if these lessons are not captured in a timely manner , experiences from officials who have first - hand knowledge may be lost .