in 2018 , there were nine launches . results from our nongeneralizable sample cannot be used to make inferences about all dod installations . of the three osd assessments , the climate vulnerability survey reflects the most ( 3 out of 5 ) leading practices . specifically , we found that the methodology used in the climate vulnerability survey followed the leading practice for identifying current water availability . the survey collected and analyzed drought - related information in a timely and systematic manner by having a question about current drought conditions on its web - based self - reporting survey . did not follow the leading practice for identifying future water availability . the survey focused only on current and past water availability . did not follow the leading practice for taking into account all sources of water . the survey did not account for all sources of water ( eg , precipitation , soil moisture , streamflow , groundwater levels , reservoir and lake levels , and snowpack ) because it did not include a question about the sources of the water . followed the leading practice for precisely identifying locations . the survey went directly to all dod installations and inquired about drought conditions at sites owned or managed by the installation , in addition to the installation itself . global change research program . further , we have previously reported about the challenges in managing water resources and the risks of water scarcity . in may 2014 , we reported on the risk of water scarcity that state water managers face . according to these managers , experts , and literature we reviewed , we found that freshwater shortages are expected to continue into the future and , in particular , 40 of 50 state water managers expected shortages in some portion of their states under average conditions in the next 10 years . in april 2016 , we found that in times when water scarcity occurred , conflicts among users increased over the use of limited freshwater resources , including irrigation , power production , and municipal water use . since 2015 , congress has directed dod to conduct three assessments that , in part , required the department to identify installations at risk of water scarcity . the three military departments have also required such assessments . senate report 115-262 , accompanying a bill for the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 , included a provision for us to review dod's water resource management practices and the identified or potential effects of water scarcity . this report evaluates the extent to which dod has assurance that it is using reliable information to identify installations at risk of water scarcity . to address our objective , we reviewed statutes and congressional committee reports that directed dod to conduct assessments for climate - related purposes , including for identifying installations at risk of water scarcity .