unit inspections . the warrior transition command conducts inspections of each wtu under the organizational inspection program , inspections that are to assess numerous aspects of each wtu's operations and provide an avenue for other concerns to be raised . these inspections generally include a pre - questionnaire to wtu soldiers , their family members , and staff ; a process evaluation to determine a wtu's adherence to policies and procedures ; and an after - action review with a wtu's leadership and staff to rate the inspection process . according to warrior transition command officials , these reviews and inspections should indicate whether changes are needed to the triad of care model . however , we found that while both validation reviews and unit inspections assess important aspects of the army's approach to care , neither has specifically assessed whether changes are needed to the triad of care model to address , for example , the greater prevalence of wtu soldiers' behavioral health needs . the army designed the triad of care model at a time when the preponderance of injuries among wtu soldiers were physical . since that time , the army has not assessed whether these significant changes to the wtu soldier population's diagnoses have impacted its approach for managing soldiers' medical care . federal standards for internal control state that management should analyze relevant risks associated with achieving a program's objectives . the increasing prevalence of behavioral health diagnoses in wtu soldiers and the resulting increase in soldiers' need for behavioral health services needs is one such relevant risk . validation reviews . the u.s. army manpower analysis agency conducts validation reviews of the warrior transition command's population and staffing models within the wtus . these reviews examine , among other things , the staffing ratios for different types of personnel ( including for members of the triad of care ) . in the absence of an assessment by the warrior transition command , officials from each of the five wtus we visited told us that they have taken various ad - hoc steps to meet the challenges posed by the increasing prevalence of behavioral health diagnoses . for example , medical officials at each of the wtus we visited told us that they include social workers as an additional member of the triad of care model in response to the need for specialized medical case management . while social workers have always played a role in the wtus' interdisciplinary team , officials at these wtus told us that the greater prevalence of behavioral health diagnoses among soldiers warranted a greater role for social workers , who serve as the wtus' behavioral health experts . further , senior officials at several of these wtus told us that they now refer to their model as the “quad of care” or “square of care” in response to the social workers' inclusion . in addition , at four of the five wtus , social workers told us that they have been directly providing certain types of behavioral health care to soldiers , such as therapy sessions , in part because obtaining behavioral health appointments at the local military treatment facility can be difficult .