, the grant year ) . base grants are distributed by formula . supplemental grants are generally awarded through a competitive process based on the demonstration of severe need and other criteria . base grants for emas , but not tgas , are protected by a hold - harmless provision that protects grantees' funding at specified levels . base grants for emas are distributed among grantees according to each grantee's share of hiv / aids cases among all emas resulting in equal funding per case for all grantees . after the preliminary funding level for an ema is calculated based on its percentage of hiv / aids cases , the amount is compared to the funding levels guaranteed by the hold - harmless provision . if the preliminary funding level is less than the guaranteed amount , the base grant is increased to the guaranteed amount and results in funding not being distributed equally per case . the funds used to meet the ema hold - harmless requirement are deducted from the funds that would otherwise be available to emas and tgas as supplemental grants before these grants are awarded . part b provides for grants to states , the district of columbia , and u.s. territories and associated jurisdictions to improve quality , availability , and organization of hiv / aids services . rwtma required that , beginning in fiscal year 2007 , care act part a and part b formula funding be based on the number of living hiv and aids cases in a grantee's jurisdiction . previously , formula funding was based solely on the number of living aids cases reported in that jurisdiction . cdc provides hrsa with the number of living name - based hiv / aids cases in each jurisdiction and hrsa uses these counts to determine care act part a and part b formula funding . for example , the grantee cannot control the number of people who become infected ; those who will lose their jobs and private health insurance and need to receive services supported with grant funds ; and changes that occur with medicaid and medicare that can affect clients . additionally , two grantees stated that because the grant awards can arrive after april 1 , it can be helpful to carry over funds from the previous year's grant award so that they can award contracts , rather than delay them until hrsa awards grant funds . these grantees said that they would like to be able to carry over funds without risking a reduction in future funding . one grantee explained that because grant awards are based on a formula and can fluctuate from year to year , it is helpful for the grantee to have funding on hand to maintain consistent service levels even if formula funding is decreased without risking a penalty . the vendor claimed that it had not been paid for services . according to state officials , to settle the dispute and comply with applicable state rules arizona had to pay the vendor twice . when the vendor realized that it had been overpaid , it reimbursed arizona in the amount of $670,000 . arizona received the reimbursement at the end of the grant year .