this is the unclassified version of that classified report . to prepare this unclassified version , we removed certain references to nuclear weapons quantities , storage locations , designs , and performance characteristics . to evaluate our objectives , we analyzed dod , doe , and nuclear weapons council policies and guidance on planning and carrying out nuclear stockpile life extension programs ; and reviewed dod and nnsa reports and b61 project officers group status briefings on the b61 life extension program . we also interviewed dod and nnsa officials responsible for coordinating the joint dod - nnsa study of requirements and design options for the planned b61 life extension program , and other officials from the office of the secretary of defense , air force , and nnsa , including the former nnsa manager for nuclear weapons stockpile sustainment , the current nnsa manager for the b61 weapon system , and nnsa managers for icbm , slbm , and cruise missile weapon systems . we analyzed documents from the office of the secretary of defense , nnsa , u.s. strategic command , u.s. european command , and nato and met with officials from these organizations . our scope and methodology are described in more detail in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from october 2009 to december 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . most modern nuclear weapons consist of three sets of components — a primary , a secondary , and a set of nonnuclear components enclosed in a case . when detonated , the primary and secondary components , which together are referred to as the weapon's “nuclear explosive package,” produce the weapon's explosive force , or “yield.” the array of nonnuclear components surrounding the nuclear explosive package serves to control the detonation sequence and helps ensure the weapon's safety and security from human tampering and accidental detonation . in addition to the nuclear forces under u.s. strategic command's operational control , the united states retains a limited number of nonstrategic , or “tactical” b61 bombs in the nuclear weapons stockpile to support nato commitments . these bombs are maintained in an operational configuration , and can be delivered by both u.s. fighter aircraft and aircraft of predesignated , trained , and certified nato allies . the commander of u.s. european command also serves as the supreme allied commander of european forces , and would exercise command and control of these weapons during a conflict . the air force exercises day - to - day custody of the b61 bombs used to support nato commitments . as is the case for the employment of nuclear weapons under u.s. strategic command's control , only the president of the united states can authorize the nato supreme allied commander to employ the b61 bomb .