in which the individual fhlbank is engaging . for interest - rate risk , each of the fhlbanks must have a fhfb - approved interest - rate risk model that provides an estimate of the market value of the fhlbank's portfolio during periods of market stress . the capital requirement for operations risk is generally 30 percent of the total capital charge for credit and interest - rate risk . glba required each fhlbank to submit a capital plan to fhfb for review and approval . fhfb approved all 12 fhlbank capital plans by 2002 and 11 of the 12 fhlbanks have implemented their capital plans . according to fhfb , 10 of the 12 capital plans rely entirely on class b stock and two of the capital plans include class a stock . as part of the capital plan implementation process , fhfb has required the fhlbanks to submit plans for modeling interest - rate risk and related procedures for managing these risks . finally , i would like to discuss some important challenges and questions affecting the fhlbank system . they include risk - management practices , the securitization of mortgage assets , the extent to which the fhlbank system is meeting its mission requirements , and the alleged impacts that large financial institutions are having on the system's traditional cooperative structure and ahp program . i discuss this issue in the next section . as i discussed earlier , prior to 1999 voluntary fhlbank members , such as commercial banks , could withdraw their capital on 6-months notice , which raised questions about the stability of the fhlbanks' capital structure . to address this concern , glba established that fhlbank membership was voluntary but required that financial institutions that choose to become members invest more permanent stock in their fhlbank . under the new capital structure , fhlbanks can issue class a stock , which can be redeemed with 6-months notice , and class b stock , which can be redeemed with 5-years notice , or both . to help ensure that capital does not dissipate due to redemption in times of stress , glba does not allow an fhlbank to redeem or repurchase capital if following the redemption the fhlbank would fail to satisfy any minimum capital requirement . under glba , the fhlbanks are also subject to both a leverage requirement ( minimum capital - to - assets ratio ) and a risk - based capital calculation . under the leverage requirements , each fhlbank must comply with two minimum capital ratios . first , permanent capital ( equal to amounts paid in for class b stock plus retained earnings ) plus class a stock is to be at least 4 percent of assets . second , class a stock plus 1.5 times permanent capital is to be at least 5 percent of assets . the risk - based capital standards account for credit risk , interest - rate risk , and operations risk . for credit risk , a fhfb regulation specifies capital requirements according to the mix of activities ( advances , mortgages , etc. )