; and the selected facilities . we excluded administrative facilities from our review . we did not evaluate the accuracy of information on the individual daily rosters . we excluded those hard - copy daily rosters that were printed more than 30 days after the date of the daily roster because we determined that the designations on non - correctional services staff were not sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also excluded from our analysis incomplete daily rosters ( i.e. , those that were sent to us with missing pages ) and rosters that we did not receive . to analyze the correctional services daily rosters from each of the facilities in our review , we selected a stratified random sample of 60 hard - copy daily rosters , 5 per month , from the universe of 365 daily rosters per facility for calendar year 2007 . we did not look at daily rosters completed before the implementation of the mission critical initiative and therefore do not know the impact of the initiative . for fcc coleman , which uses separate daily rosters to assign staff at each of its four facilities , we reviewed the separate rosters from each facility for the 60 days . for fcc terre haute , which uses a consolidated roster to assign staff throughout the complex , we reviewed the consolidated daily roster for the 60 days . in total , we reviewed 600 daily rosters . with this stratified random sample , each roster in the universe had a chance of being selected . each selected roster was subsequently weighted in the analysis to account statistically for all the members of the universe , including those who were not selected . for each day selected in the sample , on the daily roster we manually counted for both mission critical posts and special assignments occurrences of ( 1 ) unassigned posts , ( 2 ) non - correctional services staff paid regular time , ( 3 ) correctional services staff paid overtime , ( 4 ) non - correctional services staff paid overtime , and ( 5 ) compensatory time . in addition , we counted the total number of special assignments assigned per day at each facility in our review . based on these results , we estimated the average daily number and percentage of mission critical posts and special assignments that were unassigned , filled with non - correctional services staff , or filled with overtime using either correctional services staff or non - correctional services staff . these results are limited to the facilities in our review for calendar year 2007 and are not intended to be applied to facilities across bop . for the overtime results , we based the average daily count on the number of overtime occurrences rather than number of overtime hours . the total number of overtime occurrences per day was determined by adding the daily count of occurrences of correctional services staff paid overtime and non - correctional services staff paid overtime . because of resource constraints , we did not count the total number of mission critical posts listed on each of the 600 daily rosters .