withdrawals . application withdrawal rates were higher after sandy than after the other disasters . of the 14,558 original business loan applications that had reached a decision status by january 31 , 2014 , 4,715 ( approximately 32 percent ) had been withdrawn by sba or the applicant . the withdrawal rates for the previous disasters ranged from approximately 18 percent ( ike ) to approximately 23 percent ( katrina and wilma ) . for hurricane sandy , sba withdrew approximately 60 percent of the 4,715 applications , while applicants requested withdrawal for the remaining 40 percent . the 60 percent figure for sba - initiated withdrawals was higher than for two of the other disasters and lower for three . the leading reason for withdrawals after sandy was the applicant's failure to provide sba with all requested information ( 1,542 withdrawals or approximately 33 percent of all withdrawn applications ) . cancellations . of the 4,180 business loan applications sba approved for hurricane sandy , 1,578 ( 38 percent ) had been cancelled as of january 31 , 2014 — a rate higher than for the other disasters . the other cancellation rates ranged from approximately 22 percent ( wilma ) to approximately 30 percent ( ike and katrina ) . of the business loans cancelled after hurricane sandy , borrowers requested cancellation of 1,171 loans ( 74 percent ) , while sba cancelled 407 ( 26 percent ) . the most common reason for sba - initiated cancellations was “failure to complete and return all loan closing documents,” representing 336 cancellations ( 21 percent ) . according to sba , factors affecting the withdrawal and cancellation rates for hurricane sandy included higher rates of insurance coverage in the footprint of the disaster area and the availability of alternative sources of recovery aid ( such as grants ) . officials told us that the rollout of programs funded by the department of housing and urban development's community development block grant program began earlier than in past disasters , and that state grantees — specifically new jersey and new york — obtained those funds and accepted applications for their respective state grant programs shortly after the disaster struck . half of the entities with which we spoke — selected business development centers and local business organizations in new jersey and new york — provided perspectives on the most common reasons why applications were withdrawn after sandy . for instance , business owners commonly withdrew applications because they had changed their plans for funding their recovery ( for example , they may have received insurance claim proceeds or state grants ) . entities also noted other reasons , such as frustration with waiting times for loan processing and a desire not to incur additional debt . in 2014 we reported that 6 years after congress passed the small business disaster response and loan improvements act of 2008 , sba had not piloted or implemented three guaranteed disaster loan programs , which therefore had not been available after hurricane sandy . as previously discussed , the act mandated the creation of the immediate disaster assistance program ( idap ) , the expedited disaster assistance loan program ( edalp ) , and the private disaster assistance program ( pdap ) .