gao - 02-897 . washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2002 . ( see fig . 2 for the types of providers that states indicated were included in their market rate surveys. ) after an examination of those fees , state officials decided whether and how to divide the state into regions based on variations in providers' fees . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 1998 . welfare reform: states' efforts to expand child care programs . gao / hehs - 98-27 . washington , d.c.: january 13 , 1998 . welfare reform: implications of increased work participation for child care . gao / hehs - 97-75 . washington , d.c.: may 1997 . state officials may use a variety of methods for dividing the state into regions . as shown in figure 3 , 18 states reported setting rates for multicounty regions , and 16 states set rates based on political boundaries , such as counties or municipalities . illinois and maryland , two of the states we visited , established reimbursement rate schedules that combined areas into multicounty regions . these regions generally consisted of counties that were not necessarily contiguous to one another but were designed to capture providers who charged similar fees . oregon , the third state we visited , grouped zip codes with comparable providers' fees into three reimbursement rate areas . conversely , 14 states reported that they did not pay different reimbursement rates to providers based on their location . in some cases , officials reported they did not divide the state into regions because there was little variation in fees across the state . most states also reported setting distinct child care reimbursement rates based on the age group of the child needing care . the states we visited , for example , had differing rates for infants and school aged children . in addition , separate rates were often used for child care providers who accepted special needs children , exceeded quality standards , or offered evening and / or weekend care . for example , 24 states reported that they had distinct child care reimbursement rates for providers whose care exceeded state quality standards . in setting their reimbursement rates , most states ranked providers' fees by type and location of care from highest to lowest , and set maximum reimbursement rates at a percentile of these fees . hhs suggested that states set their maximum child care reimbursement rate at least at the 75th percentile based on the most recent market rate survey results . in responding to our survey , 21 states indicated that they did so . an additional 7 states indicated that they set rates at least at the 75th percentile but used a more dated survey . while states most often reported that market rate survey results were very important in setting child care reimbursement rates , they also reported that their state budget and policy goals were important factors considered when setting rates . for example , 32 states reported that the amount of their current budget was of great importance when setting child care reimbursement rates . budgets are important because they establish a financial framework for developing programs and policy goals .