concerns about interference . many conflicts with regard to spectrum decisions arise over concerns about interference . a good example of this concern arises with regard to unlicensed spectrum users . many licensed spectrum users , both commercial and government , have expressed concern that allowing certain unlicensed uses — wherein devices operating at low power and in fairly limited range use the same frequencies as licensed providers — may create interference that compromises the quality of services provided by licensed users . conversely , those wanting to introduce certain new technologies view access to unlicensed spectrum as beneficial to the public interest and maintain that the degree of interference created by certain unlicensed uses is not “harmful.” concerns about policies that influence markets' competitiveness . many policy initiatives can have an effect on the competitiveness of wireless markets . for example , allowing greater flexibility for spectrum holders to use spectrum in a variety of ways could create opportunities for firms to enter markets for certain services , increasing the competitiveness of those markets . in fact , some experts have noted that , at times , incumbent firms oppose certain spectrum policies , in part , because of concerns about the effect on competition in the market . another area where conflicts among spectrum stakeholders have arisen relates to difficulties in determining how to balance the needs — or a process to ensure a balancing of needs — between public - sector and private - sector spectrum users . government users have said that because they offer unique and critical services that are not comparable to those provided in the commercial sector , a dollar value cannot be placed on the government's provision of spectrum - related services . fcc officials , commercial users , and others have stated that the ability of commercial users to acquire adequate spectrum is also critical to the welfare of society , because the commercial wireless sector makes important contributions to a healthy , robust economy . fcc and department of commerce officials acknowledge the difficulty of balancing the critical needs of government and commercial spectrum users . to illustrate this point , they refer to the difficulties experienced in negotiating two recent agreements: the reallocation of spectrum from government to commercial users for 3g services and the rules under which ultrawideband devices will share spectrum with federal users . under the divided management framework , no one entity has been given ultimate decisionmaking authority over all spectrum use . there must be coordination and cooperation in order to determine how best to accommodate users of spectrum . while any decisions involving spectrum can be difficult , those involving spectrum allocations can be particularly protracted . because most of the desirable spectrum has already been allocated , allocating spectrum for a new technology or service usually requires that some existing users be moved to another part of the spectrum . since existing users are likely to experience costs for relocating but little , if any , benefit , they are often reluctant to make a move . even within the jurisdiction of a single spectrum - management agency , reallocations of spectrum may require lengthy negotiations .