, the kissell amendment ) . dhs employs multiple procedures , according to officials , in an effort to ensure that the restriction on the procurement of foreign textiles from the kissell amendment was and is properly applied , including ( 1 ) a standardized procurement contract review process ; ( 2 ) a requirement for all dhs components to use established department - wide contracts ; ( 3 ) verification procedures to ensure the stated country of origin is correct ; and ( 4 ) trainings on foreign procurement restrictions . first , the dhs official review process for all procurements helps ensure that the kissell restriction is applied , if appropriate , to contracts for textiles and apparel , according to officials . specifically , each procurement goes through a standardized review process that includes several levels of acquisition supervisors and dhs legal counsel , depending on the estimated dollar amount of the procurement . the dhs acquisition manual requires this review and approval process , which is designed to ensure compliance with all relevant federal acquisition laws , regulations , policies , and procedures . through this process , officials evaluate the proposed contract for a number of restrictions , such as the appropriate use of a small business set - aside or a sole - source contract , which must also be reviewed by supervisors and legal departments before contract approval . according to dhs officials , while the applicability of the kissell amendment is part of the standard review process , there is no separate review for whether the foreign procurement restriction should be applied to the procurement . officials also stated that the small number of contracting officers handling these textile procurements are aware of the requirements . they also provide a list of the types of textile items included in the restriction ( i.e. , yarn , wool , cotton ) , the exceptions noted in the kissell amendment , and provide detail on the specific application of trade agreements . see appendix i for more information on our scope and methodology . some components within dhs issued additional , supplemental guidance to the hsar , while other components determined that additional guidance would be duplicative , according to officials . for example , transportation security administration's ( tsa ) internal guidance and procedure memorandum , updated in june 2016 , provides additional guidance to contracting officers at tsa on the procurement of textiles . this guidance specifically states that for certain textile products , tsa's contracting officers can only evaluate and / or accept offers from specified countries . tsa's procurement of textiles is different because it is not included in the u.s. coverage schedules of the wto gpa and all u.s. free trade agreements , with the exception of the north american free trade agreement and the u.s. - chile free trade agreement . according to ustr officials , some of tsa's security functions were originally held by the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , which is not subject to the far . furthermore , tsa was also not subject to the far prior to 2008 , until congress passed legislation removing the requirement that tsa procurements be subject to the acquisition management system established by the administrator of the faa .