most u.s. firefighters are volunteers . under dot's emergency order , the railroads support emergency responders by providing sercs with information about expected movements of trains carrying bakken crude oil . in addition , since 1996 , railroads that ship oil in containers exceeding 3,500 gallons must prepare response plans that document that they have trained personnel , placed equipment , and established procedures to respond to an oil spill . phmsa has recently proposed in coordination with fra , expanding the oil - spill response - planning requirements to require railroads to obtain fra approval for more detailed , comprehensive oil - spill response plans for high - hazard flammable trains carrying petroleum oil . recently enacted legislation may change the responsibilities of some stakeholders . in december 2015 , president obama signed into law the fast act , which requires dot to codify and expand the information sharing requirement relative to the existing emergency order's notification requirements for trains carrying 1-million gallons or more of bakken crude oil . in accordance with the fast act , in july 2016 phmsa proposed regulations ( the same as mentioned above ) to require railroads to share information on a monthly basis about high - hazard flammable trains' operations with state ( i.e. , serc ) and tribal emergency response commissions . “high hazard flammable trains” are those that transport ( 1 ) 20 or more tank cars loaded with a class 3 flammable liquid in a continuous block or ( 2 ) a total of 35 or more tank cars carrying such materials . the fast act also directs dot to require railroads to provide , through the applicable fusion center , emergency responders with real - time access to information about the train's hazardous materials shipments in the case of a train accident . while planning is conducted by a range of participants , local emergency responders and railroad train crews are typically first on the scene in the immediate aftermath of this type of accident . firefighters , police , and emergency medical technicians assess and secure the scene , as described in figure 2 . for example , local and sometimes regional officials may be responsible for advising the public on taking shelter - in - place actions or conducting evacuations of affected populations . in addition , assuming they are not affected by an accident , railroad train crews are expected to provide local emergency responders with information about the type and quantity of hazardous materials on the train , the position of the train's contents , and the emergency contact information ( referred to as hazardous materials documentation ) , as described in figure 2 . according to the hmr , railroads are required to provide notice of certain hazardous materials accidents to the national response center . after the initial response , local emergency responders and railroads as well as state and federal agencies have various responsibilities for mitigating and investigating an accident ( see fig . mitigation: according to aar , railroads have hazardous materials accident management personnel and employ hazardous materials response contractors and environmental consultants that provide spill response tools and equipment . federal and state environmental agencies are responsible for assisting this effort and monitoring and evaluating the environmental damage .