reg . for example , osc may provide information to the equal employment opportunity commission about allegations of discrimination and to the merit systems protection board when filing a petition for disciplinary action . in the event that osc believes that disclosure may be appropriate in a circumstance when it has not received a written request or consent from a complainant or whistleblower , and routine use or other privacy act condition of disclosure does not apply , osc will seek written authorization from the complainant or whistleblower . regardless of the permissibility of disclosure under the privacy act , osc is specifically prohibited by law from responding to inquiries concerning work performance , ability , aptitude , general qualifications , character , loyalty or suitability for any personnel action of any complainant who filed a prohibited personnel practice allegation , unless ( 1 ) the complainant consents in advance , or ( 2 ) an agency requires the information in order to make a determination concerning the complainant's access to highly - sensitive national security information . , § 1212 ( g ) ( 2 ) ) . when a prohibited personnel practice complaint is filed , it is osc's policy not to reveal the identity of the complainant even to the involved agency unless osc has the complainant's consent . osc requires each filer to select one of three consent statements that contains varying restrictions on osc's disclosure and use of complainant information . osc has taken a number of steps within the agency to ensure that the rights and privacy of the complainants are adequately protected . the agency requires that all staff receive training about ensuring the confidentiality of osc records and the privacy rights of those individuals bringing cases to it . in addition , the agency makes information about its policy statements and disclosure policies under the whistleblower protection act available to each person alleging reprisal for whistleblowing . for example , in april 1995 , osc issued “policy statement concerning the disclosure of information regarding prohibited personnel practice complaints.” osc enhanced this statement in september 1995 , when it issued another policy statement on the “disclosure and use of information from osc files,” which contains disclosure information relevant to all osc case types and outlines the privacy act provisions under which osc may disclose information about a case . moreover , in september 2002 , osc issued two updates to the statements that expounded on the disclosure and use of information from osc program files . these policy papers afford better understanding of how osc uses and discloses the information that osc acquires or creates while investigating and prosecuting cases . we examined efforts by osc to manage its caseload . our review provided information in the following areas ( 1 ) osc's caseload by type and number and changes to the caseload between fiscal years 1997 to 2003 , ( 2 ) the extent to which cases were processed within time frames set by congress , ( 3 ) actions taken by management to address workload issues , and ( 4 ) the agency's perspective on the adequacy of its resources . in addition , we were asked to provide information on osc's data tracking system and its privacy protection policies .