examples include the following . in an operational test readiness assessment of the ea - 18g aircraft , the director of systems engineering found multiple moderate - level risks related to software , communications , and mission planning and made recommendations to reduce the risks . the program acted on the risks and recommendations identified in the assessment and delayed the start of initial operational testing by 6 weeks to implement the fixes . it has completed initial operational testing and was found to be effective and suitable by navy testers . the director of operational test and evaluation rated the system effective but not suitable , and stated that follow - on testing has been scheduled to verify correction of noted deficiencies . the program received approval to enter full rate production and is rated as a low risk in the joint annual report . the systems engineering assessment of the global hawk program was high risk pending the determination of actual system capability ; it also stated that there is a high probability that the system will fail operational testing . the assessment cited numerous issues , including questions regarding the system's ability to meet mission reliability requirements , poor system availability , and the impact of simultaneous weapon system block builds ( concurrency ) . this organization was dissolved in 1999 . from 1999 to 2006 , systems engineering and developmental testing responsibilities were aligned under a variety of offices . the responsibility for managing test ranges and resources , for example , was transferred to the director of operational test and evaluation . this function was later moved to the test resource management center , which reports directly to at&l , where it remains today . in 2004 , a director of systems engineering was re - established and then in 2006 this became the system and software engineering directorate . developmental testing activities were part of this directorate's responsibilities . as a result , systems engineering and developmental testing issues were reported indirectly to at&l through the deputy under secretary for acquisition and technology . congress passed the weapon systems acquisition reform act of 2009 ( reform act ) — the latest in a series of congressional actions taken to strengthen the defense acquisition system . the reform act establishes a director of systems engineering and a director of developmental test and evaluation within the office of the secretary of defense and defines the responsibilities of both offices . the reform act requires the services to develop , implement , and report on their plans for ensuring that systems engineering and developmental testing functions are adequately staffed to meet the reform act requirements . in addition , it requires the directors to report to congress on march 31 of each year on military service and major defense acquisition program systems engineering and developmental testing activities from the previous year . for example , the report is to include a discussion of the extent to which major defense acquisition programs are fulfilling the objectives of their systems engineering and developmental test and evaluation master plans , as well as provide an assessment of the department's organization and capabilities to perform these activities .