iii. ) fda advisory committees fda has 31 advisory committees that are administratively attached to fda centers or to the office of the commissioner . meetings may be held when there are controversial issues that committee advice could help the agency resolve . in consultation with the review division , the chair's responsibilities may include helping develop the meeting's agenda and topic questions , deciding the meeting's voting procedure , monitoring the length of meeting presentations , and approving meeting minutes . why is an advisory committee meeting needed ? although an advisory committee may have a regular meeting schedule , the advisory committee's review division decides when an advisory committee meeting is needed . for example , in july 2007 , two of cder's advisory committees met jointly to consider whether avandia , a diabetes drug , should remain on the market given concerns that its use increased heart risks for those with diabetes . what is the advisory committee meeting's topic and what questions are to be answered ? the review division selects the topic , develops the issues fda seeks advice on into topic questions for the advisory committee to address at the meeting , and compiles the background information for the committee to review . other options for developing possible meeting topics: subcommittee meetings: the review division may select a limited number of advisory committee members — including at least two standing members — and other consultants to serve as a subcommittee to discuss and develop an issue of fda's choosing . the subcommittee then provides this information to an advisory committee for its consideration . homework assignments: fda may also select advisory committee members and other experts to conduct homework assignments , again on issues of fda's choosing . a homework assignment may involve , for example , an in - depth review of an issue that may be considered as a potential topic at an upcoming advisory committee meeting or review of a product early in its development . are temporary members needed , and if yes , who should be selected ? the review division will determine whether the standing committee members able to attend the meeting have the needed expertise to address the topics to be discussed at the advisory committee meeting . if additional expertise is determined to be necessary , temporary members can be selected to serve on the committee for the meeting . the review division decides which individuals — usually from the center's consultant pool — are selected to serve as temporary members . each center maintains a consultant pool and selects the pool's individual experts . are guest speaker presentations needed , and if yes , who should be selected ? the review division may determine that additional information needs to be presented at an advisory committee meeting . the division can select and invite guest speakers to make presentations and answer questions before the committee . guest speakers may , for example , be members of other fda advisory committees , individuals from a center's consultant pool , federal employees from other agencies , or national or international experts from outside fda . guest speakers do not vote , and they do not participate in the committee's discussions .