attorneys offices . figure 2 illustrates the typical immigration benefit fraud referral and coordination process . the homeland security act of 2002 created the office of the citizenship and immigration services ombudsman . the ombudsman's primary function is to: assist individuals and employers in resolving problems with uscis ; identify areas in which individuals and employers have problems in dealing with uscis ; and propose changes in the administrative practices of uscis in an effort to mitigate problems . the ombudsman has issued two annual reports that have highlighted issues related to prolonged processing times , limited case status information , immigration benefit fraud , insufficient standardization in processing , and inadequate information technology and facilities . other federal agencies also play important roles in the immigration benefit application process . ( 3 ) what actions does dhs take to sanction those who commit benefit fraud ? to address these questions , we interviewed responsible officials at and reviewed relevant documentation obtained from dhs and the departments of state , justice , and labor . regarding the nature and extent of immigration benefit fraud , we analyzed uscis management data contained in its performance analysis system ( pas ) , results from two fraud assessments uscis had completed before december 2005 , information reported by dhs and the u.s . attorneys offices based on investigations and prosecutions of immigration benefit fraud , and information in fraud bulletins prepared by one uscis service center . we evaluated the methodology used in uscis's fraud assessments and determined that it provided a reasonable basis for projecting the frequency with which fraud was committed within the time period from which the samples were drawn . we assessed the data derived from pas and determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review . because we selected investigations and prosecutions to review based upon information that was available , the information obtained from them is not necessarily representative or exhaustive of all immigration benefits cases nationwide . similarly , information contained in the fraud bulletins is not necessarily representative of immigration benefit fraud nationwide . to determine how uscis detects fraud during the adjudications process and to evaluate these efforts , we interviewed uscis headquarters officials and uscis's fdns staff . we also interviewed 59 adjudicators at the 4 uscis service centers and 2 uscis district offices with responsibility for and familiarity with adjudicating different types of applications in a group setting , which allowed us to identify points of consensus among these adjudicators . in addition we interviewed ice office of investigations officials from four ice field offices . as we did not select probability samples of adjudicators and ice office of investigations staff to interview , the results of these interviews may not be projected to the views of all uscis adjudicators and ice office of investigations field staff nationwide . further , we compared the practices in place to the standards for internal control in the federal government and to guidance from internationally recognized , leading organizations in fraud control , including the american institute of certified public accountants and the united kingdom's national audit office .