pub . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 continued the program and renamed it the commercialization readiness program . although the program may support any phase iii awards , such as technology transition to commercial products , dod is required to provide goals to increase the number of phase ii sbir contracts that lead to technology transition into programs of record or fielded systems and to use incentives to meet those goals . pub . requires dod to set a goal to increase the number of phase ii contracts awarded that lead to technology transition into acquisition programs or fielded systems , and use incentives to encourage program managers and prime contractors to meet the goal . requires that dod report specific transition - related information to the administrator of the small business administration for inclusion in an annual report to designated congressional committees . this includes reporting the number and percentage of phase ii contracts that led to technology transition into acquisition programs or fielded systems , information on the status of each project that received funding through the commercialization readiness program and efforts to transition those projects , and a description of each incentive used to meet the department's transition goal . authorizes dod to establish goals for the transition of phase iii technologies in subcontracting plans for contracts of $100 million or more , and to require prime contractors on such contracts to report the number and dollar amount of contracts entered into by prime contractors for phase iii projects . sets the ceiling for discretionary technical assistance that can be provided annually for all phase i and phase ii projects at $5,000 per project . programs can use this funding to assist awardees in making technical decisions on projects , solving technical problems , minimizing technical risks , and commercializing projects . establishes a pilot effort to allow dod sbir programs to use not more than 3 percent of their sbir budgets for , among other things , program administration , technical assistance , and the implementation of commercialization and outreach initiatives . the military department sbir programs use several management practices and tools to support technology transition efforts . we identified some common transition elements across the programs , but also found some differences in how each program approaches its technology transition efforts . the programs' technology transition efforts are supported through use of administrative funds coming from their sbir budgets and other funds provided by their respective military department . the transition facilitation practices , tools , and funds used to promote the transition of sbir technologies include the following: early focus on transition through topic generation and project selection: technology transition efforts begin with topic generation and project selection processes that emphasize the pursuit of projects for which there is a demonstrated military need and potential transition opportunities . to do this , the military department programs formally engage stakeholders from the science and technology and acquisition communities in generating and endorsing topics for sbir solicitations . in proposing topics and selecting projects , programs have to balance their desire for technological innovation with meeting pressing warfighter needs .