pretreatment facility . this facility is to receive the waste from the tanks and separate it into high - level and low - activity waste streams . low - activity waste facility . this facility is to receive the low - activity waste from the pretreatment facility and immobilize it by vitrification . the canisters of vitrified waste will be permanently disposed of at another facility at hanford . high - level waste facility . this facility is to receive the high - level waste from the pretreatment facility and immobilize it by vitrification . the canisters of vitrified waste will be stored on - site until a final repository is established . effluent management facility . the effluent management facility is being built to evaporate much of the secondary waste produced during low - activity waste processing and vitrification at the low - activity waste facility . analytical laboratory . this facility will conduct analyses as needed , such as testing samples of the vitrified waste to ensure that it meets certain criteria and regulatory requirements for disposal . balance of facilities . these facilities consist of the 22 support facilities that make up the plant infrastructure , such as cooling water systems and silos that hold vitrifying materials . in part because of the 2012 work stoppage at the wtp's pretreatment and high - level waste facilities , in 2012 doe adopted a phased waste treatment strategy through which the department aims to begin treating some of the low - activity waste before resolving all wtp technical issues . during the first phase of this strategy , doe plans to implement a direct feed low - activity waste ( dflaw ) approach to transfer some low - activity waste from the tanks to the wtp's low - activity waste facility for vitrification before the pretreatment facility is completed . the approach relies on construction of a new facility — the low - activity waste pretreatment system — designed to remove highly radioactive particles from liquid tank waste before sending the waste stream to the low - activity waste facility . during later phases , doe intends to complete the wtp pretreatment facility and high - level waste facilities . doe also plans to construct a tank waste characterization and staging facility under a different contract to stage , mix , sample , and characterize high - level waste from the tanks prior to delivery to the pretreatment facility . figure 1 illustrates wtp and other facilities planned for hanford tank waste treatment . because of the long - standing quality assurance problems at the wtp , doe required orp to closely monitor the contractor's implementation of the mip . specifically , as a result of a doe office of enforcement investigation into the contractor's quality assurance and corrective action management programs , doe entered into a consent order with the contractor in 2015 . the consent order required the contractor to complete the actions identified in the mip to the extent necessary to restore quality assurance program to full effectiveness by april 30 , 2016 .