his area . his testing was not part of an since our last report in 2002 , va's ig and independent auditors continued to report serious weaknesses with the department's information security controls . the auditors' report on interna l controls , prepared at the completion of va's 2005 financial statement audit , identified weaknesses related to access control , segregation of duties , change control , and service continuity — a of weaknesses that are virtually identical to those we identified years earlier . the department's fy 2005 annual performance a accountability report states that the ig determined that many information system security vulnerabilities reported in nationa l audits from 2001 through 2004 remain unresolved , despite the department's actions to implement ig recommendations in pre audits . the ig also reported specific security weaknesses and vulnerabilities at 45 of 60 va health care facilities and 11 of 21 va regional offices where security issues were reviewed , placing va at ss and risk that sensitive data may be exposed to unauthorized acce improper disclosure , among other things . as a result , the ig determined that weaknesses in va's i controls were a material weakness . in response to the ig's findings , the department indicates tha are being implemented to address the material weakness in information security . according to the department , it has maximi limited resources to make significant improvement in its overall security posture in the near term by prioritizing fisma re activities , and work will continue in the next fiscal year . mediation despite these actions , the department has not fully implemented the key elements of a comprehensive security management program , and its efforts have not been sufficient to effectively protect its information systems and information , including personally identifiable information , from unauthorized disclosure , misuse , or loss . in addition to establishing a robust information security program , agencies can take other actions to help guard against the possibility that personal information they maintain is inadvertently compromised . these include conducting privacy impact assessments and taking other practical measures . it is important that agencies identify the specific instances in which they collect and maintain personal information and proactively assess the means they intend to use to protect this information . this can be done most effectively through the development of privacy impact assessments ( pias ) , which , as previously mentioned , are required by the e - government act of 2002 when agencies use information technology to process personal information . pias are important because they serve as a tool for agencies to fully consider the privacy implications of planned systems and data collections before those systems and collections have been fully implemented , when it may be relatively easy to make critical adjustments . in prior work we have found that agencies do not always conduct pias as they are required . for example , our review of selected data mining efforts at federal agencies determined that pias were not always being done in full compliance with omb guidance .