gao - 13-738t . washington , d.c.: july 25 , 2013 . navy shipbuilding: significant investments in the littoral combat ship continue amid substantial unknowns about capabilities , use , and cost . gao - 13-530 . washington , d.c.: july 22 , 2013 . the maintenance concept for lcs may be changed in the future . the lcs program office requested that a business - case analysis be conducted to develop a sustainment strategy that will provide the most cost - effective solution for providing lcs maintenance outside the continental united states . the analysis , completed in april 2013 , compared five alternatives to the current contractor - based maintenance approach and recommended shifting responsibility from contractors to shore - based navy personnel to achieve cost savings and other improvements . the navy is exploring options to enact this recommendation under different scenarios and plans to do so as more lcss are deployed to more forward operating stations . all discussions were held aboard uss freedom . our group discussions were not designed to ( 1 ) demonstrate the extent of a problem or to generalize results to the entire uss freedom crew population or to other lcs variants , ( 2 ) develop a consensus to arrive at an agreed - upon plan or make decisions about what actions to take , or ( 3 ) provide statistically representative samples or reliable quantitative estimates . instead , they were intended to generate in - depth information about the discussion group participants' attitudes and reasons for their attitudes toward specific topics and to offer insights into the range of concerns and support for an issue . the generalizability of the information produced by our discussion groups is limited for several reasons . first , the information represents the responses of uss freedom officers and enlisted personnel from the 17 groups described above . second , while the composition of the groups was designed to assure a distribution of navy officers , enlisted personnel , seniority , and ship departments , the group participants were not probabilistically sampled . third , participants were asked questions about their specific experiences on the singapore deployment . the experiences of other uss freedom personnel who did not participate in our group discussions may have varied . because of these limitations , we did not rely entirely on group discussions , but rather used several different methodologies to corroborate and support our conclusions . we conducted this performance audit from september 2013 to july 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in 2012 , the chief of naval operations received the results of four internal studies he requested to assess , among other things , the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) across aspects of manning , training , and maintenance to assist in preparing the uss freedom for deployment in march 2013 .