ii. ) accordingly , we present our estimates of the impacts of the different compact scenarios as ranges that include our initial set of estimates and the results of our sensitivity analyses . in addition , we present these estimates as changes from our 1999 baseline estimates , which represent the estimated values of farm - level and wholesale - level dairy indicators in that year in the absence of any dairy compact — our “no - compact scenario.” our estimates apply only to 1999 , and they may not represent the interregional impacts of compacts in all years . in particular , these estimates are based on data for the period prior to usda's milk marketing order regulatory reforms in january 2000 , which have affected some dairy sector indicators , such as farm - level milk prices . the spatial market equilibrium model also incorporated two additional modeling features: it simulated the processing of dairy commodities in a vertical marketing sector and used price wedges , or mark - ups , for each dairy commodity to simulate usda's classified pricing system and compacts . to generate a competitive spatial market equilibrium , the model maximized producer and consumer surpluses in each region , minus transportation costs , for the different commodities , subject to certain trade - flow and other constraints . in addition , the model allowed for classified pricing so that raw milk used for fluid milk attracted a higher price than raw milk used for manufactured dairy commodities . using an iterative technique , the model solved for regional farm - level milk prices and production , wholesale - level dairy prices and production , and interregional trade flows . this model — the ircm97 — is an earlier version of the model that we used for our analysis of interregional impacts . the model assumed intermediate - run ( 3- to 5-year ) supply and demand functions for 12 geographic regions of the country ( the current 11 usda milk marketing orders and california ) , representing different milk and dairy product supply and demand regions . in addition , cox et al . used component yield data from other researchers . features of their analysis follow: the model was an interregional , spatial equilibrium model . the model prohibited fluid milk trade between compact and noncompact regions . twelve demand relationships for dairy products were developed for the 12 regions in the model ; these demand relationships were based on consumer demand for nine distinct dairy products using national estimates of per capita wholesale demand . to link prices among the 12 regions , the model used 1995 transportation cost estimates provided by researchers at cornell university . the model used 1997 price and production data obtained from usda for developing a 1997 base year . the model added a price wedge of $2 per hundredweight to the 1997 class i differentials in each compact region . all scenarios assumed no commodity credit corporation milk price supports because these were set to expire in 2000 . under the model assumptions used , the researchers estimated the impacts of dairy compacts on farm - level prices and revenue , and commodity prices and expenditures . tables 77 and 78 provide the study's results .