chairwoman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . for further information about this testimony , please contact john stephenson , director , natural resources and environment at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov . fec has two partner levels: agency and facility . to participate , executive branch agencies or their subcomponents must register . according to epa documents , participation can provide agency officials greater assurance that the e - waste they donate to schools , or send for recycling , is ultimately disposed of in an environmentally responsible manner . for instance , in following fec guidance , participants are to provide recipients of donated equipment with instructions on how to have the equipment recycled responsibly and how to verify that responsible recycling occurs — procedures known as “downstream auditing.” when donating equipment , fec instructs agencies and facilities to ensure that recipients contact local or state environmental or solid waste agencies to obtain a database of vendors who recycle e - waste once the equipment is no longer useful to the recipient organization . fec also recommends that participating agencies and facilities instruct recipients to avoid arrangements with recyclers that are unable or unwilling to share references and cannot explain the final destination of the e - waste they collect . some of the companies were willing to export this equipment in apparent violation of u.s. law . as we showed in our august 2008 report , equipment exported to developing countries may be handled in a way that threatens human health and the environment . as we reported in november 2005 , existing federal government approaches to ensuring environmentally responsible management of electronic equipment from procurement through disposal rely heavily on two interrelated epa electronic product stewardship initiatives . the first , the electronic product environmental assessment tool ( epeat® ) , assists federal procurement officials in comparing and selecting laptop computers , desktop computers , and monitors with environmentally preferable attributes . the second , the federal electronics challenge ( fec ) , helps federal agencies fully utilize the benefits of epeat - rated electronics by providing resources to help agencies extend these products' life spans , operate them in an energy efficient way , and expand markets for recycling and recovered materials by recycling them at end of life . epeat was developed along the lines of epa's and the department of energy's ( doe ) energy star program in which the federal government rewards manufacturers of energy - efficient products that ultimately save money and protect the environment by providing them with a label for their products that certifies these benefits . epeat - registered products are awarded a bronze , silver , or gold certification for increasing levels of energy efficiency and environmental performance . using epeat , an on - line tool , federal procurement officials can evaluate the design of an electronic product for energy conservation , reduced toxicity , extended lifespan , and end of life recycling , among other things .