we agree with both points . regarding the first point , we recognize that nwis holds data that are consistently subjected to quality assurance and quality control , while storet and other databases contain some data of varying or unknown quality . regarding the second point , many federal agency officials and others noted that it would be neither realistic nor necessary to establish one database that contains all water data . rather , they generally explained that an internet - based tool that allows them to link to data sources in a particular geographic area would be both practical and sufficient . epa agreed on the need for reliable , comprehensive , and accessible data on water quality to effectively implement the watershed approach . epa noted , however , that the report should further discuss recent significant improvements to the storet system and the emphasis placed on coordination and data sharing in epa's “elements of a state monitoring and assessment program” guidance . the draft report contained some information on these issues , but we incorporated additional detail in response to epa's comments . many stakeholders use water quantity data to make decisions with important economic , environmental , and social implications . among other things , water quantity data are needed to help make water quality determinations . the quantity of water flowing through a river , for example , affects the concentration of a regulated pollutant in that river . the importance of water quantity data , however , extends beyond their impacts on pollutant concentrations . federal , state , local , tribal , and private organizations also rely heavily on water quantity data to fulfill critical responsibilities such as ensuring an adequate water supply to meet a variety of competing needs . officials at both the federal and state level most often reported that their biggest concern about water quantity data is the lack of data available to make these economically and socially important watershed management decisions . however , where data are available , there is broad consensus among federal and state data collectors we interviewed that , while not always flawless , the coordination of water quantity collection efforts is less complicated and more effective than the coordination of water quality data collection . as pressure on existing supplies continues to grow , water supply and management issues , and therefore water quantity data , are increasingly important . much as debits , credits , and savings in a financial budget need to be quantified to maintain fiscal responsibility , the nation's water supply and use need to be comprehensively quantified within the water budget context to ensure adequate availability of water as water demands fluctuate regionally because of changes in climate , urban growth patterns , agricultural practices , and energy needs . scientific water quantity data make it possible to understand and protect water for many economically , environmentally , and socially important uses such as safe drinking water , habitat for fish and wildlife , rivers and streams for recreational activities , and water allocations among competing uses by industry , agriculture , and municipalities . a broad group of stakeholders use water quantity data to support decisions concerning these uses .