however , serious inefficiencies remain . while the transfer eliminated dod's responsibility for conducting the investigations , it did not eliminate the shortage of trained investigative personnel needed to address the backlog . although dod retained the responsibility for adjudicating clearances , opm is now accountable for ensuring that investigations are completed in a timely manner . by the end of fiscal year 2005 , opm projects that it will have 6,500 of the estimated 8,000 full - time equivalent federal and contract investigators it needs to help eliminate the investigations backlog . dod has made progress and expects to continue making improvements in its support infrastructure management , but much work remains to be done . dod's support infrastructure includes categories such as force installations , central logistics , the defense health program , and central training . dod's infrastructure costs continue to consume a larger - than - necessary portion of its budget than dod believes is desirable , despite reductions in the size of the military force following the end of the cold war . for several years , dod also has been concerned about its excess facilities infrastructure , which affects its ability to devote more funding to weapon systems modernization and other critical needs . dod has reported that many of its business processes and much of its infrastructure are outdated and must be modernized . left alone , the current organizational arrangements , processes , and systems will continue to drain scarce resources . dod officials recognize that they must achieve greater efficiencies in managing their support operations . dod has achieved some operating efficiencies and reductions from such efforts as base realignments and closures , consolidations , organizational and business process reengineering , and competitive sourcing . it also has achieved efficiencies by eliminating unneeded facilities through such means as demolishing unneeded buildings and privatizing housing at military facilities . in addition , dod and the services are currently gathering and analyzing data to support a new round of base realignments and closures in 2005 and facilitating other changes as a result of dod's overseas basing study . despite this progress , much work remains for dod to transform its support infrastructure to improve operations , achieve efficiencies , and allow it to concentrate resources on the most critical needs . organizations throughout dod need to continue reengineering their business processes and striving for greater operational effectiveness and efficiency . we have found , however , that dod personnel did not always make sound use of these tools . for example , in june 2004 , we reported that more than half of the task orders to support iraq reconstruction efforts we reviewed were , in whole or in part , outside the scope of the underlying contract . in july 2004 , we found that dod personnel waived competition requirements for nearly half of the task orders reviewed . as a result of the frequent use of waivers , dod had fewer opportunities to obtain the potential benefits of competition — improved levels of service , market - tested prices , and the best overall value . we also found that dod lacked safeguards to ensure that waivers were granted only under appropriate circumstances .