registration . the copyright office examines applications for registering copyrights , along with any accompanying copies of the work ( called the deposit ) , to determine whether they satisfy statutory requirements . copyright registration is a legal formality intended to make a public record of the basic facts of a particular copyright , but is not required by law or as a condition of copyright protection . according to the copyright office , in fiscal year 2014 , the copyright office registered about 476,000 creative works for copyright , including about 219,000 literary works and 65,000 sound recordings . recordation . authors , heirs , and other parties submit a variety of documents to the copyright office for public recordation , including copyright assignments , licenses , security interests , and termination of transfers . like registration , a copyright owner is not required to record such changes to ownership , but there are certain incentives in the law for those who do . the copyright office recorded about 7,600 copyright records in fiscal year 2014 . statutory licenses . the copyright office administers several statutory licenses set forth in the copyright act that manage and disperse royalty payments , including those pertaining to copyright owners' rights related to television programming that is retransmitted by cable operators and satellite carriers . the disposition of these private funds is determined by a board of copyright royalty judges , called the copyright royalty board . the work of the board is reviewable by the register , but the board reports to the librarian as head of the agency . according to the copyright office , in fiscal year 2014 , it collected approximately $315 million in royalties and made disbursements in accordance with the decisions of the copyright royalty board . in addition to registration , recordation , and statutory licensing , the office also performs other functions . for example , the register is charged with advising congress on national and international issues relating to copyright and provides assistance to federal departments , the judiciary , and the public on such topics . the office also requests published works on behalf of the library of congress to meet the mandatory deposit provisions of the copyright act . a simplified view of the office's organization is provided in figure 1 . the seven program areas have various responsibilities related to meeting the copyright office's statutory mission . a description of the key responsibilities of each program area is found in table 1 . the copyright office also receives support from the library's administrative offices . for example: the library's office of human resources services develops policies and procedures for and supports hiring , pay , and benefits . the library's office of the chief financial officer is responsible for providing policy direction , review , and coordination of all budgetary and financial activities of the library , including the development of the budget and tracking of expenditures . the library's office of integrated support services provides assistance with procurement , physical space utilization , and management of mail .