iv ) . in addition , he provided technical comments that we incorporated where appropriate . first , epa expressed the view that its rules have resulted in better air quality nationally . epa said it was “disappointed” that we did not accurately reflect its progress in achieving environmental justice with respect to air pollution . it noted that the three rules are part of a larger program that is making significant progress in providing cleaner air nationwide . second , epa stated that in examining the agency's process for considering environmental justice , we asked the wrong question , and that we should have focused on the outcome of the rulemaking process — the rules themselves . finally , it stated that our evidence of how it considered environmental justice during the development of the three final rules did not support our conclusions and recommendations , and it provided detailed information about the efforts it took relating to environmental justice for the three final rules . we question the relevance of the information provided on air quality nationally and disagree with epa's other two points . first , in addition to the data we had already presented on the decrease in emissions of certain air pollutants , epa provided data on overall improvements in air quality , specifically the decrease in the number of areas throughout the nation that did not meet certain ambient air quality standards . however , because these data provide no detail on the conditions facing specific groups — for example , residents of areas near refineries , who might be negatively affected by the two mobile source rules — these data are not necessarily germane to environmental justice . although executive order 12898 calls on agencies to identify and address the disproportionately high and adverse effects of its programs , policies , and activities on specific groups , epa provided no information about such groups . also , we believe that epa's statement about the effect of clean air rules on national air quality at some level misses the point . second , epa suggested that it would have been more appropriate for us to look at the outcomes of its efforts than at the process that produced the outcomes . we agree with epa that outcomes are important , but it is not yet clear whether the rules we examined will address environmental justice issues effectively because the rules are being implemented over the next several years . it is also important to examine the process that led to the rules — as we did . the various process steps are intended to help ensure that epa's activities during the many phases of drafting and finalizing all rules are efficiently and effectively focused on achieving the desired outcomes . third , although epa stated that our evidence did not support our conclusions and recommendations , it did not challenge the accuracy of the information we provided on how it considered environmental justice during the many phases of developing the three final rules discussed in the body of our report and the three proposed rules discussed in appendix ii . while it provided detailed information on certain activities and the rationale for undertaking them , our report already discussed nearly all of these activities .