( see fig . in contrast to granting most of the requests for fast track designation , fda denied more than half ( or 120 ) of the 225 requests for breakthrough therapy designation that the agency received since that expedited program was established in july 2012 through the end of december 2014 . according to fda officials , most requests for this designation are denied because of poor study design associated with the request . fda granted 71 requests for breakthrough therapy designation since the program was established , including 31 requests granted in each of fiscal years 2013 and 2014 . ( see fig . according to fda data , 34 requests for breakthrough therapy designation were withdrawn by the sponsor during the period . cder's evaluation showed that information on postmarket study status ( eg , whether the study was proceeding according to schedule or was delayed ) was often outdated or otherwise inaccurate , partly due to delays in staff reviewing submissions , such as final study reports , from drug sponsors . for example , the evaluation found that over half of reviews of sponsors' submissions associated with about 1,400 postmarket studies fda requested or required from march 2008 to september 2013 were delayed or overdue . cder's evaluation also found inaccuracies in the postmarket study data , such as statuses recorded as pending or ongoing that should have been recorded as delayed , as well as delays in data entry . over a third ( 500 ) of the approximately 1,400 studies had their status updated or corrected during the course of cder's internal evaluation . of the 525 requests for fast track designation that fda granted from fiscal year 2007 through the first quarter of fiscal year 2015 , the most common product category ( with 112 requests granted ) was for antiviral drugs . for example , isentress — an antiviral drug to treat human immunodeficiency virus that was approved by fda in 2007 — used fast track designation . this product category was followed by oncology ( 81 requests granted ) , neurology ( 74 requests granted ) , anti - infectives ( 55 requests granted ) , gastroenterology and inborn errors ( 46 request granted ) , hematology ( 34 requests granted ) , and cardiovascular and renal ( 32 requests granted ) . the remaining requests that fda granted for fast track designation ( 91 requests ) were for drugs in other product categories . ( see fig . appendix i has more information on requests for fast track designation that fda granted , by product category . the most common product categories among the 71 requests for which fda granted breakthrough therapy designation from july 9 , 2012 , through december 31 , 2014 , were oncology ( 15 requests granted ) , antiviral ( 14 requests granted ) , and hematology ( 14 requests granted ) . for example , fda granted breakthrough therapy designation for the oncology drug keytruda ( a drug to treat patients with advanced melanoma who are no longer responding to other drugs ) because , according to fda , the sponsor demonstrated through preliminary clinical evidence that the drug may offer a substantial improvement over other therapies .