no results in the round . at davos in late january , the eu trade commissioner was quoted as stating that so little was being offered by other countries that the eu would stand to lose next to nothing if the doha negotiations failed . ( his official remarks since then , however , emphasize the eu's commitment to doha's success , while stressing the need for reciprocity. ) in february , wto director - general lamy indicated that without sufficiently ambitious results , there will be no doha outcome . u.s. trade representative portman has said the united states is committed to doing everything it can to bring an agreement together . yet he added that if the doha negotiations are not concluded by the end of 2006 , “there is a real danger the doha round could drift into a long , unpredictable period of stagnation.” some analysts and business groups also warn the round has gone off course for lack of political will , and accepting various premises for avoiding liberalization ; they say that a pause or collapse would be better than reaching a “bad deal.” yet a complete collapse of the doha round is generally seen as the least desirable outcome by observers , who believe that members will try to avoid total failure because so much is at stake . in addition to forfeiting the economic and welfare gains expected from doha's successful conclusion , wto director - general lamy and numerous observers warn that failure to achieve agreement may pose risks to the credibility of the wto as an effective or even relevant institution . although the wto itself — with its extensive set of binding commitments and vast coverage in terms of country membership and world trade volume — would no doubt continue , experts caution that doha's failure could strain the global trading system . for example , director - general lamy has expressed the view that developing countries , particularly the smallest and weakest , would be among the biggest losers . others say one potential outcome of a failed round could be the proliferation of regional and bilateral trade agreements , further weakening the “most favored nation” principle — the concept of equal treatment for all members that is a pillar of the multilateral trading system . the united states has already announced its intention to move vigorously in 2006 to negotiate new bilateral and regional agreements . in fact , some in congress have encouraged the united states to pursue bilateral free trade agreements with countries such as korea , in part to encourage countries that are resisting liberalization at the wto to take notice . other wto functions , such as the legitimacy of the dispute settlement system , also could be weakened . negotiations continue beyond mid - 2007 with uncertain results . another possible outcome would be to continue the talks in the hope of a more robust outcome at a later date . experts note that past rounds have taken longer than originally planned , and the last round — which involved fewer countries — took 7.5 years to complete .