the expansion affected less than 21,000 beneficiaries . as of september 2001 , the seven mcos that had contracted to serve additional geographic areas had enrolled a total of about 12,000 beneficiaries . about half of these beneficiaries ( 5,968 ) were enrolled in st. joseph healthcare . this mco had intended to discontinue service in four counties in new mexico as of january 2001 . following bipa , the mco reversed its earlier decision and proposed including the four counties in its service area . st. joseph healthcare obtained permission from hcfa to serve the four counties during january and february . thus , st. joseph healthcare operated without a disruption in service . the other three mcos that reentered previously served counties had to disenroll their members in those counties at the end of december 2000 and could not reenroll them until march 2001 when the bipa payment increase went into effect . many of the disenrolled beneficiaries did not return to their original plans . as of september 2001 , these three mcos had enrolled about 2,200 beneficiaries in the affected counties — substantially less than their combined enrollment level at the end of 2000 . the four mcos that expanded their service areas had not enrolled many beneficiaries as of september 2001 . however , one of the four mcos had only begun service in its expansion area during september . the four mcos' aggregate enrollment increased by approximately 460 beneficiaries in the counties affected by the expansions . these amounts ranged from about $5 to $37 pmpm . for approximately 10 percent of their plans , mcos applied some ( 2 percent to 78 percent ) of the payment increase to a benefit stabilization fund for the plan . among these plans , the median contribution was 34 percent of the bipa payment increase . the dollar contributions for these plans ranged from less than $1 pmpm to $55 pmpm with a median contribution of $9 pmpm . mcos have always had the option of placing a portion of a plan's medicare payments into a benefit stabilization fund . historically , however , mcos have not used this option but instead used the full payment amount to cover costs in the current year . an industry trade association has suggested that some mcos may have used the benefit stabilization funds in 2001 because of the short time frames associated with the implementation of the bipa payment changes . according to the association , some mcos may have decided they had too little time to renegotiate provider contracts or to change their health plans' benefit packages . hcfa then spent two months reviewing and approving the contracts . under bipa's time frames , the process — hcfa' development and announcement of the new county rates , mcos' preparation and submission of contract proposals , and hcfa's review and approval of those proposals — happened within six weeks . mcos reported that some or all of the bipa payment increase would be used to stabilize or enhance beneficiary access to providers for the majority of their m+c plans .