they are both being wound down by ncua . credit unions that triggered pca had mixed results . our analysis of credit unions that underwent pca indicates corrective measures that were triggered earlier were generally associated with more favorable outcomes . however , the program was later revised so that any unsecured debt issued after june 2010 would mature no later than september 2012 . ncua stated that this revision was necessary to focus on short - term liquidity needs and bring the program's deadline in line with its other stabilization efforts ( see fig . share guarantee program . this program largely mirrors the liquidity guarantee program . that is , ncua guaranteed credit union shares in excess of $250,000 through february 2009 , with the option of continuing participation in the program through december 2010 . ncua revised the program in may 2009 to extend the program's deadline to december 2012 and shortened the length of the program's coverage to shares with maturities of 2 years or less ( see fig . in mid - 2009 , ncua transferred obligations from both the liquidity guarantee and share guarantee programs to the stabilization fund to limit ncusif's losses stemming from any future corporate losses . we obtained and analyzed ncua data related to conservatorships and resolution actions taken from january 2008 to june 2011 to determine the number and causes of corporates' and credit union failures . we further assessed credit union member business loan participation as a percentage of total loans for both failed and their peer credit unions that did not fail from december 2005 to january 2011 . to identify credit union failures related to fraud , we reviewed data , analyzed reports and documents by ncua and its oig on each of the failed credit unions from january 2008 to june 2011 . corporates are owned by and serve credit unions . through these bridge institutions , ncua managed the corporates' illiquid assets and maintained payment services to the member credit unions . the member credit unions must provide sufficient capital to acquire the operations of these bridge institutions from ncua . third , ncua established a securitization program to provide long - term funding for the legacy assets formerly held in the securities portfolios of certain corporate credit unions by issuing ncua - guaranteed notes . ncua's analysis showed that mbs were trading at market prices considerably below the intrinsic value that would eventually be received by long - term investors . ncua used a method similar to the “good bank - bad bank” model that the federal deposit insurance corporation has sometimes adopted with insolvent banks to remove illiquid or “bad” assets from the failed corporates . in particular , ncua transferred the corporates' assets into asset management estates , also known as liquidation estates . using these estates , ncua held and isolated the corporates' illiquid assets ( i.e. , mbs ) from the bridge institutions and issued the ncua - guaranteed notes . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we also verified the status of ncua's implementation of oig recommendations through a documentation review and interviews with ncua oig officials and relevant ncua officials . appendix ii contains additional details of our scope and methodology .