while all military branches were represented , we cannot generalize from this information . because the military experiences of the members in each branch are different , some branches tailor the content of transition services to better meet the needs of their service members . for example , the army believes that many of its separating soldiers need additional employment - related assistance and more individualized attention . a large number of the army's separating service members have held combat - related jobs , which provide skills that have limited transferability to jobs in the civilian labor market . further , many of these soldiers are young and have little civilian work experience . several service members told us that they had pursued or planned to pursue additional job - related transition assistance offered at their locations . some service members also found other transition assistance informative , such as financial planning , stress management , and va benefit information . service members told us , however , that earlier access to this assistance would enable them to better utilize it and smaller class sizes would allow them adequate time for questions and answers . in 1999 , dol sponsored a study to assess the attitudes and opinions of participants in the transition assistance workshop . twenty - one focus groups of persons who had attended a transition assistance workshop in the prior month were asked about the structure and content of the workshops and the extent to which they felt their participation helped prepare them to find civilian employment . participants generally agreed that the services they received contributed to their knowledge and confidence about transitioning to civilian life . many participants felt that attendance in the workshop should be mandatory and that receiving the service earlier in an individual's military career would be beneficial . while participants generally appear to find assistance helpful , much less is known about the ultimate impact of transition services on employment or other outcomes , such as education and retention . two studies conducted about 10 years ago found limited impact of transition assistance on employment . an early dol evaluation required by the congress assessed the impact of the pilot transition assistance program on service members who transitioned to civilian life in 1992 . this study compared a sample of those who had attended a transition assistance workshop with those who had not to analyze whether transition assistance had any effect on post military job search and employment . although both groups were found to have similar aspirations for jobs , careers and salaries , the results indicated little difference between the employability of those who had taken the workshop and those who had not . however , the study noted that service members who received transition assistance found jobs 3 to 7 weeks earlier than those who had not . the army sponsored an evaluation of its job assistance centers to determine whether services provided at these centers affect soldiers' employment outcomes .