mitigate . this may be an appropriate response where there are actions or techniques that will reduce the likelihood of the risk event and its impact , should it occur . watch . this may be an appropriate response where a trigger event can be identified far enough in advance so that mitigation activities can be delayed until then . accept . this may be an appropriate response where the probability and potential impact of the risk is so low that mitigation actions do not appear necessary or the impact can be absorbed if the risk occurs . as of december 2018 , the bureau planned to mitigate 67 percent of the active risks it had identified ( see table 1 ) . notably , this signifies that the bureau determined there were actions it could take or techniques it could employ to reduce the likelihood of the majority of risks to the enumeration or their impact , should they occur . the bureau's decennial risk management plan sets out the following requirements for developing mitigation and contingency plans: mitigation plans are required for all active portfolio risks and for all active program risks with a mitigate risk response . contingency plans are required for all active portfolio risks with a high - or medium - priority rating , and a moderate or higher likelihood of occurrence . contingency plans are also required for active program risks with a high - or medium - priority rating , a moderate or higher likelihood of occurrence , and a risk response of mitigate or accept . of the 360 active risks to the census as of december 2018 , 242 ( 67 percent ) met the bureau's criteria for requiring a mitigation plan ( see table 2 ) . according to the bureau's risk registers , 232 of these risks ( 96 percent ) had a mitigation plan . in addition , 146 of the active risks ( 41 percent ) met the bureau's criteria for requiring a contingency plan . according to the bureau's risk registers , 102 of these risks ( 70 percent ) had a contingency plan . our prior reporting similarly found that earlier in the decennial cycle , the bureau did not have mitigation and contingency plans for all risks that required them . in november 2012 , we found that the bureau had mitigation and contingency plans for each of the portfolio risks it had identified at the time , but none for the program risks . we reported that such plans were needed to help the bureau fully manage associated risks , and we recommended that the bureau develop risk mitigation and contingency plans for all program risks . in april 2014 , the bureau provided us with program - level risk registers that contained both risk mitigation and contingency plans where appropriate , and we closed the recommendation as implemented . however , as of december 2018 , the bureau is missing required mitigation and contingency plan for both portfolio and program risks . example of 2020 census risk without required contingency plan in july 2016 , the bureau added a risk titled , major disasters , to its portfolio risk register .