( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to opm for its review and comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix iv , opm partially concurred with both of our recommendations . with respect to our first recommendation , opm stated that it agrees that finalized guidance on retaining conversion case files should specifically list information that must be documented in opm's case files . however , opm stated that it does not agree with the implication that its current guidance lacks information about the material that must be maintained in case files . opm noted that its political conversion standard operating procedures provide a description for the file organization and lists the contents to be stored in each case file , including a file for contents for the pre - appointment checklists . it also noted that while its guidance does not list each individual document to file , opm maintains the documents submitted by the requesting agency and additional information obtained during the review process to support opm's decision . opm stated that in situations involving extensive file transactions , it allows agencies the flexibility to grant its evaluators access to automated hiring systems to conduct pre - or post - appointment reviews . it also stated it exercises discretion and provides exceptions to maintaining voluminous or large sized files reviewed in automated hiring systems , when it is burdensome or impractical to store them in opm's files . finally , opm stated that its evaluators review checklists , which are filed in the case file , and capture the review and analysis of that documentation . we acknowledge opm's standard operating procedures include information about documents that must be maintained in case files . these procedures — which opm provided after submitting comments on a draft of this report — include a description of the file organization and broad categories of information to be stored in each case file , such as contents for pre - appointment checklists submitted by agencies and additional documents reviewed . opm's procedures also describe roles and responsibilities for staff involved in political conversion reviews . for example , opm's lead coordinator for political conversions and an evaluator assigned to the case are expected to ensure that opm has received all documentation from the agency submitting the conversion request . an evaluator also reviews the agency's documentation and completes a review checklist to determine whether the request complies with merit system principles and appropriate laws , rules , and regulations , and if it is free of political influence . however , the procedures do not list the specific documents obtained from agency submissions and automated hiring systems opm should save in its case files . for example , the procedures do not list specific agency documents described in review checklists used by evaluators to review conversion requests , such as job opportunity announcements used to solicit applications or documentation used to adjudicate veterans' preference . as noted above , as opm drafts the records schedule on retaining conversion case files for maintaining files from conversion requests , it can specify information that must be saved from agencies' automated systems to ensure such documentation is available for subsequent review .