b . execution: is the study well executed ? is the study's methodology consistent with the study's objectives ? are the study's objectives addressed ? were the models used to support the analyses appropriate for their intended purpose ? were the data used valid for the study's purposes ? were the data used sufficiently reliable for the study's purposes ? were any data limitations identified , and was the impact of the limitations adequately explained ? were any modeling or simulation limitations identified , explained , and justified ? have the models used in the study been described and documented adequately ? c. presentation of results: are the results timely , complete , accurate , concise , and relevant to the client and stakeholders ? do the results of the modeling support the report findings ? does the report present an assessment that is well documented ? are the study results presented in the report in a clear manner ? in addition to the individual named above , key contributors to this report were tom gosling ( assistant director ) ; james ashley ; timothy carr ; farrah graham ; foster kerrison ; amie lesser ; amanda manning ; ruben montes de oca ; terry richardson ; ben sclafani ; michelle a. vaughn ; cheryl weissman ; and michael willems . see 37 u.s.c . § 474 , et seq . the secretary of defense ( osd ) and service officials , and we asked them to identify any program or policy changes that would have affected pcs costs , as well as any external factors — such as decisions to change the number of overseas locations — that may have influenced pcs costs during this timeframe . we also reviewed the results of our analysis of pcs moves and costs , identified specific areas of relatively large increases or decreases over time , and discussed these changes with osd and service officials to obtain additional context for the changes we identified . to evaluate the extent to which military personnel are meeting time - on - station requirements by either reaching minimum time - on - station lengths or receiving exceptions and waivers to make a pcs move earlier than planned , we obtained and analyzed available data from the military services on time - on - station lengths and associated waivers and exceptions . we asked each of the services to provide the average and median time - on - station for officer and enlisted personnel for operational and rotational moves . we also asked for these data to be broken out by rank and job specialty , and for data on the number of moves that required waivers and exceptions . the services used existing databases — the army's total army personnel database , the navy's enlisted assignment information system and officer assignment information system , the air force's military personnel data system , and the marine corps' total force data warehouse — to produce summary time - on - station data . to assess the reliability of the databases , we reviewed policies and procedures related to the respective databases , and we interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about these data .