most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comments . given the importance of the optimization initiative , this report responds to the committees' request that we review federal agencies' data center optimization progress . the specific objectives of this review were to ( 1 ) assess agencies' progress against omb's data center optimization targets , ( 2 ) identify agencies' notable optimization successes and challenges , and ( 3 ) evaluate the extent to which agencies are able to effectively measure server utilization . to address the first objective , we analyzed 24 dcoi agencies' february 2017 data center optimization progress information from the it dashboard — an omb public website that provides information on federal agencies' major it investments . we then compared the agencies' optimization progress information against omb's fiscal year 2018 optimization targets , as documented in its august 2016 memorandum . we also reviewed the 24 agencies' dcoi strategic plans , as of april 2017 , to obtain information regarding their fiscal years 2017 and 2018 plans to meet or not meet omb's optimization targets . in written comments , epa did not state whether the agency agreed or disagreed with our recommendation , but described planned actions to implement it . specifically , the agency detailed plans to address omb's requirements , such as leveraging epa's current investment in a network monitoring tool and the intent to procure and deploy a data center infrastructure management tool by the end of fiscal year 2018 . however , epa also noted that budget cuts may delay the agency's efforts to fully implement the requirements of dcoi . as noted earlier , because of the potential efficiency and savings from data center optimization , we believe epa should devote the necessary resources to ensure that automated monitoring tools are installed at all department - owned data centers by the end of fiscal year 2018 , as required by omb . epa's written comments are reprinted in appendix xi . in written comments , gsa stated that it agreed with our recommendation and that it plans to install automated monitoring tools by the end of fiscal year 2018 . gsa's comments are reprinted in appendix xii . in written comments , nrc stated that it was in general agreement with our findings . the agency did not state whether it agreed or disagreed with our recommendation , but described actions planned to address it . specifically , the agency stated that it plans to install automated monitoring tools in all of its tiered data centers . the agency added that it is planning to close its non - tiered data centers . nrc's comments are reprinted in appendix xiii . in written comments , opm stated that the agency partially concurred with our recommendation . specifically , the agency stated that it plans to consolidate its remaining data centers into two main locations by the end of fiscal year 2018 . opm further stated that this consolidation will obviate the need to implement automated monitoring tools at the data centers that are closing . finally , the agency noted that it is implementing automated monitoring tools at the designated core data centers . we encourage opm's efforts to continue to consolidate its data centers .