, communities ) that we interviewed . fra is not required to participate in diagnostic reviews . the notice of intent provides railroads and state agencies with an opportunity to provide comments and recommendations on the quiet zone . this cost includes reviewing quiet zone applications , participating in diagnostic reviews when invited , and the time gcms or other fra staff spends providing technical assistance to public authorities and others on establishing quiet zones . while public authorities are generally responsible for paying the costs to establish quiet zones , about half of the public authorities we interviewed ( 10 of 13 ) said they obtained funding from outside sources to help pay for the zones , for example: federal funds: six of the public authorities we interviewed reported receiving federal funds to help establish their quiet zones . in particular , one public authority that we interviewed reported receiving a $3.3 million transportation investment generating economic recovery grant to establish a quiet zone . we also discussed with fra program officials the methodologies used to prepare these studies , and concerns with the data , conclusions , and plans to conduct future analyses . to assess the reliability and methodological soundness of the studies , we used the same approach as above . we are encouraged that fra is willing to consider revising its methodology for analyzing the safety of grade crossings in quiet zones . however , we continue to believe that our recommendation is valid and that to fully understand quiet zone safety fra needs to revise its methodology to account for relevant characteristics of quiet — zone grade crossings . as we state in the report , the reliability of fra's current methodology will likely decrease over time because it does not control for relevant changes to grade crossings in quiet zones including changes to vehicle or train traffic or speeds . these and other factors are critical determinants of grade - crossing safety . further , developing a methodology that incorporates characteristics that affect safety at grade crossings in quiet zones may also provide fra insight into the safety of grade crossings more generally . ccm is a correspondence management system which includes all data on quiet zones — such as the establishment date and grade crossings included , among others . this information is contained in the notice of quiet zone establishment that the public authority establishing the quiet zone is required to provide to fra . alternatively , the safety data analysis website contains two datasets: the grade crossing inventory system ( gcis ) and the railroad accident / incident reporting system ( rairs ) . the gcis contains information on every crossing in the nation and was used to identify the characteristics of the individual crossings within the quiet zone , whereas the rairs contains details about each crossing collision incident that has occurred . to assess the reliability of the data used in our review , we examined fra reports , reviewed prior gao data reliability material , and interviewed fra stakeholders about how the data were collected , stored , and used . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our objectives .