while an ssae no . 16 examination is intended to provide assurance regarding the control environment of the service providers , the fiar effort is intended , among other things , to provide assurance that the components are ready for a financial statement audit . to do this , the components must be aware of the impact of the deficiencies in the service provider's control environment so that they can assess their risks and identify and implement compensating controls if needed . because dfas did not adequately classify the identified deficiencies and assess their related impact to the components , dod components will not be able to obtain a complete understanding of the impact of the deficiencies identified by dfas on their own control environments and design and implement compensating controls to mitigate the effect of dfas's control deficiencies on their financial operations . dfas notified the fiar directorate that it had implemented the necessary corrective action plans and developed an audit readiness strategy ; however , we found that dfas did not ( 1 ) take the necessary corrective actions or maintain sufficient documentation for 18 of 25 deficiencies dfas reported as remediated that we reviewed and ( 2 ) properly update the corrective action phase section of its fip status report . dfas's audit strategy consisted of its contract pay fip undergoing an ssae no . 16 examination and , as stated earlier , dfas evaluating the three processes excluded from its contract pay fip for each of the components to support their audit readiness efforts . however , dfas did not provide documentation ( an updated conops or memorandum of understanding ) to show that it had coordinated with the components to determine how it would support their audit readiness efforts for those processes excluded from the fip as required by the fiar guidance . further , additional deficiencies may exist in dfas's contract pay processes and systems that were not considered during the corrective action phase because , as discussed previously , dfas did not ( 1 ) validate the population used to perform internal control and substantive testing and ( 2 ) perform sufficient general control and application - level testing . as a result of these deficiencies , dfas's contract pay fip did not provide sufficient assurance that all the deficiencies that may materially affect the accuracy and reliability of its contract pay transaction data had been fully remediated . the fiar directorate reviewed the dfas's supporting documentation for its contract pay fip and authorized dfas to undergo an ssae no . 16 examination . dfas reported that it had developed and implemented corrective actions to remediate 393 of the 399 deficiencies it identified as part of the discovery phase . dfas officials stated that for the 6 deficiencies that were not remediated as part of the contract pay fip , dfas will either address the deficiencies subsequent to its audit readiness assertion or rely on other components to address these deficiencies . the fiar guidance requires service providers to remediate each identified deficiency before asserting that they are audit ready . in addition , 2 of these 6 deficiencies were determined by the fiar directorate to be material .