these weaknesses had not been effectively mitigated . we have previously reported a similar weakness and recommended that irs revise its remedial action verification process to ensure actions are fully implemented , but the condition continued to exist . until irs takes additional steps to fully implement our previous recommendation of improving its remedial action process , it will have limited assurance that weaknesses are being properly corrected and that controls are operating effectively . continuity of operations planning , which includes developing and testing contingency plans and disaster recovery plans , is a critical component of information protection . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , and the treasury inspector general for tax administration . the report also is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . a basic element of cryptography is encryption . encryption can be used to provide basic data confidentiality and integrity by transforming plain text into cipher text using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . the internal revenue manual requires the use of encryption for transferring sensitive but unclassified information between irs facilities . the national security agency also recommends disabling protocols that do not encrypt information transmitted across the network . irs configured routers to use protocols that allow unencrypted transmission of sensitive information . for example , 18 routers we reviewed at the three computing centers used a protocol that was configured to authenticate information using plain text . in addition , irs did not use encryption for routing table messages for six routers we reviewed at two of the centers . enabling encryption on routing table messages helps to prevent someone from purposely or accidentally adding an unauthorized router to the network and either corrupting routing tables or launching a denial of service attack . further , irs had not corrected a previously identified weakness related to encrypting administrator login data to a key application . by not encrypting these data , irs is at increased risk that an unauthorized individual could view and then use the data to gain unwarranted access to its system and / or sensitive information . to establish individual accountability , monitor compliance with security policies , and investigate security violations , it is crucial to know what , when , and by whom specific actions have been taken on a system . organizations accomplish this by implementing system or security software that provides an audit trail , or logs of system activity , that they can use to determine the source of a transaction or attempted transaction and to monitor users' activities . the way in which organizations configure system or security software determines the nature and extent of information that can be provided by the audit trail . to be effective , organizations should configure their software to collect and maintain audit trails that are sufficient to track security - relevant events . the internal revenue manual requires that audit records be created , protected , and retained to enable the monitoring , analysis , investigation , and reporting of unlawful , unauthorized , or inappropriate information system activity .