illiteracy . widespread illiteracy among afghan army and police personnel substantially impaired equipment accountability . for example , a mentor noted that illiteracy in one afghan national army corps was directly interfering with the ability of supply section personnel to implement property accountability processes and procedures , despite repeated training efforts . poor security . some afghan national police units did not have facilities adequate to ensure the physical security of weapons and protect them against theft in a high - risk environment . in a northern province , for example , a contractor reported that the arms room of one police district office was behind a wooden door that had only a miniature padlock , and that this represented the same austere conditions as in the other districts . unclear guidance . afghan government logistics policies were not always clear to afghan army and police property managers . approved ministry of interior policies outlining material accountability procedures were not widely disseminated , and many police logistics officers did not recognize any of the logistical policies as rule . additionally , a mentor to the afghan national army told us that despite new ministry of defense decrees on accountability , logistics officers often carried out property accountability functions using soviet - style accounting methods and that the ministry was still auditing army accounts against those defunct standards . corruption . reports of alleged theft and unauthorized resale of weapons are common , including one case in which an afghan police battalion commander in one province was allegedly selling weapons to enemy forces . desertion . desertion in the afghan national police has also resulted in the loss of weapons . for example , contractors reported that afghan border police officers at one province checkpoint deserted to ally themselves with enemy forces and took all their weapons and two vehicles with them . in july 2007 , defense began issuing night vision devices to the afghan national army . these devices are considered dangerous to the public and u.s. forces in the wrong hands , and defense guidance calls for intensive monitoring of their use , including tracking by serial number . however , we found that cstc - a did not begin monitoring the use of these sensitive devices until october 2008 — about 15 months after issuing them . defense and cstc - a attributed the limited monitoring of these devices to a number of factors , including a shortage of security assistance staff and expertise at cstc - a , exacerbated by frequent cstc - a staff rotations . after we brought this to cstc - a's attention , it conducted an inventory and reported in december 2008 that all but 10 of the 2,410 night vision devices issued had been accounted for . we previously reported that defense cited significant shortfalls in the number of trainers and mentors as the primary impediment to advancing the capabilities of ansf . according to cstc - a officials , as of december 2008 , cstc - a had only 64 percent of the nearly 6,700 personnel it required to perform its overall mission , including only about half of the over 4,000 personnel needed to mentor ansf units .