we disagree . while state / s / crs had taken some steps to increase its monitoring of section 1207 projects , it had neither systematically analyzed embassy reports on the effectiveness of section 1207 projects nor provided these reports to its dod counterparts responsible for the projects' funding . accordingly , we do not believe that these efforts justified the additional fees this office charged beyond those that state and usaid already charged to implement the projects . usaid noted in its written comments that our report highlights several issues of interest to all agencies participating in the section 1207 process and that usaid looks forward to continuing to refine its business processes based on our review . we are sending copies of the report to the secretaries of defense and state and other interested parties or interested congressional committees . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8979 or at christoffj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix viii . our review encompassed all projects funded by the department of defense ( dod ) under authorities in sections 1206 and 1207 of the national defense authorization act of fiscal year 2006 , as amended , during fiscal years 2006 through 2009 . for more in - depth project review , we focused on 18 of the 62 countries receiving assistance under these programs: albania , the bahamas , georgia , haiti , kazakhstan , malaysia , and the philippines , where we visited with u.s. embassy officials and host country officials , as well as implementing partner representatives in section 1207 recipient countries ; ethiopia , pakistan , and uganda , where we interviewed u.s. embassy officials in conjunction with other gao work ; and honduras , kenya , lebanon , mali , mexico , nigeria , sri lanka , and ukraine , where we conducted interviews with security assistance officers ( sao ) or other project managers via telephone . to select countries to visit , we ranked all 62 countries based on the following criteria: ( 1 ) the amount of section 1206 and 1207 program funding a country had received in order to include countries representing a significant portion of total funding , as well as both large and small individual projects from each program ; ( 2 ) the year when a country's projects began , in order to visit mature projects ; ( 3 ) the presence of both section 1206 and section 1207 projects in a country , in order to use our time efficiently in visiting projects from both programs in single country visits ; ( 4 ) dod and state suggestions ; ( 5 ) recent gao or dod and state inspectors general visits , to reduce the burden on embassies ; ( 6 ) congressional interest ; ( 7 ) security considerations ; and ( 8 ) opportunities to consolidate the fieldwork of multiple gao engagements .