resource needs . the plan does not discuss resources needed to implement improvement efforts . as noted , an effective strategic planning process should be able to link resource needs to performance , prioritize initiatives and resources , establish investment priorities , and guide key resource decisions . in the absence of more detailed information in these areas , the usefulness of the logistics strategic plan for decision making may be limited . measuring performance , for example , allows for tracking progress toward goals and gives managers crucial information on which to base their decisions . in addition , if the plan included information on problems , capability gaps , and resource needs , managers could use the plan as a basis for establishing priorities for formulating , funding , and implementing corrective actions . dod has recognized the need to include some of this information , and the plan states dod's intent to establish baseline performance and then measure that performance against interim targets through an annual assessment process . although the logistics strategic plan is linked to some broader strategic plans , it does not show explicit links with other strategic plans of supply chain or logistics defense components , and the link between that plan and some major logistics activities is not clear . these plans and activities could have a major role in shaping future logistics capabilities and functions . we have reported on some of these issues . for example , we reported in 2009 that dod has taken steps to implement automatic identification technologies , such as item unique identification and passive radio frequency identification , to identify and track equipment and supplies , but has experienced difficulty in fully demonstrating return on investment to the military services responsible for implementation . the logistics strategic plan also includes some information on how dod plans to track progress . the plan lists success indicators and performance measures under each goal , and it states that the plan will be implemented by following the performance management framework found in the strategic management plan . this framework contains six steps: plan , set targets , cascade measures , align processes , assess and report , and correct . such information is necessary to establish a clear and common understanding of what problems and gaps the plan is trying to address . for example , the plan does not discuss logistics problems encountered during operations in iraq and afghanistan . however , this concept is not discussed in the logistics strategic plan . the purpose of this concept is to guide development and employment of future joint supply capabilities . it is not clear how the logistics strategic plan will be used within the existing logistics governance framework to assist decision makers and influence resource decisions and priorities . we raised a similar concern about the 2008 logistics roadmap . while the joint logistics board and other bodies may play critical roles in dod's supply chain management improvement efforts , their roles are not defined in the plan . in addition , the organizations responsible for key initiatives included in the plan are not identified . similarly , the plan does not clearly define how oversight of plan implementation will occur .