i will be happy to answer any questions you may have . usaid did not consistently document decisions made . for example , staff working in afghanistan had no documented assessments for modifications to the largest usaid - funded united nations office for project services ( unops ) project in afghanistan — rehabilitation of secondary roads — even though these modifications increased the scope and budget of the program by more than ten times its original amount . furthermore , usaid and other u.s. agencies in afghanistan lack a sufficient number of acquisition and oversight personnel with experience working in contingency operations . this problem is exacerbated by the lack of mechanisms for retaining and sharing institutional knowledge during transitions of usaid personnel and the rate at which usaid staff turn over , which usaid acknowledged as hampering program design and implementation . in addition , the state department office of inspector general noted in its february 2010 inspection of the u.s. embassy to afghanistan and its staff that 1-year assignments , coupled with multiple rest - and - recuperation breaks , limited the development of expertise , contributed to a lack of continuity , and required a higher number of personnel to achieve strategic goals . the usaid monitoring officials for the eight agricultural programs we focused on during our review of usaid's agricultural development efforts in afghanistan were in place , on average , 7.5 months ( see table 1 ) . moreover , the length of time that a monitoring official was in place has declined . the two most recently initiated agricultural programs have had monitoring officials in place for an average of only 3 months each . usaid officials noted that the effectiveness of passing information from one monitoring official to another is dependent on how well the current official has maintained his or her files and what guidance , if any , is left for their successor . usaid officials noted that a lack of documentation and knowledge transfer may have contributed to the loss of institutional knowledge . we reported in april 2010 that usaid used contractors to help administer its contracts and grants in afghanistan , in part to address frequent rotations of government personnel and security and logistical concerns . functions performed by these contractors included on - site monitoring of other contractors' activities and awarding and administering grants . while relying on contractors to perform such functions can provide benefits , we found that usaid did not always fully address related risks . for example , usaid did not always include a contract clause required by agency policy to address potential conflicts of interest , and usaid contracting officials generally did not ensure enhanced oversight in accordance with federal regulations for situations in which contractors provided services that closely supported inherently governmental functions . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .