purpose . the purposes of temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) and the community services block grant ( csbg ) are broad and can be used to support families in multiple ways . for example , csbg's purposes are , among other things , to reduce poverty , revitalize low - income communities , and empower low - income individuals and families to become fully self - sufficient . in addition , according to hhs , these two broad programs allow state and local agencies to cover costs that other programs do not allow , such as salaries for staff to design the two - generation approach . among the 23 state and local entities , officials from the three entities that reported using csbg and seven of the 11 that reported using tanf said that they used the programs in combination with other federal programs that have more limited purposes . the other programs can be used to provide more specific supports , such as developing child care programs , increasing employment and earnings , alleviating hunger , or improving maternal and child health . benefits or services provided . a range of benefits and services for both children and parents are available across the 10 federal programs , such as child care , food assistance , and job skills training . to create their two - generation approach , state and local entities can , to the extent permitted by law , combine services from multiple programs to provide a coordinated approach to addressing the needs of the entire family . in fact , according to hhs , combining services from multiple programs is common in two - generation approaches because single programs tend to cover only one type of service or may be for parents or children instead of both . in addition to the 10 most commonly cited federal programs , state and local entities reported using over 40 other federal programs to support their two - generation approaches ( see appendix ii ) . for example , one entity has a housing complex for single parents and their children . the families receive hud section 8 project - based rental assistance , and the entity also provides support services such as child care , parenting classes , and financial counseling . two entities reported using medicaid — one of the nation's largest sources of funding for medical and other health - related services for low - income individuals . there may be additional federal programs beyond those cited that could be used for two - generation approaches that selected state and local entities did not report using . for example , hhs officials told us that the social services block grant could be used for two - generation approaches because it is one of the most flexible sources of social services funding . hud officials said the family self - sufficiency program provides case management services and could be used for two - generation approaches . however , none of the 23 selected state and local entities reported using either program . we found that selected entities leveraged the 10 most commonly cited federal programs in different ways to meet the unique needs of their individual communities .