doe . the office of project management participates in a number of the mox project's oversight activities . in particular , the office has led independent reviews of the mox project to validate its cost and schedule estimates and has conducted certification and surveillance reviews of the mox contractor's earned value management ( evm ) system . nnsa . subsequent to its establishment in 2000 , several nnsa offices have provided overall direction to , and oversight of , the contractor for the mox project , including the office of fissile materials disposition and the office of defense nuclear nonproliferation . in november 2011 , after starting to place increased emphasis on improving its management of projects , the newly created office of acquisition and project management began providing overall direction to , and oversight of , the contractor for the mox project . in march 2013 , the office of acquisition and project management established the nnsa mox project management office at the savannah river site to lead the onsite project and contract management direction , administration , and oversight of the mox project . mox services . as the contractor for the mox project , mox services is responsible for designing , constructing , and operating the mox facility . mox services has also subcontracted work to complete certain construction activities , such as the fabrication of specific types of equipment , including the complex gloveboxes needed for handling plutonium and the heating , ventilation , and air conditioning systems . figure 2 depicts the roles of , and interrelation among and between , doe , nnsa , and the mox contractor in overseeing the mox project . according to key practices that we and others have identified for both program and project management , it is important to identify and apply lessons learned from programs , projects , and missions to limit the chance of recurrence of previous failures or difficulties . project management principles state that effective project management helps organizations to , among other things , increase the chances of success ; resolve problems and issues ; and identify , recover , or terminate failing projects . after nnsa's project peer reviews and the mox contractor's proposed update to the project's cost and schedule estimate showed the significant likelihood of additional cost growth and schedule delays , nnsa proposed slowing down construction of the mox facility in 2013 and ultimately terminated the project in october 2018 . as outlined in doe order 413.3b , doe requires that project management staff document and share project management lessons learned on capital asset projects like mox but does not require that all project management lessons learned from capital asset projects be documented consistently or shared in a timely manner . moreover , doe order 413.3b does not require the evaluation of the results of corrective actions taken in response to lessons learned that are identified during the course of capital asset projects such as the mox project to ensure that the problems experienced are resolved department - wide . doe's requirements for capital asset projects , as outlined in order 413.3b , specify that project management lessons learned should be captured — that is , documented — throughout the continuum of a project .