donations . administrative receive state approval to operate . ensure all promotional materials include required language . scholarship awards . academic follow guidelines for school curriculum or core subjects . follow guidelines for minimum instructional time or attendance . donations: donors contributed over $68 million during calendar year 2017 . the program is open to individual donors only ( business donors may fingerprinting for staff . donate through other arizona programs. ) financial follow requirements if students withdraw ( eg , report or repay ) . donations are eligible for 100 percent tax credits . the program does not limit annual program - wide donations . individual donors ( filing as single ) were limited to $569 in tax credits during tax year 2019 . scholarship awards: 34,632 scholarships were awarded between july 1 , 2017 and june 30 , 2018 . 1 and app . of the 17 states operating these programs , arizona , florida , and pennsylvania operate the largest programs in terms of both dollars donated and number of scholarships awarded . these are also the only three states that operate multiple programs per state . decisions about whether to develop and operate a tcs program — as well as how to structure requirements — are at the discretion of each state ; there is no federal role in establishing these programs . for example , states sometimes choose to establish requirements that sgos and schools must follow as a minimum condition for participation . since scholarships are funded through donations rather than state appropriations , the financial impact to states from tcs programs primarily occurs through forgone revenue resulting from the associated tax credits . various state agencies , sgos , and participating private schools generally all play a role in administering state tcs programs , with the specific division of responsibilities varying by program . state agencies that are responsible for tax administration , education , or both , generally administer these programs . for example , in some programs , state agencies disseminate information to donors , scholarship students , or the public , and approve sgos or private schools to participate in the program . sgos are tax - exempt organizations that are generally responsible for managing some aspects of the donation process — such as collecting donations — as well as awarding scholarships to students . participating private schools educate students receiving tax credit scholarships . they sometimes also facilitate donations or inform parents about tcs scholarship awards . participating schools can vary in terms of characteristics such as their size , religious affiliation , and whether they focus on specific student populations , such as students with disabilities . in september 2018 , we issued a report that described state tcs program requirements related to donations and student eligibility for programs operating at the beginning of 2018 . in that report , we found that these programs offered tax credits to individuals , businesses , or both that ranged from 50 percent to 100 percent of the donation amount . we also found that most programs set limits on the amount of tcs program donations that could be made per year .