appendix i describes how we made our estimate . the obtp updates both examinations yearly . the examinations cover specific oregon and federal personal income tax laws as well as tax theory and practice . the ltc examination also includes questions on corporation and partnership income as they relate to personal income tax returns . the examination questions pertain to approximately 75 percent federal and 25 percent state law . irs enrolled agents in oregon who wish to become ltcs must pass a shorter version of the ltc examination that is limited to oregon state laws . ( 3 ) what are the state - level costs and benefits of the paid preparer programs in california and oregon and what insights do they provide for possible benefits if congress were to enact national paid preparer registration or licensing requirements ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant documents from california , oregon , and irs , including budget and legislative material . we interviewed california and oregon state program administrators and paid preparer industry representatives in those states and nationwide . we also searched legal databases for examples of newly enacted paid preparer laws in other states and pending legislation . we also interviewed irs officials to discuss the implications of using the california or oregon regulatory regimes as possible models for federal - level paid preparer legislation . to compare tax return accuracy , we analyzed data from the national research program ( nrp ) , an irs study of reporting compliance for a random sample of individual tax returns filed for tax year 2001 . in most cases , the returns were audited to determine whether income , expenses , and other items were reported accurately by the taxpayers . we determined that the data used to characterize tax return accuracy differences between california , oregon , and the rest of the country and to describe the costs of the two state programs were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report ; we determined this after assessing the reliability of nrp data , reviewing california and oregon financial reports , and interviewing state program administrators . we conducted this performance audit from september 2007 through july 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology , see appendix i . a paid tax return preparer is anyone who is paid to prepare , assist in preparing , or review a taxpayer's tax return . in this report , we refer to two categories of paid preparers — tax practitioners and unenrolled preparers . cpas , attorneys , and enrolled agents are tax practitioners . tax practitioners can practice before irs ; practicing before irs includes the right to represent a taxpayer before the irs , to prepare and file documents with irs for the taxpayer , and to correspond and communicate with irs .