our methodology is detailed in appendix i . we did our work from june 2002 through september 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . medicare payment policies for technical pathology services have changed over the years as new payment systems for hospital and physician services have been implemented and modified . beginning with the implementation of the hospital inpatient pps on october 1 , 1983 , through the implementation of the medicare physician fee schedule ( mpfs ) on january 1 , 1992 , and the outpatient pps on august 1 , 2000 , payment for technical pathology services changed as fixed , predetermined payment replaced reasonable cost or charge - based reimbursement for medicare services . under the inpatient pps , each inpatient stay is classifed into a diagnosis - related group ( drg ) based primarily on the patient's condition . each drg has a payment weight assigned to it that reflects the relative cost of inpatient treatment for a patient in that group compared with that for the average medicare inpatient . included in the costs of each drg are nonphysician services provided to inpatients by the hospital and its outside suppliers . a hospital receives a drg payment from medicare and a deductible amount from a beneficiary for each inpatient benefit period.each year , the drg weights are recalibrated to account for changes in resource use , and the payment rate is adjusted by an update factor to account for changes in market conditions , practice patterns , and technology . medicare separately pays physicians , including pathologists , and certain other professionals for the direct services they provide to inpatients . when developing the inpatient pps in the early 1980s , hcfa determined that technical pathology services outsourced to laboratories were an integral part of the professional services provided by the laboratories' pathologists , not separate nonphysician services . based on that determination , the payment for technical pathology services provided by laboratories was included in the larger payment to the laboratories and not included in the pps payments . in 1992 , hcfa implemented the mpfs , which created distinct payments for the professional and technical components of most diagnostic services , including pathology services . although the mpfs included a distinct payment to laboratories for technical pathology services , hcfa did not revise its policy to prohibit laboratories from continuing to receive the separate medicare payment for outsourced technical pathology services provided to inpatients . under the mpfs , beneficiaries are responsible for a copayment equal to 20 percent of the payment for physician services , including technical pathology services . thus , inpatient beneficiaries whose technical pathology services were outsourced by a hospital to a laboratory that received direct payment from medicare were responsible for a copayment , while other inpatients were not . on july 22 , 1999 , hcfa proposed ending medicare payments under the mpfs to laboratories for technical pathology services provided to hospital inpatients on or after january 1 , 2000 . under the proposal , laboratories , like suppliers of other nonphysician services , would have to seek payment from hospitals for technical pathology services provided to hospital inpatients .