reservists 3 . full - time equivalent employees other than incident management at the incident , the federal coordinating officer and other field leadership staff are responsible for overseeing coordinating the responders working for fema . generally , after response operations and programs are initiated , staffing needs may change . at this point , field leadership may decide to demobilize some personnel deployed in certain cadres . the decision to do so is based on workload , complexity of operations , and disaster needs . according to fema's 2017 hurricane season after - action report , fema did not meet its annual staffing target for disaster personnel during the 2017 hurricane season . fema uses force structure and force strength targets to estimate staffing requirements for incidents and analyze the number of staff the agency has available against these targets . fema establishes a longer - term target for the number of incident management staff needed to meet mission needs , called force structure , and tracks the actual number of incident management staff who can deploy at a point in time , which it calls force strength . fema uses its force strength measure to track progress towards meeting staffing goals set out in the force structure target and also sets interim targets each fiscal year for reaching the longer - term force structure target . in 2015 , fema's workforce management division conducted a review of fema's workforce in coordination with the 23 cadres and adopted a force structure target of 16,305 . according to fema , this target was established based on a number of considerations , including potential incident levels and historical staffing data for incident management staff deployed to different level events . the agency's force strength at the end of fiscal year 2017 was 11,656 . on average , reservists had the largest gap between force strength and established annual targets . for example , at the end of fiscal year 2017 , fema's force strength for reservists was 6,793 , which was 15 percent short of its target of 7,982 for that year . in 2019 , fema's workforce management division completed a similar review of its incident management workforce and updated its force structure target to 17,670 incident management personnel , which it aims to achieve by 2025 . this new target was established using an updated methodology based on information on historical disasters and deployed incident management staff , along with input from each cadre's management and other officials with expertise on staffing patterns throughout disasters . according to fema's 2017 hurricane season after - action report , fema faced shortages across over half of its cadres when disasters made landfall or began during the 2017 season , and we found that fema faced similar shortages during the 2018 disaster season . for instance , according to fema's deployment data , 18 of 23 cadres operated with 25 percent or fewer staff available to deploy when hurricane maria made landfall shortly after hurricane irma hit florida , including the individual assistance , logistics , and hazard mitigation cadres . see figure 7 for more information on cadre staffing levels at the start of major disasters during the 2017 and 2018 disaster seasons .