education . in the annual education indicators report that it submitted to jemco from 2007 through 2011 , the fsm identified problems with the overall quality , and consistency , of the education data , as well as problems with timeliness in reporting . additionally , the reports noted the need for training of the data managers and difficulties with the data systems . in march 2012 , jemco reaffirmed the need for reliable education data to evaluate performance in a resolution that required independent verification of performance indicators and data for the education sector , which the fsm was to communicate in a report due to oia by july 1 , 2013 , prior to the august 2013 annual meeting . in april 2013 , the fsm department of education ( national government ) addressed the jemco resolution by seeking proposals to conduct an independent verification of its performance indicators and data quality . the request for proposals stated that the project period was approximately 2 months , ending july 30 , 2013 , but it did not state whether a report on the results of the project would be prepared within that time frame . health . the fsm reported on its 14 annual health indicators , comprehensively by state and for the national government , in a july 2012 report by the fsm national department of health and social affairs covering fiscal years 2004 through 2011 . the report noted limitations with some of the data , for example , that not all infant deaths in the outer islands were included in the infant mortality data . in response to the report , jemco identified concerns regarding the reliability of data reported for the health indicators . for example , jemco noted concerns about the accuracy of the reported infant mortality rates as well as the reported number of encounters for primary health care services offered in community and dispensary settings , which the fsm tracked as a proxy measure of improved community - based primary health care . in its 2012 resolution jemco reaffirmed the need for reliable and quantifiable health data to evaluate performance and also required independent verification of performance indicators and data for the health sector ; it required the fsm to submit a report on the health indicators by july 1 , 2013 . we inquired about the status of the fsm's effort to address the jemco resolution to conduct an independent verification of the health data , and the department of health and social affairs informed us that the fsm asked for an extension of the july deadline . according to oia , the fsm did not budget sufficient funds for the assessment , and that is why the fsm needed an extension . education . from fiscal years 2007 through 2011 , the rmi reported data on its annual indicators in its ministry of education annual portfolio budget statements ( hereafter , portfolios ) . the rmi ministry of education reported that data on educational indicators are entered quarterly into its data management system , and that schools generally provide their data before the established deadlines . the rmi also provided us with copies of the standard forms that it uses to collect data on educational indicators .