serv . c. 466 ( dearing ) ; 2005 ill. legis . serv . 94-163 ( west ) ; 2005 minn. laws c. 243.166 ; 2005 okla. sess . laws serv . c. 465 ( west ) . requirements in state community notification laws specifying that nursing homes and icfs - mr be notified about registered sex offenders who were residents appear to be a recent trend . for example , a 2001 review of state community notification laws by the bureau of justice statistics found that states generally did not notify nursing homes or icfs - mr when offenders entered the facilities . the other four states we reviewed — florida , new jersey , ohio , and utah — do not specifically require the notification of long - term care facilities when registered sex offenders enter them . long - term care facilities in these states , or in states where community notification of such facilities is not required for all registered sex offenders , may not be aware of residents who are offenders or must rely on other methods to identify such individuals . for instance , administrators we interviewed at 8 of the 29 long - term care facilities indicated that one or more registered sex offenders had lived in their facilities for some period . each of these 8 long - term care facilities was notified about the registered sex offenders , although the method of notification varied . for example , while 4 facilities were notified before the offenders entered them , either by offenders' family members or the state department of corrections , the 4 remaining facilities were notified after the registered sex offenders were admitted , either by local law enforcement officials who were verifying sex offenders' residential addresses or by an advocacy group conducting research on registered sex offenders living in certain long - term care facilities . long - term care facilities may access states' publicly available sex offender registry web sites to determine where registered sex offenders reside . a 2003 amendment to the wetterling program statute required states to maintain a publicly available web site with information about registered sex offenders . the law did not provide instruction on how these web sites should be designed or what specific information should be included . depending on the state , these web sites provide varying amounts of information to the public about registered sex offenders . for example , the web site registry in each of the eight states we reviewed included some address information for all or a portion of the state's adult registered sex offenders . five states we reviewed — florida , illinois , ohio , oklahoma , and utah — provided the full residential address of all the state's adult registered sex offenders , while three others — california , minnesota , and new jersey — included certain registered sex offenders on their web sites and in some cases did not always list their full addresses . for example , minnesota separates offenders into three levels and includes level 3 offenders — those deemed predatory or most likely to re - offend — on its web site .