ice . according to ice officials , rather than conducting foreign language needs assessments , ice primarily identifies its needs based on daily activities . that is , ice relies on its agents' knowledge of foreign languages they have encountered most frequently during their daily law enforcement and intelligence operations . however , ice has not collected data on what those daily needs are . without such data , ice is not in a position to comprehensively assess its language needs . according to ice officials , in 2007 , ice reinstated the spanish language requirements that were in place prior to the formation of dhs for its office of detention and removal operations . further , for its offices of investigations and intelligence , it utilizes foreign language interpreter services by contract for foreign languages necessary , including spanish . the components' efforts to assess their foreign language needs are varied and not comprehensive . specifically , the assessments have been limited to certain languages , locations , programs , and offices . as a result , component officials we spoke with identified foreign language needs that are not captured in these assessments , such as the following: in the five cbp and ice offices we visited near the mexican border , we were told that they have encountered foreign language needs for variations of spanish language skills , such as castilian , border , and slang spanish ( that is , spanish dialects in certain geographic regions that use words and phrases that are not part of the official language ) . according to ice officials , in 2009 , its office of detention and removal operations experienced a need for mandarin chinese language skills because of an influx of encounters with chinese speakers near the mexican border . however , cbp and ice have not assessed their needs for chinese speakers . in the three cbp and ice offices we visited near the canadian border , we were told that their encounters primarily involve spanish , arabic , and quebecois french speakers . however , cbp and ice have not assessed their needs for arabic and quebecois french speakers . in the seven coast guard , cbp , and ice offices we visited in the caribbean region , we were told that they primarily encounter puerto rican and slang spanish , haitian - creole , and patois . although the coast guard has assessed its need for some of these languages , cbp and ice have not assessed their needs in these languages . coast guard , cbp , and ice offices in new york report that their primary language needs include colombian spanish , arabic , chinese , urdu , and fulani . although the coast guard has assessed its need for these languages , cbp and ice have not assessed their needs for arabic , chinese , urdu , and fulani . according to dhs officials , foreign language skills are an integral part of the department's operations . coast guard , cbp , and ice officials in the seven components generally agreed that a comprehensive approach to conducting a foreign language needs assessment would be beneficial . by conducting a comprehensive assessment , dhs would be in a better position to address its foreign language needs .