consumption . to the extent economically feasible and technically practicable , not less than 7.5 percent of electrical energy consumed by federal agencies is to come from renewable sources beginning in fiscal year 2013 . according to federal guidance implementing the energy policy act of 2005 , to count toward the consumption goal , dod must possess renewable energy credits for electricity it consumes . executive order 13693 established additional goals , including directing agency heads to ensure that increasing percentages of electrical energy consumed in buildings be renewable electric energy where cost - effective , beginning with 10 percent in 2016 and climbing to at least 30 percent by fiscal year 2025 . in addition , the military departments have also taken steps to encourage renewable energy , and each has issued department - level guidance to develop 1 gigawatt of renewable energy — air force by 2016 , navy by 2020 , and army by 2025 . the military departments have also established some unique energy goals . for example , the secretary of the navy established a goal to derive at least 50 percent of shore - based energy requirements from alternative sources , including renewable energy , by 2020 . in addition , in its energy strategy , the army established a goal to increase its use of renewable or alternative resources for power and fuel use . to meet these goals , over a number of years , dod has taken steps to develop renewable energy projects on its installations . additionally , congress requires that dod report information on its progress toward these and other energy goals in its annual energy management report . dod's most recent report identifies more than 1,130 operational projects of varying generating technologies and capacities . in addition to its renewable energy goals , dod has also identified renewable energy projects as a possible way to contribute to its energy security objective . in particular , dod has noted that its installations and missions can be vulnerable to disruptions of the commercial electricity grid and that renewable energy , combined with energy storage and other tools , can allow installations to maintain critical operations without electricity from outside the installations . to develop renewable energy projects , dod can either directly fund the construction or development of projects or work with private developers to help initially finance them . to directly develop renewable energy projects , dod typically uses funds provided through its annual appropriations process — referred to in this report as up - front appropriated funding . otherwise , dod can finance projects through agreements with private developers and pay back the costs of the projects over time — referred to as alternative financing mechanisms . in addition , when developing projects with private developers , dod may use one of three types of land use agreements to provide developers with use of dod land . through such agreements , dod allows developers the use of its land in exchange sometimes for revenues or in - kind consideration . each type of land use agreement has different requirements for compensation for the use of dod land , as follows: leases .