the district is now in its fourth year of implementing its new financial management system . however , as we reported recently , essential elements of the system are not operational . i can summarize our findings in each of these three areas very briefly . first , our review of the district's fiscal year 2000 performance report underscores that while the report more fully met statutory requirements than the fiscal year 1999 report , performance planning , measurement , and reporting is very much a work in progress in the district . the district changed its performance goals and measures throughout fiscal year 2000 , and the resulting performance report does not indicate why or when those changes were made or whether the performance data developed were valid or complete . district officials recognize the limitations with the fiscal year 2000 performance report and are committed to instilling a results - oriented approach to management , decisionmaking and accountability for the district government . second , we found that the district continues to face significant challenges in its efforts to put in place a financial management framework that ensures timely and reliable financial data on the cost of the district's operations . almost 4 years after the district's acquisition of its core financial management system , that system and related elements are in various stages of implementation . the current mix of components involves duplication of effort and , in some cases , requires cumbersome manual processing . as a result , the system is unable to produce certain types of financial information on a timely and reliable basis , such as the cost of services at the program level . in responding to our report , the cfo stated that actions are already being taken on some of our recommendations , and that the remaining recommendations will be implemented . finally , district government officials initially told us that they planned to apply the $250,000 from congress to existing contracts that were being used in the district's effort to reform its classification and compensation systems — and therefore would not carry out the conditions that congress had established for receipt of the funds . however , more recently , the officials said they no longer planned to use the funds because doing so would delay their reform effort , and they would formally request that congress rescind the appropriation . congress , and this subcommittee in particular , has demonstrated a sustained interest in working with the district government to ensure that a sound performance management system is in place . after holding hearings on the district's performance in serving its residents , congress enacted the “federal payment reauthorization act of 1994,” which required the district to implement an annual performance assessment process . specifically , the law requires the district to develop and submit to congress a performance plan for each fiscal year , including a statement of measurable , objective performance goals for all of the government's significant activities .