vi. ) dod concurred with our overall findings and provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and appropriate congressional committees . the report is also available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( ndaa 2008 ) directed the department of defense ( dod ) to determine the adequacy of the number of health care and mental health care providers that currently accept nonenrolled beneficiaries as patients under tricare , dod's health care program . the ndaa 2008 also directed us to review the processes , procedures , and analyses used by dod to determine the adequacy of the number of health care and mental health care providers that currently accept nonenrolled beneficiaries as patients . to evaluate the methodology dod used to implement the beneficiary and provider surveys , we reviewed the office of management and budget's ( omb ) standards and guidelines for statistical surveys ( 2006 ) to identify key aspects and best practices of statistical survey methodology that result in sound survey design and implementation . we focused our evaluation on standards that address , among other things , designing a survey , developing sampling frames , collecting survey data , and analyzing survey response rates . table 7 provides a description of these standards . the ndaa 2008 directed dod to determine the adequacy of the number of health care and mental health care providers that currently accept nonenrolled beneficiaries as patients under tricare , dod's health care program . for the purpose of this report , we refer to beneficiaries who are not enrolled in tricare prime — that is , those who use tricare standard , tricare extra , or tricare reserve select — as nonenrolled beneficiaries . the mandate also included specific requirements related to the number and priority of areas to be surveyed , including the populations to be surveyed each year , the content for each type of survey , and the use of benchmarks . it also provides information on tma's analyses of its 2008 beneficiary and provider surveys . the ndaa 2008 specified that dod survey beneficiaries and providers in at least 20 tricare prime service areas , and 20 geographic areas in which tricare prime is not offered — referred to as non - prime service areas — each fiscal year , 2008 through 2011 . within dod , the tricare management activity ( tma ) , which oversees the tricare program , had responsibility for designing and implementing the beneficiary and provider surveys . the following information describes tma's methodology , including its actions to address the requirements for each of the following: ( 1 ) survey area , ( 2 ) sample selection , ( 3 ) survey content , and ( 4 ) the establishment of benchmarks . the ndaa 2008 also required dod to consult with representatives of tricare beneficiaries and health care and mental health care providers to identify locations where nonenrolled beneficiaries have experienced significant access - to - care problems , and give a high priority to surveying health care and mental health care providers in these areas .