( recommendation 2 ) . we asked about the level of their engagement with fema . we initially fielded the survey from december 10 , 2018 , to january 15 , 2019 , and continued to accept responses from a few grantees until march 12 , 2019 . to assess fta and fema's coordination , we interviewed officials from fta headquarters and division offices responsible for administering the public transportation emergency relief program , as well as fema officials at headquarters and regional offices responsible for administering fema's public assistance program for the selected states and territories . we reviewed documentation from fta and fema coordination meetings , as well as emails regarding specific applications between fta and fema staff . we compared fta's and fema's coordination against federal internal control standards as well as statutory requirements in map - 21 and fta and fema guidance regarding how the agencies should coordinate . we conducted this performance audit from april 2018 to november 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . when a disaster overwhelms the ability of state , local , or voluntary agencies to adequately provide essential services on their own , the federal government , when requested , supports disaster response and recovery , providing selected resources where they are needed . the federal government has provided significant funds for transit services following past catastrophic disasters . for example , congress provided roughly $232 million in response to the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes and over $10 billion in response to hurricane sandy . we did not independently verify the estimated damage costs . in addition , we conducted site visits to texas , florida , and puerto rico ( the states and territory receiving the largest fta allocations following the 2017 hurricane ) to tour damaged facilities and interview officials from a non - generalizable selection of two to four transit agencies in each state or territory . sites were selected to include transit agencies with the largest allocations as well as those within driving distance of one another , for logistical reasons . to examine whether transit agencies applied to fema for funding , we interviewed the transit agencies mentioned above and we conducted a web - based survey of the 52 transit agencies that received a direct allocation of emergency relief funding from fta ( fta grantees ) . forty - four of the 52 fta grantees ( 85 percent ) completed our survey . fema is the federal government's primary agency for disaster response . in addition to coordinating disaster response and recovery operations , fema's public assistance program provides funding to state and local governments and some nonprofit organizations for recovery efforts after a disaster , including removing debris , implementing emergency protective measures , and repairing or replacing damaged public equipment or facilities .