evaluating the results . evaluating the actions taken by irs to reduce the tax gap would help maximize irs's effectiveness . evaluations can be challenging because it is difficult to isolate the effects of irs's actions from other influences on taxpayers' compliance . our work has discussed how to address these challenges , for example by using research to link actions with the outputs and desired effects . optimizing resource allocation . developing reliable measures of the return on investment for strategies to reduce the tax gap would help inform irs resource allocation decisions . irs has rough measures of return on investment based on the additional taxes it assesses . developing such measures is difficult because of incomplete data on the costs of enforcement and collected revenues . beyond direct revenues , irs's enforcement actions have indirect revenue effects , which are difficult to measure . however , indirect effects could far exceed direct revenue effects and would be important to consider in connection with continued development of return on investment measures . in general though , the effects of tax gap reduction by improving voluntary tax compliance can be quite large . for example , if the estimated 83.7 percent voluntary compliance rate that produced a gross tax gap of $345 billion in tax year 2001 had been 85 percent , this tax gap would have been about $28 billion less ; if it had been 90 percent , the gap would have been about $133 billion less . third , tax code complexity may erode taxpayers' willingness to comply voluntarily if they cannot understand its provisions or they see others taking advantage of complexity to intentionally underreport their taxes . simplification could take multiple forms . one form would be to retain existing laws but make them simpler . for example , in our july 2005 report on postsecondary tax preferences , we noted that the definition of a qualifying postsecondary education expense differed somewhat among some tax code provisions , for instance with some including the cost to purchase books and others not . making definitions consistent across code provisions may reduce taxpayer errors . although we cannot say the errors were due to these differences in definitions , in a limited study of paid preparer services to taxpayers , we found some preparers claiming unallowable expenses for books . further , the joint committee on taxation suggested that such dissimilar definitions may increase the likelihood of taxpayer errors and increase taxpayer frustration . another tax code provision in which complexity may have contributed to the individual tax gap involves the earned income tax credit , for which irs estimated a tax loss of up to about $10 billion for tax year 1999 . although some of this noncompliance may be intentional , we and the national taxpayer advocate have previously reported that confusion over the complex rules governing eligibility for claiming the credit could cause taxpayers to fail to comply inadvertently . the administration's fiscal year 2008 budget proposes legislative language to simplify eligibility requirements for the credit as well as to clarify the uniform definition of a qualifying child . another form of simplification could be to broaden the tax base while reducing tax rates , which could minimize incentives for not complying .