( see app . ii for the full text of hhs's written comments. ) hhs pointed out that it is important to consider that the financial incentives for efficiency under tefra payments to psychiatric dpus or rehabilitation pps payments to rehabilitation dpus would not be preserved if cahs were able to claim cost - based reimbursement for their dpus , and therefore hhs said such dpus should continue to be paid separately from the cah . the department also emphasized that cahs are required to meet more limited health and safety standards compared to other acute care hospitals and raised concerns that any dpus operated by cahs would likewise be subject to more limited health and safety standards unless the congress acted to maintain standards currently in place for dpus . furthermore , hhs suggested that we analyze the extent to which inpatient rehabilitation and psychiatric services are available to rural residents beyond their local hospitals in order to determine whether such services are more or less accessible to rural residents than other specialty services . the department expressed concern that non - cah hospitals that are within close proximity to cahs may perceive unfair treatment if such cahs are allowed to operate dpus . finally , in commenting on the relaxation of the cah acute care patient census limit to an annual average of 15 , hhs proposed that we consider suggesting corresponding changes to the cah bedsize limit . as we noted in the draft report , incentives for efficiency that exist under the current payment systems for inpatient psychiatric and rehabilitation services would not be preserved under cost - based reimbursement . we revised the matters for congressional consideration to specifically suggest that cah - affiliated dpus be paid under the same formulas as other inpatient psychiatric or rehabilitation providers . we also agree with hhs that there are differences in conditions of participation between hospitals and cahs and that appropriate health and safety standards should be maintained for cah - affiliated dpus , and we modified the report accordingly . however , determining what health and safety standards should be applied to the dpus of cahs was beyond the scope of this report . while we noted differences in the availability of inpatient rehabilitation and psychiatric services between rural and urban areas in the draft report , measuring in detail the level of access rural residents have to various specialty services was beyond the scope of this report . we believe that the close proximity of non - cah hospitals to cahs with dpus would only present a fairness issue if such cah - affiliated dpus are paid cost - based reimbursement or if they are subject to less stringent regulations . if such dpus operate under the same payment methodologies and regulations as other dpus , this would not be an issue . a detailed examination of the levels of competition between cah and non - cah hospitals was beyond the scope of this report . we clarified in the report that we are not suggesting any changes to the cah limits of 15 acute care beds or 25 total beds when swing beds are included , since most cahs have swing beds that could be used when the acute care patient census exceeds 15 .