defense transportation regulation . managed by the u.s. transportation command ( transcom ) , the defense transportation regulation defines requirements for the transportation of items within the defense transportation system , such as the use of unique identifiers for all shipments and how to use and pay commercial carriers , when applicable . security assistance management manual ( samm ) . managed by dsca , samm provides guidance to the dod components that manage or implement the fms program . foreign partners that purchase items and services through the fms program may use their own funds or , if provided , u.s. funds , such as grants or loans provided through foreign military financing . in addition , some fms purchases are made using funds appropriated to dod , state , or other u.s. government agencies for building partner capacity ( bpc ) programs . these programs purchase items or services for foreign partners through fms . the fms process begins when an eligible entity requests information on defense articles or services for purchase . the responsible dod component then prepares a letter of offer and acceptance ( loa ) , which is the legal instrument used by the u.s. government to sell defense articles to a foreign country or international organization under authorities provided in the arms export control act . additionally , dsca officials confirmed that they do not document their monthly review of expenditures . dsca officials told us that while dsca staff conducted regular monthly reviews , dsca has not issued specific internal guidance explaining how staff should conduct and document these reviews . federal internal control standards state that management should develop documentation of its internal control system , document internal control activities such as by documenting that activities occurred , and ensure that activities are performed routinely and consistently . without internal guidance that identifies how staff should perform and document monthly reviews as well as a process to ensure reviews are documented , dsca cannot provide reasonable assurance that staff perform monthly reviews consistently . dsca officials told us that their planned internal guidance should address how the monthly review process is conducted , and should be implemented by july 2020 . however , until dsca finalizes and implements that guidance , dsca will not have guidance on documenting its monthly review of expenditures consistent with federal internal control standards . dsca officials have not provided written guidance to dfas on preparing the reports and analyses dsca uses for its monthly review , and , as a result , those reports and analyses may be inconsistent and incomplete . federal internal control standards state that management should design control activities that respond to risks , document internal controls , communicate required information to external parties , and obtain relevant data from external sources based on information requirements . seven separate accounts hold transportation funds for certain larger bpc programs . these seven bpc accounts allow bpc program transportation fee collections and expenditures to be tracked . in addition , one main account holds transportation funds for all foreign partner purchasers and smaller bpc programs .