we do not agree . specifically , while we do not question whether investment data are provided to the dbsmc and the irbs , the department's policies and procedures do not include specific decision criteria that explain how these data are to be used to make consistent , repeatable selection and reselection decisions across all investments . in addition , while bea compliance policies have been developed and are being used , the guidance is not fully defined . for example , the guidance allows programs to defer demonstrating full compliance with important bea artifacts until the final phases of the acquisition process , at which time addressing instances of noncompliance would be more expensive and difficult . furthermore , the compliance criteria are not consistently described in different guidance documentation . as a result , dod risks beginning system production and deployment before ensuring that a system is sufficiently aligned to the bea . dod did not agree with our recommendation to define and implement policies and procedures that provide for the reselection of investments that are in operations and maintenance . according to dod , components are required by policy to annually review all business systems , including investments for which there is no planned development or modernization spending . we agree that the annual review process does require this . however , consistent with our itim framework , the corporate investment boards should continue to reselect investments that meet the defined threshold criteria throughout their life cycles ( i.e. , when they are in operations and maintenance ) . in contrast , dod's corporate boards focus only on reselecting those investments that are in the development / modernization stage . dod did not agree with our recommendation to define and implement policies and procedures that specify how the corporate boards use funding information in carrying out decisions on system certification and approvals . in this regard , it stated that such information is required in its current policies and considered during board deliberations . we do not agree . our recommendation does not address whether existing policies or guidance provide for the collection of this information ; our recommendation addresses the definition of policy , guidance , and supporting procedures that fall short of satisfying the best practices embodied in our itim framework . specifically , while we do not question whether funding data are provided to investment decision - making bodies , the department's policies and procedures do not include specific decision criteria that explain how these data are to be used to make consistent , repeatable selection and reselection decisions across all investments . dod did not agree with our recommendation to define and implement policies and procedures that provide for sufficient oversight and visibility into component - level investment management activities . in particular , it stated that this recommendation contradicts the department's “tiered accountability” approach to investment management . we do not agree . under the department's current policies and guidance , most dod investments are not subject to corporate visibility and oversight , either because they do not involve development / modernization ( i.e. , they are in operations and maintenance ) or because they do not exceed a certain dollar threshold .