while most commanders support the programs , some do not . although dod and the coast guard require that all servicemembers receive periodic training on their respective sexual assault prevention and response programs , our nongeneralizeable survey , interviews , and discussions with servicemembers and program officials revealed that a majority , but not all , servicemembers are receiving the required training , and that some servicemembers who have received it may not understand how to report a sexual assault using the restricted reporting option . for example , a survey we administered at 14 military installations revealed that while the majority of servicemembers we surveyed had received the required training , the percentage of servicemembers who responded that they would not know how to report a sexual assault using the restricted reporting option ranged from 13 to 43 percent for the seven installations where we administered our survey in the united states and from 13 to 28 percent for the seven installations where we administered our survey overseas . to date , neither dod nor the coast guard has systematically evaluated the effectiveness of the training provided . servicemembers who have not received the required training or are otherwise not familiar with their respective programs incur the risks of not knowing how to mitigate the possibility of being sexually assaulted or how to seek assistance if needed , or risk reporting the assault in a way that limits their option to maintain confidentiality while seeking treatment . access to mental health services may be limited . dod and the coast guard both require that sexual assault victims be made aware of available mental health services , and in 2007 , dod's mental health task force recommended that dod take action to address factors that may prevent some servicemembers from seeking mental health care . however , we found that several factors , including a dod - reported shortage of mental health care providers , the inherent logistical challenges of operating overseas or in geographically remote locations in the united states or overseas , and servicemembers' perceptions of stigma associated with mental health care can affect whether servicemembers who are victims of sexual assault can or do access mental health services . we also did not find any indication that either dod or the coast guard are taking steps to systematically assess factors that may impede servicemembers who are victims of sexual assault from accessing mental health services . we found , based on responses to our nongeneralizeable survey and a 2006 dod survey , the most recent available , that occurrences of sexual assault may be exceeding the rates being reported , suggesting that dod and the coast guard have only limited visibility over the incidence of these occurrences . we recognize that the precise number of sexual assaults involving servicemembers is not possible to determine and that studies suggest sexual assault are generally underreported in the united states . nevertheless , our findings indicate that some servicemembers may choose not to report sexual assault incidents for a variety of reasons , including the belief that nothing would be done or that reporting an incident would negatively impact their careers .