as such , we did not include them in our totals . most of the agencies agreed with the recommendations or had no comments . nonetheless , agencies continued to be challenged in identifying and reporting their cost savings . as of august 2017 , 5 of the agencies had implemented our recommendations in this area . in the absence of consistent and full reporting of fiscal years 2016 through 2018 planned savings in agencies' dcoi strategic plans , as required by fitara and omb , agencies' total planned savings will likely continue to be understated . with less than a year for agencies to meet omb's current planned savings targets , we are re - emphasizing the need for agencies to implement our prior recommendations related to establishing and meeting their planned data center cost savings targets . fitara required omb to establish metrics to measure the optimization of data centers , including server efficiency , and ensure that agencies' progress toward meeting the metrics is made public . pursuant to fitara , omb's august 2016 memorandum established a set of five data center optimization metrics intended to measure agencies' progress in the areas of server utilization and automated monitoring , energy metering , power usage effectiveness , facility utilization , and virtualization . however , the effective date of the updated data ( february 2018 ) is outside the scope of our review , which relied solely on data reported in august 2017 , as detailed in appendix i . while we recognize the department's efforts to ensure that its past reporting is updated and as accurate as possible , our report only presents data as reported by agencies in august 2017 . consequently , we believe that the achieved cost savings for interior accurately reflect what the department reported at the time of our review . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix v. in an e - mail received on march 27 , 2018 , gsa did not agree or disagree with the draft report's findings , and provided comments questioning the methodology we used to determine the number of data center closures . specifically , gsa stated that , by including facilities that are now closed in our reporting of the federal government's inventory of 12,062 data centers , our report gives the impression that the government is currently operating 12,062 open data centers . gsa also asserted that we should include in our counts facilities identified as using cloud computing providers . in our report , we consistently state that the 12,062 data centers reflect the overall count of federal facilities identified since the launch of fdcci in 2010 . further , we clearly identify the portion of the overall count of data centers that have since closed , or that are planned to close . figure 6 summarizes agencies' progress , as of august 2017 , in meeting omb's optimization targets and planned progress to be achieved by september 2018 . the limited progress made by agencies in optimizing their data centers , combined with the lack of established plans to improve progress , makes it unclear whether agencies will be able to achieve omb's optimization targets by the end of fiscal year 2018 .