the commission has no independent budget . the act authorized appropriations to the commission of amounts necessary to carry out its work , and for fiscal year 2005 congress specified that $1 million should be used for the development and implementation of the national strategy . to develop the national strategy for financial literacy , the commission formed a national strategy working group of 13 member agencies , issued a call for public comment in the federal register , and held six public meetings — five organized around the commercial , government , nonprofit , education , and banking sectors and one for individual consumers . although the financial literacy act required the commission to adopt the strategy within 18 months of enactment , or june 2005 , the strategy was not publicly released until april 2006 . the commission sought unanimous consent on the national strategy , and commission members told us that the treasury department faced a significant challenge in trying to get 20 federal agencies — each with its own mission and point of view — to unanimously agree to a strategy . a particular source of disagreement involved whether nonfederal entities should be cited by name as illustrative examples in the strategy . the commission ultimately agreed that it would not name these organizations in the national strategy , but cite them in a separate document issued by treasury , called the quick reference guide to the strategy . the content of the national strategy for financial literacy largely consists of a comprehensive overview of issues related to financial literacy and examples of ongoing initiatives . it describes many major problems and challenges that relate to financial literacy in the united states , identifies key subject matter areas and target populations , and describes what it believes to be illustrations of potentially effective practices in financial education across a broad spectrum of subjects and sectors . in commenting on our report , treasury , in its capacity as chair of the commission , noted that the national strategy for financial literacy was the nation's first such effort and , as such , was designed to be a blueprint that provides general direction while allowing diverse entities the flexibility to participate in enhancing financial education . the department said that the strategy's calls to action are appropriately substantive and concrete — setting out specific issues for discussion , conferences to be convened , key constituencies , and which commission members should be responsible for each task . as noted earlier , in its april 2007 report to congress , the commission provided definitions for “financial literacy” and “financial education” to help guide its work . we acknowledge that the national strategy represents the nation's first such effort , but continue to believe that future iterations of the strategy would benefit from inclusion of the characteristics cited in our report . the financial literacy act required the commission to establish and maintain a web site to serve as a clearinghouse and provide a coordinated point of entry for information about federal financial literacy and education programs , grants , and materials . with minor exceptions , the commission did not create original content for its web site , which it called my money .