tion . according to los angeles officials , the city prioritized the replace restoration of its highway infrastructure to restore the region's transportation networks . to maintain partial traffic flows immediately after the earthquake , the city established alternative detour rout highways . the earthquake resulted in 480 damage locations to federal , state , and local roads throughout the los angeles area and forced the closure of four major highway corridors that , together , carried over 780,000 vehicles per day before the earthquake . this caused significant disruption to commuting patterns as well as the transportation of freight . ing for the to expedite the completion of highway rebuilding projects , the califor nia department of transportation ( caltrans ) included financial incentives in its contracts for each major restoration or repair contract . under this approach , bonuses were available to each contractor who completed projects early . caltrans calculated bonuses based on an analysis of the economic cost incurred to the region as a result of the disruption to traffic rded and associated delays . as a result of this approach , bonuses were awa to 9 out of the 10 eligible contractors . according to a caltrans official , these incentives allowed the city to restore these freeways within a months after the earthquake ( see fig . the federal highway administration also granted other measures of flexibility within its regulations to facilitate infrastructure recovery . for example , the agency granted exemptions from certain regulations , such as allowing the california department of transportation to proceed without conducting environmental impact statements as required under the national environmental policy act . on january 17 , 1995 , a magnitude 7.3 earthquake caused significant damage to the japanese city of kobe in hyogo prefecture . as a result of the earthquake , the affected areas sustained heavy damage and many casualties . for example , over 6,000 people were killed and 40,000 injured . in addition to destroying over 400,000 homes and buildings , the earthquake caused extensive damage to roads , railroads , highways , and subway stations ( see fig . the port of kobe , japan's leading container shipping port at the time , also experienced heavy damage to almost all container berths . the japanese government provided significant funding to facilitate recovery from the 1995 kobe earthquake . some examples of national government assistance for recovery are shown in figure 12 . recovery after the kobe earthquake was generally a top - down process of post - disaster planning and financing . the government prioritized the rapid rebuilding of infrastructure and economic stabilization and later focused on housing and social recovery . the physical reconstruction process took less than 3 years to complete . specifically , the city of kobe designated 24 areas to prioritize for rebuilding , using national government funds to widen roads , add parks and open spaces , and construct other public facilities . for the first 3 to 4 years after the earthquake , the focus was mainly focused on physical reconstruction . in subsequent years , the government shifted it focus to community development , economic development , and the restoration of communities .