( app . we have recommended , and epa subsequently concurred , that the agency improve its planning for this research to ensure that it will be adequately funded and research results will be available when needed . second , the agency provides funding to states for drinking water revolving funds . the following table identifies the major management challenges confronting the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , which includes the governmentwide high - risk areas of human capital and information security . the first column of the table lists the management challenges that we and / or epa's office of inspector general ( oig ) have identified . the second column discusses what progress , as discussed in its fiscal year 2000 performance report , epa made in resolving its challenges . the third column discusses the extent to which epa's fiscal year 2002 performance plan includes performance goals and measures to address the challenges that we and the epa's oig identified . we found that epa's performance report discussed the agency's progress in resolving its challenges . of the agency's nine major management challenges , its performance plan had ( 1 ) four that were directly related to goals and measures , ( 2 ) three that were indirectly applicable to goals and measures , and ( 3 ) two that had no related goals and measure but discussed strategies to address them . the agency reported that it exceeded its fiscal year 2000 goal of completing construction cleanup at 85 superfund sites by having 87 sites with construction cleanup complete , which the agency defines as the point at which a cleanup remedy is in place . while reaching this point may take many years , more time may be needed before all cleanup standards are achieved and some remaining long - term threats are addressed at the site . therefore , we have reported that “construction complete” should not be construed as an indicator that all cleanup work is completed and the sites can be returned to economic use . accordingly , while epa attained its goal , this should not be construed that the sites are cleaned up and no further actions are necessary . the agency fell short of its annual performance goal for reaching interagency agreements with other federal agencies that are responsible for site contamination and clean up . of the six agreements targeted for completion in fiscal year 2000 , only two were completed but the agency reported that two more were completed since the beginning of fiscal year 2001 . for nonfederal sites , the agency reported that it nearly attained its goal for securing cleanup commitments from responsible parties for 70 percent of the new construction starts and for recovering costs from responsible parties when epa spends $200,000 or more for site cleanups . epa works in partnership with state and tribal governments to clean up superfund sites and ensure that parties responsible for the site contamination pay a fair share of the cleanup costs . epa may compel parties responsible for the contamination to perform the cleanup , or it may pay for the cleanup and attempt to recover the costs . epa may also enter into settlements with responsible parties to clean up sites or recover costs .