these projects are in various stages of deployment . one of the largest agencywide efforts is dhs's identification and credentialing project . the agency plans to issue 250,000 cards to employees and contractors . this is a comprehensive identification and credentialing effort that will use pki technology for logical access and proximity chips for physical access . authentication will rely on biometrics with a personal identification number as a backup . other recently initiated agencywide smart card projects include gsa's nationwide identification , va's authentication and authorization infrastructure project , and the department of labor's e - authentication project . table 5 summarizes both previously reported and recently initiated agencywide smart card efforts . we received oral comments on a draft of this report from gsa's associate administrator , office of governmentwide policy , and from officials of omb's office of information and regulatory affairs and its office of general counsel . both gsa and omb generally agreed with the content in the draft report . in addition , each agency provided technical comments , which have been addressed where appropriate in the final report . we will provide copies of this report to the director of omb and the administrator of gsa , and the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you have any questions on matters contained in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or john de ferrari , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-6335 . we can also be reached by e - mail at koontzl@gao.gov and deferrarij@gao.gov , respectively . other key contributors to this report were tonia brown , barbara collier , felipe colón , pamlutricia greenleaf , and joel grossman . our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the current status of smart card projects under way at the time of our last review , ( 2 ) identify and determine the status of projects initiated since our last review was completed , and ( 3 ) identify integrated agencywide smart card projects that are currently under way . production began in july 2004 . another example of a large - scale project is gsa's nationwide id card . gsa plans to issue cards to 61,000 federal employees , contractors , and tenant agencies . using this card , gsa plans to implement nationwide uniform credentials based on smart card technology by providing a single standard credential card for identification , building access , property management , and other applications . table 4 provides status information on the 10 recently initiated smart card projects . gsa developed the smart card access common id contracting vehicle to help make it easier for federal agencies to acquire commercial smart card products and services . according to the director of gsa's center for smart card solutions , further guidance is planned that will require agencies to use the contracting vehicle or provide justification for not using it . the director also stated that using gsa's contract should help reduce the cost of smart cards and ensure that vendors incorporate interoperability specifications .