annual reviews of financial reports . va policy generally requires staff to obtain yearly financial reports and bank statements from some fiduciaries to determine how beneficiary funds were used . each fiduciary program unit generates a list of fiduciaries meeting this criteria by using va's electronic case management system to link or match a fiduciary to all of their beneficiaries . however , this computer match is based on a fiduciary's name , rather than a unique identifier , such as the fiduciary's social security number or tax identification number . central office managers and staff , as well as managers in two regional offices we visited , acknowledged that these matches may not reliably identify all the beneficiaries managed by a fiduciary because fiduciary names can be entered inconsistently into the system . for example , if a fiduciary's name is entered using different spellings or abbreviations , such as john smith versus jon h. smith , it may not show up in the system as the same fiduciary across multiple beneficiary case files . a bond ensures that the beneficiary's estate will be reimbursed in the event of fiduciary mismanagement or abuse of beneficiary funds . generally , the bond amount should be adequate to cover the value of the beneficiary's accumulated estate derived from va funds plus 1 year of va benefits . fiduciary program staff are required to obtain documentation showing that the fiduciary has an adequate bond . va is required to assess the need for a bond and the bond amount each time it reviews the fiduciary's yearly financial report . periodic on - site reviews of professional fiduciaries . in addition to visits , va staff are required to conduct on - site reviews of professional fiduciaries who oversee more than 20 beneficiaries with combined benefits of at least $50,000 once every 3 years . unscheduled reviews may also be conducted as needed . during the on - site reviews , staff are to examine the financial records of multiple beneficiaries concurrently and examine any questionable expenses . va developed this policy in 2005 as a result of new requirements included in the veterans' benefits improvement act of 2004 . fiduciary program policies and procedures are developed by fiduciary program central office staff under the office of policy and program management within the veterans benefits administration . individual fiduciary program units are generally colocated in va regional offices that also oversee other veterans benefits administration programs . one major exception to this is the western area fiduciary hub , where fiduciary program units and files from 14 western va regional offices were merged into a single unit colocated in the va regional office in salt lake city , utah , beginning in january 2008 . each regional office is held accountable for meeting performance measures established by va , including workload timeliness and accuracy measures . for example , performance measures for fiduciary program units include the timeliness of visits and the accuracy of beneficiary case file documentation , as measured through va's internal quality review processes . va tracks fiduciary program performance measures for timeliness by generating reports based on case - level data recorded in its electronic case management system , known as the fiduciary beneficiary system ( fbs ) .