( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the secretary of commerce . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , the department of commerce agreed with our findings and recommendation and said it would develop an action plan to address our recommendation . the census bureau also provided technical comments , which we incorporated . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of commerce , the under secretary of economic affairs , the director of the u.s. census bureau , and interested congressional committees . the report also is available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2757 or goldenkoffr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report assesses the extent to which the census bureau ( bureau ) is following its plans for space acquisition , recruiting and hiring , and training . in south and central florida . the chicago rcc reported recruiting outreach challenges in urban areas , including chicago , indianapolis , detroit , minneapolis / st . paul , st. louis , and kansas city , that have higher minority and immigrant populations as well as in rural areas with increasing diversity . bureau officials responded that later this fall , in preparation for their peak operations effort , they will begin to focus recruiting efforts on foreign language recruiting . specifically , partnership and recruiting staff plan to work with partners and advertise jobs locally ( at the grassroots level ) in places where persons with these skills are likely to look to ensure they are meeting recruiting goals in those areas . for the 2020 census , the bureau is following its plans to use a blended training approach combining technology - assisted training with classroom instruction . according to bureau planning documents , on the first day of in - person classroom training , the bureau will provide orientation information and issue devices that trainees will use to conduct census operations . the bureau plans to use local institutions such as schools , libraries , churches , and fire halls to host training . aco staff are to coordinate the training location setup , device deliveries to training sites , and manage other logistics for large - scale field staff training . after the first day of training , field staff will spend the next 4 to 6 days ( depending on the operation ) completing at - home training online using their own personal device at their own pace . this training will include , for example , operation - specific skills , use of the data collection device ( smart phone or tablet ) , and general field processes . trainees who complete the online portion of the training program will return to the classroom to practice what they learned through role - playing , mock interviews , or live cases ( for listing operations ) facilitated by managers or supervisors .