ii. ) our interviews with faa rulemaking staff and management and our observations of specific rulemaking projects supported the staff's perception and confirmed that problems in the three central areas of management involvement , the administration of the rulemaking process ( process administration ) , and human capital continued to slow the process . problems related to three general areas of management involvement continued to slow the process . multiple , shifting priorities made it difficult to allocate resources effectively and often disrupted the timing of the rulemaking process . too often , policy issues were not resolved in a timely manner . finally , multiple layers of review continued to contribute to delays . what were the effects of faa's 1998 reforms on its process and on its time frames for completing rulemaking ? how effective were faa's reform efforts in addressing the factors that affect the pace of the rulemaking process ? this report contains recommendations to the secretary of transportation on steps that faa can take to improve the timeliness of its rulemaking through better management of the process and its participants . as we agreed with your offices , unless you publicy announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter . we will then send copies to the secretary of transportation and the administrator of faa . we will also make copies available to others who request them . internally , they attributed the growth in the number of priority rulemaking projects in part to a lack of commitment to the reformed process of some participants and to what they described as “parochial” views of priorities that resulted in efforts to circumvent the decisions of the rulemaking steering committee . for example , officials said that some program offices circumvented the approval process for adding rulemaking projects to the top priority list by adding projects to their own short - term incentive plans , creating pressure on the steering committee to add the rules to the top priority list . our survey of rulemaking staff showed that less than one - third ( 29 percent ) of the staff agreed that senior managers supported the steering committee's decisions regarding priorities . not only were too many rules given top priority , but changes in the relative ranking of “top” priorities created problems in managing staffing resources , thereby increasing the processing time for significant rules . eighty - three percent of the survey respondents agreed that changing priorities in the rulemaking process caused delays in the process . team members said they were frequently pulled off of top - priority rules to work on other projects that their management considered higher priority . they noted that these disruptions created delays . it is important to note that , while some of the causes of shifting priorities stem from the current rulemaking process and can be changed , others relate to events that faa cannot control . for example , new safety issues may emerge whenever there is an aviation accident . in addition , rulemaking efforts in progress that are related to issues such as safety threats can be overtaken by new events that then drive the agency's priorities .