it is a tool that can be used by state personnel . prism's innovation is that it is designed to associate vehicle identification numbers with out - of - service carriers to prevent the carrier from registering or reregistering its vehicles . although prism is a potential deterrent to a carrier wishing to reincarnate , only 25 states have implemented the system to the extent that they can automatically identify out - of - service carriers and then deny , suspend , or revoke their vehicle registrations . another limitation to prism's effectiveness is that it only includes vehicles that register under a protocol known as the international registration plan ( irp ) — which pertains only to carriers involved in interstate commerce . charter buses are exempt from irp ( interstate ) registration and thus not subject to prism . furthermore , vehicles are not checked at registration since companies are not required to supply this information on their application to fmcsa . fmcsa's duty and authority to deny operating authority registration to persons not meeting statutory requirements is provided by statute . a person applying for registration must demonstrate that he or she is willing and able to comply with the safety regulations , other applicable regulations of the secretary , and the safety fitness requirements . complexities regarding the application of state laws on corporate successorship may , in certain instances , affect the agency's ability to deny operating authority to or pursue enforcement against unsafe reincarnated motor carriers under these statutory provisions . the complexities include the legal standard that must be met to hold a newly formed corporation liable for civil penalties assessed against its corporate predecessor . the facts necessary to satisfy the legal standard — whether under federal or state law — require documentation outside the normal compliance review processes . fmcsa uses a detailed field worksheet which lists types of evidence that would be needed , including company contact information , documentation on management and administrative personnel , business assets , tax records , insurance , payroll , drivers , vehicles , customer lists , advertising and promotional materials , corporate charters , and information on the corporate acquisition or merger at issue . this labor intensive investigative process is not undertaken unless strong preliminary evidence indicates that the new company is a reincarnation of a former motor carrier against which enforcement was taken and that the reincarnation was for the purpose of evading enforcement action or violation history of the predecessor company . in order to make it easier for fmcsa to place a reincarnated carrier out of service , the highways and transit subcommittee of the committee on transportation and infrastructure of the house of representatives approved legislation on june 24 , 2009 , that would impose a uniform federal standard and would authorize fmcsa to deny or revoke operating authority from a carrier who failed to disclose a relationship with a prior carrier . the legislation would also authorize fmcsa , in certain cases , to impose civil penalties against a reincarnated motor carrier that were originally imposed against a related motor carrier . the daughter said she was not involved with the bus company .