as of november 2006 , no exchanges have occurred . these plans are to be approved by the head of each agency before beginning exchanges . agencies , companies , and individual participants are also required to sign a written agreement before any exchanges can begin . each participating agency has primary responsibility for planning and directing its own itep program but must adhere to the act and opm regulations in implementing exchanges . in december 2005 , 3 months after the itep regulations went into effect , opm issued additional guidance to assist agencies in implementing their programs and in drafting plans . the guidance included an overview of the program , templates for itep plans and written agreements , and answers to frequently asked questions and is available to agencies through the opm.gov web site . to help promote the program , opm partnered with the federal chief information officers council and with the industry advisory council and conducted outreach with several other it professional organizations to reach private - sector companies . assignments can last up to a year and are extendable for another year . federal employees could be exposed to private industry best management practices , while private - sector employees could gain a greater understanding of federal information management practices and of how the government does its work . the opportunity to begin exchanges is due to end in december 2007 . opm was required to issue implementing regulations for itep and to report semiannually to the congress on the number of individuals assigned to and from each agency , including a brief description of each assignment and other information as appropriate . between 2003 and 2005 , opm developed implementing regulations for the program , including soliciting public comments . omb reviewed and approved opm's draft regulations as part of its normal regulatory process . the final itep regulations were not issued until august 2005 , and became effective in september 2005 , almost 3 years into the program . opm reported to the congress that the delay in the issuance of the regulations was due to the complexity of the issues involved , including various ethics and standard of conduct issues that could complicate exchanges , especially from private industry to the federal government . in addition to omb , opm worked with the department of justice and the office of government ethics to finalize the regulations . in the itep regulations , opm established a requirement that each participating agency develop an itep plan . opm assists the agencies in marketing their itep programs through its usajobs web site . to facilitate the exchange of information , opm has been conducting weekly teleconferences with participating agencies and the iac . additionally , the cio of opm co - chairs the cio council's information technology workforce committee , which helps to promote the program and shares status updates during monthly meetings . the e - gov act specifically addresses ethics and reimbursement issues . the law states that private - sector employees assigned to a federal agency under itep are deemed to be employees of the federal agency in terms of title 5 , u.s.c. , chapter 73 ( suitability , security , and conduct ) as well as various other laws .