agricultural exports . gao - 01-727 . washington , d.c.: june 15 , 2001 . intellectual property: deposits of biological materials in support of certain patent applications . gao - 01-49 . washington , d.c.: october 16 , 2000 . finally , usda said the report gives the incorrect impression that many of the 'am i regulated ? inquiries from ge crop developers escape usda regulations because they were developed using newer ( now alternative ) technologies . usda stated that most inquiries to date concern ge plants developed with biolistics , which is an older technology , and that for those inquiries where it determined that the organism in question was not a regulated article , it first concluded that there was no reason to believe the organism presented a plant pest risk . as discussed , we have made changes to the report defining alternative technologies as those in which the ge crop developed contains no plant pest dna . this includes technologies where a plant pest may have been used initially as part of the ge crop development process . it also includes technologies that do not use plant pests at all in the development of a ge crop . further , while usda may conclude there is no reason to believe the organism covered by an inquiry presents a plant pest risk , that conclusion is not based on a comprehensive assessment ( eg , the conduct of confined field trials and the submission of detailed information for review by usda scientists ) of the potential risks of that organism ( i.e. , a new ge crop ) . as discussed , under usda's current biotechnology regulations , only those new ge crop varieties developed with and containing plant pest dna are subject to a comprehensive usda assessment of potential risks before commercialization , and it is this regulatory gap , at least in part , that usda seeks to close in updating its biotechnology regulations . at present , only after commercialization of a ge crop created with an alternative technology , can usda , if it becomes aware of a possible plant pest risk or noxious weed risk , take regulatory action . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of agriculture , the secretary of health and human services , the commissioner of the food and drug administration , the administrator of the environmental protection agency , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . dedicated infrastructure . in some instances , growers , transporters , and processors may use distinct equipment and facilities to process non - ge crops separately from ge crops . such infrastructure may include dedicated silos ; transportation systems , including rail cars or containers ; handling systems and grain elevators . figure 2 provides more information on measures to decrease unintended mixing of ge and non - ge crops .