and , cras might process data erroneously . for example , collection agencies and public records on bankruptcies , tax liens , and judgments were cited as major sources of errors . cra officials and data furnishers said the growing number of fraudulent credit “repair” clinics that coach consumers to make frivolous reinvestigation requests in an effort to get accurate , though negative , information off the credit report also might cause errors , as disputed information a cra cannot verify within 30 days is deleted from the consumer's credit report . file segregation , a tactic in which a consumer with a negative credit history tries to create a new credit file by applying for credit using consistent but inaccurate information , was another reported cause for inaccurate credit data . the credit industry has been working on systems to help ensure accuracy since the “reasonable procedures” standard took effect under fcra in 1970 . within the last decade , cdia has led efforts to implement industry systems and processes to increase the accuracy of credit reports . the data provided by cdia and the cras have serious limitations as well . for example , neither cdia nor cra officials provided an explanation of the methodology for the collection of data provided by cdia and for the assessments cited by the cras . moreover , because these data related primarily to those errors that consumers disputed after an adverse action , they excluded a potentially large population of errors . specifically , these data excluded errors that would cause a credit grantor to offer less favorable terms on a loan rather than deny the loan application . the data also excluded errors in cases where consumers were not necessarily seeking a loan and therefore did not have a need to review their credit reports . additionally , as stated earlier , only a small percentage of consumers requested credit reports simply out of curiosity . while the cdia representatives felt that these data were useful for assessing a level of accuracy , they agreed that by focusing on these data only , the industry did not consider a potentially large set of errors . while both the literature and credit industry representatives cited similar types and causes of errors , neither the literature nor the credit industry data identified one particular type or cause of error as the most common . all respondents stated that error type could range from wrong names and incorrect addresses to inaccurate account balances and erroneous information from public records . based on the literature we reviewed and on our discussions with cra and data furnisher officials , we could not identify any one cause or source most responsible for errors . data on the impact of the 1996 fcra amendments on credit report accuracy was not available . for instance , we could not identify impact information from the literature we reviewed and industry officials with whom we spoke said they did not collect such data . furthermore , ftc could not provide overall trend data but did provide fcra - related consumer complaint data involving cras . table 1 shows the frequency of these four disposition categories .