the remainder supports sewers and other conveyances . since the cwsrf's inception , the total dollar amounts that states annually provide for wastewater infrastructure and nonpoint source projects has increased . however , cwsrf support for wastewater infrastructure has increased at a greater pace than the amount for nonpoint source projects . figure 4 shows that states have used their cwsrfs to finance wastewater infrastructure projects since 1987 but only began to use them to support nonpoint source projects in 1990 . we also reviewed epa - issued guidance for states inputting data to the nims database . based on these interviews and guidance we determined that the data about the usage of cwsrf dollars were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . however , we determined that data about the number of cwsrf loan agreements were of less certain reliability to identify the exact percentage of loan agreements between qualifying expenses , given that states vary in the way that they account for the number of loan agreements . moreover , cwsrf programs must comply with the single audit act and generally accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) and undergo independent financial audits . therefore , in figure 2 , we reported data about the number of loan agreements with appropriate caveats . to examine the strategies states use to allocate their cwsrf dollars among qualifying expenses , we interviewed epa and state - level agency officials and reviewed annual reports and other official epa and state - level documents . the annual percentage of the cwsrfs states allocated to nonpoint source projects peaked in 1996 at about 10 percent . direct cwsrf support for nonpoint source pollution control activities represents only 4 percent ( about $2 billion ) of cwsrfs allocated by the states but accounts for over 25 percent of all cwsrf - supported projects because nonpoint source projects are typically less expensive than wastewater infrastructure projects . the extent to which states have used their cwsrfs to support nonpoint source projects varies . to date , 37 states have reported using some portion of their cwsrf funds to directly support nonpoint source projects . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . instead , the sponsoring community covers the cost as part if its repayment of its wastewater facility loan . according to ohio officials , the benefit of the state's program is that water restoration projects that may not normally receive cwsrf funding are completed with the help of the wastewater treatment plants . based in part on the program's success , ohio officials have decided to set aside $15 million of cwsrf resources each year for their water resource restoration sponsor program . local governments have primary responsibility for wastewater treatment , owning and operating more than 17,000 treatment plants and 24,000 collection systems nationwide . local ratepayers have long been relied upon to fund both construction costs and operating and maintenance costs associated with facilities serving their communities . however , the federal government has provided financial assistance for these wastewater treatment facilities since the enactment of the water pollution control act amendments of 1956 , which established the federal construction grants program .