predeployment training . the army and marine corps offer predeployment training programs to provide additional language and culture instruction focused on the particular area to which a unit will deploy . the defense language institute foreign language center and army and marine corps culture centers provide deploying forces with language survival kits , briefings on culture issues , and mobile training teams that present more in - depth language and culture training . recommendation 4: the gao recommends that the secretary of defense direct the commander of the u.s. central command to establish a comprehensive , analytically - based process to identify and approve predeployment training requirements and include in this documentation a description of the analysis to be conducted prior to approving the requirements . dod response: concur . us central command ( uscentcom ) concurs that an analytically - based process by which to identify and approve predeployment training requirements was necessary at the time of this study . uscentcom commander approved uscentcom frago 09-1700 , uscentcom theater training requirements , dated march 28 , 2011 , which establishes the process for service components and sub - unified commands to nominate training requirements for approval , modification , or deletion for approval by the director of operations , uscentcom . dod response: concur . uscentcom concurs that a process to ensure that requirements are synchronized among the service components and subordinate commands was necessary at the time of this study . uscentcom has established and instituted a process that synchronizes requirements among the service components and subordinate commands . a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . dod , the army , and the marine corps have emphasized the need for improved language and culture skills in strategic guidance and are implementing training and education programs to begin to address these needs . before september 11 , 2001 , dod generally focused efforts to build language and culture capabilities on its professional communities . as military operations in afghanistan and iraq have continued , dod has broadened this focus to the general purpose forces . in figure 1 , we show that in departmentwide and service - level documents issued since 2005 , dod and the army and marine corps addressed the need for improved language and culture skills . the responsibilities within dod for identifying , developing , and maintaining language and culture capabilities are shared among several components , including the office of the secretary of defense , the combatant commanders , and the military services . the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness provides overall policy guidance for the defense language program and is also responsible for reviewing the policies , plans , and programs of the dod components to ensure that foreign language and regional proficiency needs are adequately addressed .