gao - 03-326 . washington , d.c.: january 29 , 2003 . see table 2 . the biggest decline has been in community nursing home care where the average daily census was 31 percent less in 2002 than in 1998 . average daily census in va - operated nursing homes also declined by 11 percent during this period . a 9 percent increase in state veterans' nursing homes' average daily census offsets some of the decline in average daily census in community and va - operated nursing homes . va headquarters officials told us that the decline in nursing home average daily census could be the result of a number of factors . these factors include providing more emphasis on shorter - term care for post - acute care rehabilitation , providing more home and community - based services to obviate the need for nursing home care , assisting veterans to obtain placement in community nursing homes where care is financed by other payers , such as medicaid , when appropriate , and difficulty recruiting enough nursing staff to operate all beds in some va - operated nursing homes . va policy provides networks broad discretion in deciding what nursing home care to offer those patients that va is not required to provide nursing home care to under the provisions of the veterans millennium health care and benefits act of 1999 . networks' use of this discretion appears to result in inequitable access to nursing home care . for example , some networks have policies to provide long - term nursing home care to these veterans who need such care if resources allow , while other networks do not have such policies . as a result , these veterans who need long - term nursing home care may have access to that care in some networks but not others . this is significant because about two - thirds of va's current nursing home users are recipients of discretionary nursing home care . va intended to address veterans' access to nursing home care as part of its larger cares initiative to project future health care needs and determine how to ensure equitable access . however , initial projections of nursing home need exceeded va's current nursing home capacity . va said that the projections did not reflect its long - term care policy and decided not to include nursing home care in its cares initiative . instead , va officials told us that they have developed a separate process to provide projections for nursing home , and home and community - based services needs . these officials expect that new projections will be developed for consideration by the under secretary for health by july 2003 . va officials also told us that va will use this information in its strategic planning initiatives to address nursing home and other long - term care issues at the same time that va implements its cares initiatives . because va has not systematically examined its nursing home policies and access to care , veterans have no assurance that va's $2 billion nursing home program is providing equitable access to care to those who need it . this is particularly important given the aging of the veteran population .