only limited progress has been made on our recommendations . in one recommendation we suggested that ssa convene an interagency study group to increase the ability of representative payee programs to protect federal benefit payments from misuse . although va , hhs , and opm indicated their willingness to participate in such a study group , ssa disagreed with this recommendation . ssa stated that its responsibility focuses on protecting ssa benefits , cited concern about the difficulty of interagency data sharing and privacy act restrictions , and indicated that leadership of the study group would not be within its purview . we checked with ssa recently and learned that its position has not changed . coordination among federal agencies and between federal agencies and state courts remains essentially unchanged , according to agency and court officials we spoke with . ssa continues to provide limited information to the va in cases where issues arise such as evidence of incapability or misuse of benefits . however , to ensure that no overpayment of va benefits occurs , ssa will provide appropriate va officials requested information as to the amount of social security benefit savings reported by the representative payee . in 2004 , we also recommended that hhs work with national organizations involved in guardianship programs to provide support and leadership to the states for cost - effective pilot and demonstration projects to facilitate state efforts to improve oversight of guardianships and to aid guardians in the fulfillment of their responsibilities . specifically , we recommended that hhs support the development of cost - effective approaches for compiling consistent national data concerning guardianships . hhs made a step in this direction by supporting a study by the american bar association commission on law and aging of the guardianship data practices in each state , which could prove helpful in efforts to move toward more consistent and comprehensive data on guardianships . the study found that although several states collect at least some basic data on guardianships , most still do not . both the house and the senate versions of bills calling for an elder justice act would establish an advisory board on elder abuse , neglect , and exploitation charged with making several recommendations including some concerning the development of state interdisciplinary guardianship committees . as noted earlier , the commission on uniform state law has issued a discussion draft of a uniform adult guardianship and protective proceedings jurisdiction act . wisconsin's adoption of a reformed guardianship law this year emphasizes the use of the least restrictive type of guardianship that is appropriate . regarding the monitoring of guardianships , recently texas and new jersey joined several states that now have programs in place to license , certify , or register professional guardians . in 2005 , colorado began requiring prospective guardians ( with some exceptions such as parents who are seeking to be guardians for their children ) to undergo criminal background checks .