gao - 06-1119t . washington , d.c.: september 28 , 2006 . cbocs are affiliated with a va medical center . cwt is a therapeutic work - for - pay program that ( 1 ) uses remunerative work to maximize a veteran's level of functioning , ( 2 ) prepares veterans for successful reentry into the community , and ( 3 ) provides a structured daily activity to those veterans with severe and chronic disabling physical and / or mental conditions . domiciliary residential rehabilitation and treatment programs for homeless veterans , providing coordinated , integrated rehabilitative and restorative clinical care in a bed - based program , with the goal of helping eligible veterans achieve and maintain the highest level of functioning and independence possible . va offers grants to non - va organizations in the community to provide supportive housing programs and supportive service centers for homeless veterans . once programs are established , va provides per diem payments to help offset operational expenses of the program . grant and per diem liaisons oversee services provided by these organizations . mental health intensive case management teams are designed to deliver high - quality services that: ( 1 ) provide intensive , flexible community support ; ( 2 ) improve health status ( reduce psychiatric symptoms and substance abuse ) ; ( 3 ) reduce psychiatric inpatient hospital use and dependency ; ( 4 ) improve community adjustment , functioning , and quality of life ; ( 5 ) enhance satisfaction with services ; and ( 6 ) reduce treatment costs . the mentally ill chemically addicted program , intended to assist underserved veterans with serious and persistent mental illnesses , involves recovery - and rehabilitation - oriented services in network 17 as well as training on the recovery model and psychosocial rehabilitation concepts and skills . operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) and operation enduring freedom ( oef ) assessment , preventative , and early intervention mental health services for veterans returning from combat in iraq , afghanistan , and other areas . these services involve outreach and education efforts , as well as a range of psychosocial support services . the peer housing location assistance group pilot program is a recovery - oriented program that encourages and enables each veteran to take responsibility and initiative to choose and apply for as many housing opportunities as his or her eligibility characteristics , preferences , and motivation permit . the program aims to help participants manage the process and frustrations of finding and maintaining safe and secure housing through a combination of information , problem - solving , encouragement , professional assistance , and peer support . a collaborative venture between the north texas health care system and the texas correctional office on offenders with medical and mental impairments that provides active outreach and case management services to veterans with diagnosed mental illness being released from the texas prisons and involves work with the texas diversion courts for mentally ill offenders to provide outreach and case management services for veterans convicted of minor offences who have been diagnosed with mental illness .