development projects . usaid does not require implementing partners to report on activities , beneficiaries , or financial resources applied to conditional food aid activities . instead , partners are required to report data based on program elements — common categories used throughout foreign assistance projects to aggregate information for reporting purposes — such as civic participation , maternal and child health , natural resources and biodiversity , and agricultural activity . according to usaid officials , these program elements often include multiple conditional food aid activities in addition to general food distribution , training , and other activities unrelated to conditional transfers . emergency projects . usaid does not systematically track data about the types of conditional food aid activities that wfp implements through usaid - funded title ii emergency projects , although wfp's annual standard project reports contain this information . however , the wfp reports do not provide , and usaid does not have access to , data specific to wfp's conditional food aid activities supported by u.s. contributions . since the united states may be one of multiple donors for wfp's emergency projects , usaid cannot determine the percentages of its contributions that support particular aspects of these projects . because information about conditional food aid in title ii projects was not readily available , usaid officials spent several months gathering and revising the data we requested to determine ( 1 ) which title ii development and emergency projects contained conditional food aid activities in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , ( 2 ) how much money usaid contributed to these projects , ( 3 ) how many beneficiaries participated in each project , and ( 4 ) what quantities of commodities usaid provided for these projects . according to chapter 203 of usaid's automated directives system ( ads ) , usaid operating units must strive to continuously learn and improve their approach to achieving results in order to meet development goals . the ads states that evaluation is the systematic collection and analysis of information as a basis for judgments to improve programs' effectiveness , to inform decisions about current and future programming , or both . the ads also states that the purpose of strong evaluation and performance monitoring practices is to apply learning gained from evidence and analysis . without tracking the use of conditional food aid , usaid cannot identify the scope of conditional food aid activities implemented under title ii . moreover , usaid cannot readily identify title ii projects that include conditional food aid activities or report the dollars awarded for these activities , the number of beneficiaries served , or the metric tons of commodities used . additionally , without the ability to collect information about the resources being used to implement conditional food aid activities , usaid cannot reliably monitor or evaluate these activities to learn systematically from their use . although usaid was unable to provide data about the amounts of title ii funding that were used for conditional food aid activities , our comprehensive review of available usaid data found that in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , 98 percent of usaid - funded title ii development projects and 88 percent of title ii emergency projects included these activities .