at the end of this report. ) building on our body of work examining dod biometrics and forensics , as requested , we examined dod's expeditionary forensic capability . specifically , this report addresses the extent to which dod has taken steps to establish an enduring expeditionary forensic capability . we narrowed the scope of our review to laboratory applications of expeditionary forensics , and focused on latent fingerprints and dna — the two most prevalent forensic disciplines u.s. forces have relied on in iraq and afghanistan . concurrently , ousd ( at&l ) contracted with cna's center for naval analyses to assess the department's overall forensic activities , to include expeditionary forensics , and issue a report for the secretary of defense by the summer of 2013 . we met with officials from ousd ( at&l ) and cna's center for naval analyses to ensure our work did not overlap with this assessment . to assess the steps dod has taken to establish an enduring expeditionary forensic capability , we analyzed relevant policy and guidance that describe dod's plans to organize , train , and equip forces to sustain expeditionary forensic activities . we also interviewed planning , operations , and resource management officials from the office of the secretary of defense , each of the four military services , all six geographic combatant commands , and special operations command to discuss the status of planned and ongoing initiatives related to expeditionary forensics . we reviewed and analyzed dod's forensic strategic plan to determine if it included key strategic planning elements that are consistent with our previous work on developing and implementing strategic plans . department of defense , dod forensic enterprise , dod directive 5205.15e ( april 26 , 2011 ) . questions on data reliability . we identified several issues concerning the reliability of the budget data obtained from ousd ( at&l ) , the military services , and special operations command , including the sources from which the budget data were derived , the consistency in how the budget data were compiled , and the manner in which the budget data were verified . as a result , we determined that the budget data were not sufficiently reliable . therefore , we are making a recommendation that addresses ousd ( at&l ) 's ability to review and evaluate the dod components' forensic budget data by calling for the development of budget collecting and reporting guidance . more detailed information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i of this report . we conducted this performance audit from may 2012 through june 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . improvised explosive devices have caused numerous injuries and fatalities among u.s. and coalition forces while carrying out operations in iraq and afghanistan . to mitigate this threat , dod has taken a number of actions , such as deploying its expeditionary forensic capabilities .