ii. ) in addition , both dod and va provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . the departments' specific responses to each of our recommendations are as follows: to develop and implement a process for using performance measures to gauge collaboration sites' progress in achieving goals related to access , quality of care , and costs , dod and va stated that their 2011- 2013 joint strategic plan established a cost efficiency measure for joint venture sites and noted that the health executive council plans to expand this cost efficiency measure and develop additional measures for other collaboration sites . va stated that a health executive council work group would develop a plan to address this issue within 6 months of the publication of this report . to expedite and communicate a plan with time frames for when iehr solutions will be made available to joint ventures and other collaboration sites , dod and va stated that the ipo advisory board has approved an incremental plan for development of iehr capabilities that results in achieving capabilities by the end of fiscal year 2017 and that the ipo will work with a joint executive council work group to ensure stakeholders are informed of this incremental schedule . dual credentialing of providers . providers who deliver care in both va and dod facilities as part of collaboration efforts must be “credentialed” by both facilities . credentialing is a process in which health care providers are systematically screened and evaluated for their qualifications and other credentials , including their licensure , education , training , and current competence . biloxi and honolulu joint venture officials said that the credentialing process is time - intensive and that dual credentialing creates some duplication of effort as staff members repeat many credentialing steps already completed by their collaboration partner . honolulu va officials added that dual credentialing also can create delays between the time new providers join their facility and when they can begin clinical work at their collaboration partner's facility , because the extra credentialing steps must first be completed . they said that it also complicates staffing . for example , if a dually credentialed va social worker who works at tripler army medical center is on vacation or is ill , va cannot send a non - dually credentialed social worker to take that person's place . at the department level , to address concerns about dual credentialing , a health executive council review resulted in a december 2010 memorandum of understanding between va and dod that was intended to facilitate credentialing and reduce the time and costs associated with dual credentialing . base access procedures are critical to protecting dod personnel and assets ; they are established locally by military leaders at each base on the basis of factors such as that base's specific security needs and guidance from the department and the military services . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact us at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or draperd@gao.gov or ( 202 ) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .