reimbursement for emergency work . officials in nine municipalities we spoke to said that they had not been fully reimbursed for emergency work they completed . further , officials in five municipalities we interviewed stated that the lack of full reimbursement has caused financial hardships . for example , officials in three municipalities said that the lack of full reimbursement has meant that the municipalities have had to pause or delay recovery work due to lack of financial resources . a mayor in one municipality stated that they have scaled back some essential services , such as the frequency of garbage pick - up , while waiting for full reimbursement . according to fema officials , delays in providing reimbursement were due to several factors including a loss in fema personnel to process reimbursement requests and a significant increase in the volume of reimbursement requests submitted by cor3 to fema . need for additional guidance . municipal officials cited concerns about a lack of comprehensive guidance for the alternative procedures process . workforce capacity constraints . fema and municipality officials cited concerns about fema staff turnover and lack of knowledge about how the public assistance alternative procedures are to be applied in puerto rico . while several municipal officials we spoke to remarked positively on consistent communication with fema officials , municipal officials in six municipalities we visited cited high levels of turnover among fema staff as a challenge . for example , officials in three municipalities said that discontinuity in fema personnel has caused them to have duplicative conversations with fema . an official from one municipality described the disruption that had been caused by repeated changes in fema personnel , especially when their point of contact at fema changed at least six times since the hurricanes . fema officials acknowledged that more personnel with expertise in the alternative procedures process are needed to administer the public assistance program and assist subrecipients . according to fema officials , fema has leveraged existing expertise from personnel in the federal coordinating officer advisory group to train new employees to increase workforce capacity . fema personnel from this group are rotating experts assigned to recovery issues to increase institutional understanding of alternative procedures and train local hires . according to fema officials , these local hires can serve as fema staff for up to one year before they become reservists . in addition , fema officials stated that they have identified contractors with previous experience regarding alternative procedures to provide additional assistance to subrecipients . specifically , officials in eight municipalities we interviewed cited problems with missing , incomplete , or conflicting guidance from fema . in addition , officials in four municipalities stated that they are waiting on additional written instructions to establish more clear and consistent guidance . officials from one municipality told us that the lack of written guidance has meant that the municipality has had to re - submit documents to fema multiple times to respond to changing guidance that they have received verbally . additionally , four municipalities cited missing , incomplete , or conflicting guidance from cor3 as a challenge . however , one municipality noted that the quality of communication with cor3 has improved over time as cor3 has become more established .