both reports are available on www.recovery.gov . omb has taken the additional step of disaggregating financial information , i.e. , federal obligations and outlays by recovery act programs and by state in its weekly financial activity report . our recommendation: the director of omb should continue to develop and implement an approach that provides easily accessible , real - time notification to ( 1 ) prime recipients in states and localities when funds are made available for their use , and ( 2 ) states — where the state is not the primary recipient of funds but has a statewide interest in this information . in addition , omb should provide a long range time line for the release of federal guidance for the benefit of nonfederal recipients responsible for implementing recovery act programs . recipient financial tracking and reporting guidance: in addition to employment related reporting , omb's guidance calls for the tracking of funds by the prime recipient , recipient vendors , and subrecipients receiving payments . omb's guidance also allows that “prime recipients may delegate certain reporting requirements to subrecipients.” either the prime or sub - recipient must report the d - u - n - s number ( or an acceptable alternative ) for any vendor or sub - recipient receiving payments greater than $25 thousand . in addition , the prime recipient must report what was purchased and the amount , and a total number and amount for sub - awards of less than $25 thousand . by reporting the duns number , omb guidance provides a way to identify subrecipients by project , but this alone does not ensure data quality . the approach to tracking funds is generally consistent with the federal funding accountability and transparency act ( ffata ) . like the recovery act , the ffata requires a publicly available web site — usaspending.gov — to report financial information about entities awarded federal funds . yet , significant questions have been raised about the reliability of the data on usaspending.gov , primarily because what is reported by the prime recipients is dependent on the unknown data quality and reporting capabilities of their subrecipients . for example , earlier this year , more than 2 years after passage of ffata , the congressional research services ( crs ) questioned the reliability of the data on usaspending.gov . we share crs's concerns associated with usaspending.gov , including incomplete , inaccurate , and other data quality problems . more broadly , these concerns also pertain to recipient financial reporting in accordance with the recovery act and its federal reporting vehicle , www.federalreporting.gov , currently under development . our recommendation: to strengthen the effort to track the use of funds , the director of omb should ( 1 ) clarify what constitutes appropriate quality control and reconciliation by prime recipients , especially for subrecipient data , and ( 2 ) specify who should best provide formal certification and approval of the data reported . agency - specific guidance: dot and fhwa have yet to provide clear guidance regarding how states are to implement the recovery act requirement that economically distressed areas are to receive priority in the selection of highway projects for funding .