the vcaa ( p.l . 106-475 ) , commonly referred to as the “duty to assist” law , was enacted in november 2000 . this law repealed the requirement that claims be well - grounded and it obligated va to assist a claimant in obtaining evidence that is necessary to establish eligibility for the benefit being sought . vcaa requires vba to take specific steps to assist claimants once they have filed a complete claim for benefits . specifically , the vcaa requires vba to: ( 1 ) notify claimants of the information necessary to complete the application ; ( 2 ) indicate what information not previously provided is needed to prove the claim , and distinguish between the portion of the information for which the claimant will be responsible and the portion for which va will be responsible ; ( 3 ) make reasonable efforts to assist claimants in obtaining evidence to substantiate claimants' eligibility for benefits , including relevant records ; and ( 4 ) inform claimants when relevant records are unable to be obtained . the vcaa also allowed for the re - adjudication of claims denied as not well - grounded between the date of the morton decision , july 14 , 1999 , and the effective date of the vcaa , november 9 , 2000 . to meet its production goal , in december 2001 , vba allocated its fiscal year 2002 national production target to its regional offices based on each regional office's capacity to produce rating - related claims given each office's number of rating staff and their experience levels . vba considered the error rate for vcaa compliance to be significant enough that in april 2002 it asked regional offices to “retrain” staff on the vcaa guidance and certify that the staff have read and understand the guidance , by the end of april 2002 . as of may 7 , 2002 , 56 of the 57 offices had certified that their staff had read and understand the guidance . although ensuring that staff have read and understand the guidance is a positive step , this may not be enough . vba had already issued a series of implementing guidance letters to answer staff questions and to reinforce guidance prior to the star review . however , the star review showed that regional offices continued to experience problems with implementation . vba has not determined the reasons why the regional offices are not properly implementing the vcaa . vba is managing the slowdown in case processing by attempting to significantly increase regional offices' rating decision production . vcaa contributed to the slowdown in claims processing because vba reworked many claims based on the vcaa's new requirements and because new claims must also be processed under these more time - consuming requirements . vba has set production and inventory goals for fiscal year 2002 , which it believes will put it on track to reducing the average time to process claims to 100 days by the end of fiscal year 2003 . although vba has made some progress in increasing production , it faces challenges in meeting these production and inventory goals .