requirements ? claims is referred to niosh for dose reconstruction niosh obtains worker's and workplace monitoring information from energy and other sources as appropriate decision ? labor's final adjudication final decision ? while labor makes and reports its decisions on the claim level , niosh reports its dose reconstruction results on the case level because only one dose reconstruction is completed for each worker regardless of the number of claims filed by survivors . table 3 presents information on the status of claims referred to niosh for dose reconstructions at both the claim and case levels as of january 31 , 2004 . in addition to the above contacts , melinda l. cordero and rosemary torres lerma made significant contributions to this report . luann moy and william bates assisted with methodology and data analysis , margaret armen provided legal support , and amy e. buck assisted with the message and report development . two necessary regulations were finalized in may 2002 . in a may 2004 report to congress , niosh reported that many of the key program pieces , such as recruiting and training staff , were not completed until 2003 , contributing to the delays in its ability to complete dose reconstructions . niosh also highlighted the difficulties it has encountered in collecting information from labor , energy and other employers , and claimants . for instance , niosh reported that information such as employment history and cancer diagnosis provided by labor is , at times , inaccurate or incomplete . niosh also reported that obtaining information from energy or other employers has been difficult because individual exposure records cannot always be located . finally , while the intent of conducting an interview with the claimant is to obtain useful information , niosh officials report , however , that this will not hinder a dose reconstruction . niosh has been working to improve its ability to develop dose reconstructions and address its backlog of claims needing dose reconstruction . in march 2004 , the director of niosh testified that niosh has steadily increased its capacity to complete dose reconstructions and that much of the program's development is complete . niosh officials stated that they continue to work with labor staff to establish a better understanding of what information , such as ethnicity and smoking history , is needed by niosh to perform a dose reconstruction , and officials stated that labor is now typically providing this information . in addition , niosh has worked with energy facilities to provide requested information in a more timely fashion . improvements have been made in this area , and officials report that energy generally provides the information within niosh's time frame of 60 days . while niosh officials are working with claimants to better educate them about the information niosh wants to collect during the interview , niosh officials said that it was important to realize that these interviews are voluntary and are not the sole source of information . information provided during the interviews is helpful , but a dose reconstruction is not dependent upon an interview being conducted , according to niosh officials .