( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for review and comment . dhs provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix ii , and technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . dhs agreed with our recommendation that tsa establish specific goals for the tso basic training program and develop performance measures that can be used to assess if the program is achieving desired outcomes . in addition , in its written comments dhs outlined steps to address this recommendation . with regard to performance goals , tsa plans to establish broad goals that include successful screening and improved morale , among others . dedicated faculty and instructor development . tso basic training offers a dedicated faculty and support staff focused exclusively on training tsos . according to tsa officials , before tso basic training , training at individual airports was often conducted by tsos for whom instruction was a collateral duty , whereas instructors at the academy have full - time training responsibilities and enhanced opportunities to learn from each other , increase their professional training skills , and provide feedback on the delivery of course curriculum . centralized facility and shared logistics . by locating the tsa academy at fletc , tsa is able to take advantage of the services and logistical support that fletc provides . specifically , fletc services and logistics include accommodations , meals , and transportation , thereby reducing the administrative demands on tsa personnel and allowing students a focused and efficient training experience . additional efficiencies cited by tsa officials include lower overall costs for office space , janitorial services , and other operational costs because such costs are shared by the 96 agencies that use fletc . according to tsa officials , conducting training at fletc can also help tsa accommodate hiring surges and better augment future training , if needed . for example , tsa officials reported that the facility has surge capacity from its current capacity of 240 students up to 300 new students if sufficient instructors are available . according to tsa documents and training officials , another key benefit of centralized training is the opportunity to enhance professionalism and help foster camaraderie and esprit de corps . tsa anticipates that centralized , standardized training will not only provide trainees with an increased focus on the tsa mission and operational environment , but can serve to instill a common culture and sense of belonging among the broader community of tsos nationwide . in its business case , tsa notes that centralized training of new recruits is a common model employed by the armed forces and other federal law enforcement agencies within dhs , such as u.s. customs and border protection and the u.s. coast guard . according to the business case , by bringing together newly hired tsos from around the country , tsa also hopes to inspire in its trainees a singular identity and unity of purpose , which previous analyses generally found lacking as part of the decentralized training approach . the business case also associates such increases in professionalism and esprit de corps with greater employee satisfaction and the potential for reduced attrition .