the estimates we were provided vary considerably . officials at nichd , which has conducted many pediatric drug studies , said costs vary depending on the number of children participating and type of drug being studied . they estimated that a safety and efficacy study may cost between $1 million and $7.5 million , while the cost of a pharmacokinetic study can range from $250,000 to $750,000 per age group . limited data provided by phrma suggested higher study costs , ranging from under $5 million to more than $35 million . another study indicated that , based on a survey of drug companies , the cost of pediatric studies averaged $3.87 million per written request . as of april 1 , 2001 , 28 drugs had been granted marketing extensions based on research conducted in accordance with fda's written requests . the drugs granted extensions treat a variety of diseases or conditions that afflict children . table 1 provides some overall population information on the prevalence of diseases in pediatric patients that may be treated by some of the drugs granted market extensions . there has been some concern that exclusivity may be sought and granted primarily for drugs that generate substantial revenue . our analysis found that sales revenue varied widely for the 155 approved drugs for which fda has issued written requests . as shown in figure 1 , while 7.7 percent of the drugs covered by written requests had sales exceeding $1 billion in 1999 , 53.5 percent had sales under $120 million in 1999 . another 14.8 percent of the drugs had sales that were more than $120 million but less than $200 million . research conducted under the pediatric exclusivity provision is providing new and useful information about whether and how drugs work in children . as of april 1 , 2001 , labels for 18 of the 28 drugs granted marketing extensions had been changed to incorporate findings from research conducted to obtain the extensions . some of these label changes include new statements that the drug can be used for younger children or for a new use . other label changes provide additional and more specific guidance regarding the effective dose or additional warnings about adverse events in children or information on related medications . in addition to making label changes , sponsors for three drugs developed new formulations that are easier to administer to children . a few examples will help illustrate the new information derived from these studies . ibuprofen: this commonly used drug to reduce fever had no dosing information for children under 2 years of age . studies in thousands of infants established a safe and effective dose in infants and children from 6 months to 2 years . ranitidine: studies in neonates provided accurate dosing information for safer and more effective use of this drug in the management of reflux of stomach contents — a life - threatening event in seriously ill neonates — and the label now says the drug can be prescribed to newborns and 1-month - olds .