we also interviewed industry associations . with respect to the use of tools such as tracking sheets to maintain and share information on commitment implementation , we discussed agency staff - level methods for tracking the status of commitments with officials from commerce . for contextual purposes , we also discussed with state officials their process for tracking the status of commitments in the strategic track of the s&ed . we discussed with commerce staff the characteristics and use of a tracking document developed by staff for compiling information on commitment implementation for use in briefing senior officials for key meetings . to evaluate how u.s. agencies report on the status of commitment implementation , we asked agency officials and consulted agency documents to identify relevant public documents and other types of reports they use to inform the public and congress on the outcomes and status . they then negotiate the wording of the joint fact sheet . this process can identify information on the status of past commitments , as well as in some cases on follow - on commitments . ustr and treasury officials stated that participants actively negotiate jcct commitment language immediately before and during the jcct plenary meetings , and treasury officials said that joint fact sheet language is also actively discussed during the time of the s&ed plenary meetings . in addition , in 2010 , the united states and china instituted a mid - year review within the jcct as an additional tool to track commitment implementation and to prepare for annual plenary meetings . according to a ustr official and our review of mid - year review agendas , the review focuses on selected priority commitments from the previous year and proposing outcomes for the upcoming plenary . u.s. officials observed that discussions of the status of particular commitments take place across a wide range of settings aside from those directly related to the jcct and s&ed . treasury officials stated that they follow up on the implementation of certain types of s&ed commitments in various meetings with their chinese counterparts , citing government procurement issues as particularly relevant for discussions with their counterparts at the ministry of finance , which leads on the issue . one agency cited mechanisms for engaging their chinese counterparts , such as memoranda of understanding with provisions related to implementation of jcct commitments . u.s. reports cited forums such as wto standing committees and the apec forum as examples of meetings where jcct and s&ed trade and investment commitment implementation may be discussed . for example , according to wto documents , china reported to the wto committee on government procurement that it expected to submit a revised offer on government procurement to the committee before the end of 2013 , consistent with its 2013 s&ed commitment . u.s. agencies obtain information on implementation status from u.s. industry and u.s. officials abroad . u.s. officials based in washington told us they work with u.s. industry associations and companies in developing information on an ongoing basis on china's implementation progress . for example , ustr solicits written submissions from interested parties through the issuance of federal register notices issued in conjunction with the preparation of annual mandated reports .