eeoc: an overview . gao - 08-589 . see figure 1 . eeoc officials told us they did not know the specific reasons for the downward trend in gender pay charges , but noted that the types of charges filed with the agency can be affected by issues covered in the media , changes in law , or the state of the national economy . in fy 2007 , gender pay charges accounted for about 2 percent of all charges . to effectively use its resources , eeoc prioritizes each charge as it is received according to whether it appears to merit further investigation . specifically: eeoc assigns charges that appear to have merit based on the available evidence for further investigation to determine whether the employer violated anti - discrimination laws . eeoc offers mediation services for charges that may have merit , but for which evidence needs to be further developed . mediation between an individual and employer is offered as an alternative to a lengthy investigation . participation in the mediation program is confidential , voluntary , and requires the consent of both parties . if mediation is not successful in resolving the charge , it is assigned for investigation . eeoc usually dismisses charges that do not appear to have merit or where the agency does not have jurisdiction . if eeoc finds a violation as a result of its investigation , it attempts to reach an agreement between the charging party and employer through a conciliation process . if conciliation fails , eeoc may decide to litigate the case in federal court . eeoc may resolve any charge with an employer early in the process through settlement , which is a voluntary process . the charge resolution process is depicted in figure 2 . compared to other types of charges , we found that gender pay charges were less likely to be dismissed and more likely to be prioritized for further investigation . over the last 8 years , approximately 32 percent of gender pay cases were prioritized for investigation , compared to about 21 percent of non - gender pay charges , as shown in figure 3 . according to eeoc officials , this difference may be attributable to the apparent strength of evidence , such as payroll data , initially presented by charging parties in gender pay cases as compared to non - gender pay cases . although eeoc prioritized a greater percentage of gender pay cases for investigation , the agency ultimately obtained a similar rate of outcomes that were favorable to the charging party in gender pay cases as it did in all others . specifically , about 24 percent of gender pay charges , and 21 percent of all other charges , resulted in conciliation , settlement , or a withdrawal that yielded monetary or non - monetary benefits from fy 2000 to fy 2007 . agency officials said the similarity in resolutions may be attributable to the fact that most charges that enter mediation are resolved in a manner that is favorable to the charging party but that charges filed under the epa are not mediated , pursuant to eeoc policy .