open . in testing a statistical sample of 45 manual interest transactions recorded during fiscal year 2006 , we found eight errors relating to the calculation and recording of manually calculated interest . we estimate that 18 percent of irs's manual interest population contains errors and concluded that irs controls over this area remain ineffective . 03-29 confirm with fms that irs's requirements for background and fingerprint checks for courier services are met regardless of whether irs or fms negotiates the service agreement . ( short - term ) management report: improvements needed in irs's internal controls ( gao - 03-562r , may 30 , 2003 ) closed . during 2002 , fms issued an amendment to the courier memorandum of understanding ( mou ) , which included the requirement that all courier employees satisfy the basic investigation , including a federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) fingerprint and name check . all 10 irs campuses now have a contact responsible for submitting paperwork to the national background investigations center ( nbic ) and ensuring courier employees are granted clearance . during 2003 , irs required nbic to provide monthly status reports of the campus compliance with this requirement . during fiscal year 2006 , all courier mous and nbic reports were received monthly , enabling irs to identify problems and issues more quickly . closed . during our fiscal year 2006 audit , we found no instances in which updated courier service contracts did not contain the requirements for background and fingerprint checks . employees' personal belongings with cash payments and receipts at irs's taxpayer assistance centers . ( short - term ) management report: improvements needed in irs's internal controls ( gao - 03-562r , may 30 , 2003 ) closed . tac procedures ( irm 21.3.4.7.3.1 ( 2 ) ) prohibit storing of personal items with any taxpayer - related documents . procedures further prohibit storing taxpayer receipts in the same storage container with employee personal items . personal items and taxpayer - related documents must not be stored in the same container under the same locking device . closed . we verified that irs prohibits its employees from storing personal belongings with any taxpayer - related documents . require lockbox managers to provide satisfactory evidence that managerial reviews are performed in accordance with established guidelines . at a minimum , reviewers should sign and date the reviewed documents and provide any comments that may be appropriate in the event that their reviews identified problems or raised questions . ( short - term ) management report: improvements needed in irs's internal controls and accounting procedures ( gao - 04- 553r , april 26 , 2004 ) closed . during fiscal year 2006 , irs established and implemented a new data collection instrument ( dci ) review , entitled “processing - internal controls.” during on - site reviews , the following logs are required to be reviewed: desk and work area , date stamp , cash , candling , shred , and mail . the results of these dci reviews are rolled into a calculation to determine each bank's score in the new bank performance measurement process .