pesticides . under ucmr2 , all public water systems serving 100,000 or more people and a representative sample of 800 systems serving fewer than 100,000 people were required to monitor for nine pesticides using the screening survey monitoring approach . these pesticides included three widely used herbicides applied for weed control on crops such as corn , cotton , and soybeans , and six degradates . contaminant monitoring occurred quarterly for surface water systems and biannually for groundwater systems . is the requirement that surface water systems monitor for 4 consecutive quarters likely to provide epa sufficient data to determine whether contaminants occur with a frequency and at levels of public health concern ? 5-not enough information to judge please explain your answer to question 16: 17 . under ucmr - 3 , ground water systems must monitor twice in a 12-month period with sampling events 5- 7 months apart . is the requirement that ground water systems monitor twice in a 12-month period likely to provide epa sufficient data to determine whether contaminants occur with a frequency and at levels of public health concern ? please explain your answer to question 17: 18 . under ucmr - 3 , non - disinfecting ground water systems located in sensitive hydrogeological areas ( i.e. , karst or fractured bedrock ) must monitor twice in a 12-month period with sampling events 5-7 months apart for 2 viruses . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - section 4: use of the ucmr contaminant occurrence data 26 . epa uses ucmr data to make regulatory determinations for some of the contaminants listed on the ccl . due to a time lag , the ucmr - 3 occurrence data will not be available to inform the regulatory determinations about the contaminants on ccl - 3 . as a result , epa is using occurrence data from prior ucmrs to inform these regulatory determinations . ccl - 3 includes 28 contaminants monitored under prior ucmrs . is this likely to be an effective strategy for making regulatory determinations , given the time lag ? 5-not enough information to judge please explain your answer to question 26: 27 . sometimes epa waits several years before it uses the ucmr occurrence data to inform its regulatory determinations . after the ucmr occurrence data has been collected , about how long is it likely to be a reliable indicator of the frequency and level of drinking water contamination ? c. - 5 to less than 11 years d. - 11 to less than 16 years e. - 16 to less than 20 years g. - not enough information to judge 28 . the primary purpose of the ucmr program is to collect contaminant occurrence data for informing regulatory determinations which are based , in part , on the frequency and level of drinking water contamination .