ssa . moving the deadline to january 31 would create logistical and technical challenges for ssa . as previously discussed , ssa officials told us that moving the deadline to january 31 or earlier would require shifting its software development cycle because ssa's computer experts are working on another system during that timeframe ; however , the computer experts are available to implement an accelerated w - 2 filing date of february 29 . if concurrent changes in the e - file threshold are not made , ssa may also incur administrative costs , should the number of w - 2 corrections increase or a processing backlog occur ( see next section for details ) . what does irs know about the extent of idt refund fraud ? what additional actions can irs take to combat idt refund fraud using third - party information ( for example , from employers and financial institutions ) ? a report to be issued later in 2014 will address a broader set of actions that irs could take to combat idt refund fraud . to understand what irs knows about the extent of idt refund fraud , we reviewed irs's identity theft taxonomy ( taxonomy ) — a matrix of idt refund fraud categories — which estimates the amount of idt refund fraud that irs is , and is not , preventing . we conducted manual data testing for obvious errors and compared underlying data to irs's refund fraud & identity theft global report . we confirmed taxonomy components where we had data available to cross check . we also interviewed irs officials to better understand the methodology used to create the estimates . for a summary of taxonomy limitations , see appendix i . to identify opportunities to improve irs's idt refund fraud efforts , we reviewed internal revenue manual sections detailing irs's identity protection program and irs documentation for its external leads program ( where third parties , often financial institutions , report suspicious refunds to irs ) , opt - in program ( where financial institutions can flag and reject suspicious refunds sent via direct deposit ) , and other third - party efforts . we interviewed officials from the social security administration ( ssa ) and from associations representing software companies , return preparers , financial institutions , and payroll companies . to help ensure our analysis covered a variety of viewpoints , we selected a nonprobability sample of 22 associations and stakeholders with differing positions and characteristics , based on irs documentation and suggestions , prior gao work , and other information . because we used a nonprobability sample , the views of these associations are not generalizable to all potential third parties . we then communicated with irs offices , including ( 1 ) privacy , government liaison , and disclosure ; and ( 2 ) return integrity and correspondence services , to determine the feasibility of various options and the challenges of pursuing them . see appendix ii for details on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from may 2014 to august 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .