gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 2009 . pension benefit guaranty corporation: improvements needed to address financial and management challenges . gao - 08-1162t . washington , d.c.: september 24 , 2008 . pension benefit guaranty corporation: need for improved oversight persists . gao - 08-1062 . we last testified on the challenges facing pbgc in september . at that time we noted that many of the challenges , particularly the financial challenges , facing pbgc are long - term and structural in nature . in fact , we designated pbgc's single - employer pension insurance program , its largest insurance program , as “high risk” in 2003 because of these financial challenges . the program remains on the list today with a projected deficit of just over $11 billion , as of september 2008 . however , recent events , particularly the steep downturn in the financial markets and worsening economic conditions , have likely further eroded pbgc's financial position and have also likely increased the risk that pbgc will have to assume responsibility for the underfunded plans of large , financially - weak employers . my statement will discuss the ( 1 ) pbgc's financial vulnerabilities , and ( 2 ) the governance , oversight , and management challenges also facing pbgc . my statement is based on our prior work assessing pbgc's long - term financial challenges , and several reports we have published over the past two years on pbgc governance and management . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we specifically noted pbgc's prior - year net deficit , as well as the risk of the termination among large , underfunded pension plans , as reasons for the program's high - risk designation . as part of our monitoring of pbgc as a high - risk agency we have highlighted additional challenges faced by the single - employer program . among these concerns were the serious weaknesses that existed with respect to plan funding rules and that pbgc's premium structure and guarantees needed to be re - examined to better reflect the risk posed by various plans . additionally , the number of single - employer insured db plans has been rapidly declining , and , among the plans still in operation , many have frozen benefits to some or all participants . further , the prevalence of plans that are closed to new participants seems to imply that pbgc is likely to see a decline in insured participants , especially as insured participants seem increasingly likely to be retired ( as opposed to active or current ) workers . pbgc has remained high - risk with each subsequent report in 2005 , 2007 , and , most recently , 2009 . in our 2007 high risk update we noted that major pension legislation had been enacted which addressed many of the concerns articulated in our previous reports and testimonies on pbgc's financial condition .