we disagree . nrc has not yet instituted a new force - on - force program , and our report reflects nrc's current force - on - force efforts . nrc suspended its old osre program after september 11 , 2001 , and is currently conducting pilot force - on - force exercises , which we describe in this report . nrc has not determined when a permanent program will be instituted or what it will consist of when it is reinstituted . nrc plans to use the results of the pilot exercises to help formulate a new , permanent program . we also disagree that the “anecdotal” issues cited in the draft report were “relatively minor issues” and do not believe that the continued extensive use of non - cited violations will achieve the best oversight . sleeping guards , unauthorized access to protected areas , disabled alarms in the vital area , and failure to inspect visitors who set off alarms on metal detectors are all serious security problems that warrant nrc attention and oversight . nrc's belief that it should rely on the licensees to self - identify and correct these types of problems is troubling . instead of discounting problems that are , on their face , quite worrisome , nrc should aggressively determine the root cause of the problems , formulate corrective actions , and follow up to ensure that the approved corrective actions have been implemented and that the implemented actions have corrected the problems . the use of non - cited violations delegates these activities and responsibilities to the licensees . nrc believes that such delegation is appropriate and that the use of non - cited violations contributes to an environment in which the licensee self - identifies and corrects problems , a behavior that nrc said it encourages . however , in the cases we cited , the delegation of responsibility for identifying and correcting security problems was not effective because all were security problems that the licensee failed to identify , but instead were found by nrc security inspectors . finally , nrc stated that its process requires it to review a sampling of the licensees' corrective actions to ensure that the licensees are implementing the corrective actions . nrc failed to note , however , that the requirement cited is part of the baseline security inspection program that was suspended after september 11 , 2001 , and that has not been reinstated . in addition , when nrc was conducting baseline security inspections , the program required corrective action checks only every 2 years , and the sample selected for checks included all corrective actions — safety and emergency preparedness , as well as security . as a result , nrc had no assurance that any security corrective actions would be selected for follow - up . licensees should be involved in identifying and correcting problems . however , we believe that by delegating these functions to the licensee , nrc is abandoning its oversight responsibilities and , as a result , cannot guarantee that problems are identified and corrected . nrc did not comment on our recommendations for reinstituting and improving its baseline inspection and force - on - force exercise programs .