the following summarizes these processes . dod's 2007 biennial core determination process began with a december 2005 tasking letter from the deputy under secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness to the services . the letter included guidance on the process and required the services to provide proposed depot maintenance core capability requirements and sustaining workloads for fiscal year 2007 . the 2005 guidance in the tasking letter generally mirrored subsequent guidance issued in january 2007 . the dod core determination process is comprised of a series of mathematical computations and adjustments that are used to derive required core capability requirements and the associated planned workloads expected to be available to sustain those capabilities . the computations involved in this methodology are performed from the perspective of the service that owns the depot maintenance assets and are divided into two parts . part 1 identifies the core capability requirements for dod weapon systems . the services identify applicable weapon systems based on the jcs contingency scenarios . the jcs scenarios represent plans for responding to conflicts that may occur in the future . all systems required to execute the jcs scenarios are to be included in the core determination process regardless of whether depot maintenance is actually performed in the public or private sectors . the services exclude some systems for several allowable reasons ( i.e. , special access programs ) that are documented citing the authority for each exclusion from the core process . after the applicable weapon systems are identified , the services compute annual peacetime depot maintenance capability requirements in direct labor hours to represent the amount of time it regularly takes to perform required maintenance , and a number of adjustments to these computations are then applied . contingency requirements and resource adjustments are made to account for applicable surge factors during the different phases of a contingency ( for example , preparation / readiness , sustainment , and reconstitution ) . the objective is to determine the most appropriate composite “surge” adjustment for a particular set of circumstances . further adjustments are made to account for redundancy in depot capability . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . to ensure core capability is maintained , congress enacted section 2464 of title 10 , which requires , in part , that the secretary of defense maintain a core logistics capability that is government owned , government operated , and that uses government personnel , equipment , and facilities . the authority and responsibility of the secretary of defense under section 2464 has been delegated to the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . for example , the aircraft equipment category includes subcategories for airframes , aircraft components , and aircraft engines , while the airframes category is further divided by types of airframes and the aircraft component category is subdivided into instruments , landing gear , avionics / electronics , and other areas . part 2 of the biennial core process identifies the planned workloads associated with sustaining the depot maintenance core capability requirements identified in part 1 .