this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have . if you should have any questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or by e - mail at melvinv@gao.gov . other individuals who made key contributions to this statement are barbara s. collier , heather a. collins , amanda c. gill , linda t. kohn , rebecca e. lapaze , and teresa f. tucker . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it is important to note that not all data require the same level of interoperability . for example , computable pharmacy and drug allergy data would allow automated alerts to help medical personnel avoid administering inappropriate drugs . on the other hand , for such narrative data as clinical notes , unstructured , viewable data may be sufficient . achieving even a minimal level of electronic interoperability would potentially make relevant information available to clinicians . any level of interoperability depends on the use of agreed - upon standards to ensure that information can be shared and used . developing interoperability standards requires the participation of the relevant stakeholders who will be sharing information . in the case of health it , stakeholders include both the public and private sectors . the public health system is made up of the federal , state , tribal , and local agencies that may deliver health care services to the population and monitor its health . private health system participants include hospitals , physicians , pharmacies , nursing homes , and other organizations that deliver health care services to individual patients , as well as multiple vendors that provide health it solutions . widespread adoption of health it has the potential to improve the efficiency and quality of health care . however , transitioning to this capability is a challenging endeavor that requires attention to many important considerations . among these are mechanisms to establish clearly defined health it standards that are agreed upon by all important stakeholders , comprehensive planning grounded in results - oriented milestones and measures , and an approach to privacy protection that encourages acceptance and adoption of electronic health records . attempting to expand the use of health it without fully addressing these issues would put at risk the ultimate goal of achieving more effective health care . the need for health care standards has been broadly recognized for a number of years . in previous work , we identified lessons learned by u.s. agencies and by other countries from their experiences . among other lessons , they reported the need to define and adopt common standards and terminology to achieve data quality and consistency , system interoperability , and information protection . in may 2003 , we reported that federal agencies recognized the need for health care standards and were making efforts to strengthen and increase their use . however , while they had made progress in defining standards , they had not met challenges in identifying and implementing standards necessary to support interoperability across the health care sector .