( see fig . 1 showing share of fleet composed by light trucks ) . while nhtsa took these steps to raise cafe standards for light trucks , the agency also began investigating reforming the light truck cafe program in part to address safety concerns . a 2002 national academy of sciences ( nas ) report on the impact of cafe standards stated that because the easiest way for an automobile manufacturer to increase vehicle fuel economy is to decrease vehicle weight , increases to cafe standards were likely to have a negative impact on safety and result in more highway fatalities . the report recommended that nhtsa investigate implementing a cafe system based on the attributes of a vehicle , such as size and / or weight , where there would be separate standards for vehicles with similar attributes . in response , nhtsa released a rule in april 2006 that reforms the structure of the cafe program for light trucks and continues to increase light truck cafe standards for model years 2008 to 2011 . under the new rule , fuel economy standards are established based upon truck size instead of having one average standard for all light trucks . each truck is assigned a fuel economy “target” based on a measure of vehicle size called “footprint,” the product of multiplying a vehicle's wheelbase ( the distance from front to the rear axles ) by its track width ( the horizontal distance between the tires ) . ( see fig . 2 for a display of how the standard applies to trucks of different sizes ) . according to nhtsa officials , the reformed cafe approach may enable the country to achieve larger reductions in oil consumption , while enhancing safety and preventing adverse economic consequences . we plan to issue our report in july 2007 . to obtain information on the cafe program and recent and proposed changes to the program , we reviewed relevant u.s. code and program guidance , including rule making documents , and interviewed a wide range of program stakeholders , including nhtsa , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , the applicable automobile workers trade union ( uaw ) , industry groups representing the automobile manufacturers , automotive safety experts , insurance industry representatives , and environmental advocates . in addition , the reformed standards include larger vehicles such as sport utility vehicles , but not pickup trucks , weighing between 8,500 and 10,000 pounds that previously were exempt from the cafe program . nhtsa estimates that including these vehicles in the cafe program will save 7.8 billion gallons of fuel over the life of the vehicles sold between 2008 and 2011 . in addition to these expected fuel savings , the reformed cafe standards offer enhanced safety by discouraging downsizing of vehicles since , as vehicles become smaller , the applicable fuel economy target becomes more stringent . in addition , according to nhtsa , the reformed cafe standards spread the regulatory cost burden for fuel economy improvements more broadly across the industry instead of concentrating it more exclusively on the manufacturers who may produce heavier , less fuel efficient vehicles .