accreditation process . according to the representatives , iac and acr requested that cms provide a provisional accreditation period for new suppliers that would allow them to obtain reimbursement for applicable adi services while they undergo the accreditation process . according to cms , it does not have the authority under mippa to provide provisional accreditation , as the statute only allows accredited suppliers to be paid for the technical component of adi services beginning on january 1 , 2012 . we provided a draft of this report for review to the department of health and human services , and the agency stated that it had no comments . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services and appropriate congressional committees . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or cosgrovej@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . radiation awareness . studies have suggested that increased physician and patient awareness of the risks associated with radiation exposure may have led to a decline in ct and nm services provided to medicare beneficiaries . of the remaining two suppliers , one indicated that it was unsure whether accreditation has affected the number of services it provides , while the other indicated that accreditation may have led to a slight increase in the number of services it provides . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . prior authorization . studies have suggested that increased use of prior authorization policies among private payers in recent years has contributed to a decrease in adi services provided to privately insured individuals . these policies may have had a spillover effect on medicare , thus contributing to the decline in adi services provided to medicare beneficiaries from 2009 to 2012 . in addition to the contact named above , phyllis thorburn , assistant director ; william black , assistant director ; priyanka sethi bansal ; william a. crafton ; richard lipinski ; beth morrison ; jennifer whitworth ; and rachael wojnowicz made key contributions to this report . findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ct uses ionizing radiation and computers to produce cross - sectional images of internal organs and body structures . mri uses powerful magnets , radio waves , and computers to create cross - sectional images of internal body tissues . nm uses radioactive materials in conjunction with an imaging modality to produce images that show both structure and function within the body . during an nm service , such as a pet scan , a patient is administered a small amount of radioactive substance , called a radiopharmaceutical or radiotracer , which is subsequently tracked by a radiation detector outside the body to render time - lapse images of the radioactive material as it moves through the body .