this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . for further information about this testimony , please contact norman rabkin at ( 202 ) - 512-8777 or at rabkinn@gao.gov . emergency preparedness and response: some issues and challenges associated with major emergency incidents . what are the costs and potential benefits of actions governments can take to mitigate the occurrence and consequences of these disasters ? for example , in the case of catastrophic hurricanes , what are the costs and benefits of greater and more precise early warnings , better resourced and exercised evacuation plans , more pre - positioned equipment such as generators and water , more designated shelters and medical care resources , enhanced health care operations , and better mutual aid planning and specific agreements ? finally , based on all of the above , what are the most prudent courses of action for various levels of government and their partners , such as private industry and nongovernmental organizations , in preparing for and responding to catastrophic disasters ? these are not easily answered questions . however , given the enormous potential costs and the increasing demands on federal discretionary funding , these are some of the questions that policymakers should explicitly discuss , reach consensus , and periodically reassess as events and considerations change . if federal funds will be used to increase first responders' capabilities for catastrophic disasters , we suggest that the congress require the use of risk management principles to assess state and urban area investments in capabilities to respond to a catastrophic disaster . because of fema's mission performance during hurricane katrina , concerns have been raised regarding the agency's organizational placement , including whether it should be disbanded and functions moved to other agencies , remain within the department of homeland security , or again become an independent agency . importantly , other factors , such as the experience of and training provided to fema leadership and adequacy of resources may be more important to fema's future success than its organizational placement . organizational changes , such as separating fema from dhs , are often viewed as a quick fix to address performance issues . based on our institutional knowledge regarding organizational performance factors , organizational changes alone may not adequately address underlying systemic conditions that result in an organization's performance problem . conditions underlying fema's performance during hurricane katrina could involve the experience and training of dhs or fema leadership ; the clarity of fema's mission and related responsibilities and authorities to achieve mission performance expectations ; the adequacy of its human , financial , and technological resources ; and the effectiveness of planning , exercises , and related partnerships .