gao - 06-609t . washington , d.c.: april 4 , 2006 . personal information: agency and reseller adherence to key privacy principles . gao - 06-421 . washington , d.c.: april 4 , 2006 . data mining: agencies have taken key steps to protect privacy in selected efforts , but significant compliance issues remain . gao - 05-866 . washington , d.c.: august 15 , 2005 . aviation security: transportation security administration did not fully disclose uses of personal information during secure flight program testing in initial privacy notices , but has recently taken steps to more fully inform the public . these agencies often did not conduct pias because officials did not believe they were required . current omb guidance on conducting pias is not always clear about when they should be conducted . we concluded that until pias are conducted more thoroughly and consistently , the public is likely to remain incompletely informed about the purposes and uses for the information agencies obtain from resellers . we recommended that omb revise its guidance to clarify the applicability of the e - gov act's pia requirement ( as well as privacy act requirements ) to the use of personal information from resellers . in summary , privacy officers at federal agencies face a range of challenges in working to ensure that individual privacy is protected , and today i have discussed several of them . it is clear that advances in technology can present both opportunities for greater agency efficiency and effectiveness as well as the danger , if unaddressed , of eroding important privacy protections . technological advances also mean there is a need to keep governmentwide privacy guidance up - to - date , and agency privacy officers will depend on omb for leadership in this area . even without a consideration of technological evolution , privacy officers need to be vigilant to ensure that agency officials are continually mindful of their privacy responsibilities . fortunately , tools are available — including the requirements for pias and privacy act public notices — that can help ensure that the right operational decisions are made about the acquisition , use , and storage of personal information . by using these tools effectively , agencies have the opportunity to gain greater public confidence that their actions are in the best interests of all americans . mr. chairman , this concludes my testimony today . i would happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . if you have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact linda koontz , director , information management , at ( 202 ) 512-6240 , or koontzl@gao.gov . omb has also issued guidance on implementing the provisions of fisma . while many agencies have had officials designated as focal points for privacy - related matters for some time , these positions have recently gained greater prominence at a number of agencies . a long - standing requirement has been in place for agency chief information officers to be responsible for implementing and enforcing privacy policies , procedures , standards , and guidelines , and for compliance with the privacy act .