be large . several experts pointed out that an ideal data source would be large , in terms of the number of individuals covered , in part due to the fact that there needs to be sufficient data within each of the age and gender groups . contain several years of data . some experts pointed out the benefit of using a data source that has been in existence for some time and that has several years of data so that one would have confidence that the data for a given year are not unusual . be convenient . for the purposes of the government's use , several experts also noted that convenience of the data source could be important to consider — such as the ease with which the government can access and use the data and the costs for obtaining them . notably , the data from the bcbs standard plan meet several of these characteristics because the plan is large , relatively popular , and covered just over 3 million members across the united states in 2015 , making it the fehbp plan with the highest enrollment . it is also a mature plan that has been in existence since 1959 . finally , it is convenient in that it is already available and familiar to the federal government , and bcbsa already provides summary cost and enrollment data to opm on an annual basis . however , experts and stakeholders identified two important limitations to using bcbs standard plan cost data as the basis of an age and gender adjustment: 1 ) not being representative of the national workforce due to selection bias and 2 ) declining enrollment . selection bias . enrollment in the bcbs standard plan is affected by selection bias among the fehbp options that may result in it not being representative of the national workforce . within the fehbp , federal employees can choose among many different health plan options . the bcbs standard plan is a relatively expensive plan within the fehbp and covers older and sicker members compared to other , less expensive plans , such as the other nationwide bcbs fehbp option , bcbs basic . actuarial experts also noted that the bcbs standard plan may be less attractive to healthier individuals and younger families who may be more attracted to the fehbp health maintenance organization options , including high - deductible and consumer - driven plans , or the bcbs basic plan . officials from opm noted , and our review of two years of cost data confirm , that members in the bcbs standard plan generally have higher health care costs than their counterparts in bcbs basic and that this is particularly true for younger members . while other employers may offer more than one plan , most employers do not provide the number of options that the federal government provides , so selection bias among plans offered by other employers may be less extreme . experts and stakeholders noted that the selection bias within the fehbp of more young members with higher health care costs in the bcbs standard plan may result in an age and gender adjustment that is not adequate .