selection . a three - to four - person panel , chaired by the relevant arpa - e program director , considers the reviewers' comments and numerical scores and recommends applications for an award . the final decisions on which applicants to select for award negotiations are made by the selecting official , usually the director of arpa - e. award negotiations . once selections are made , arpa - e program directors work closely with selectees to negotiate the terms and conditions of their award . these negotiations include , among other things , developing a project plan with technical milestones that are to be met during the 2 to 3 years that the award is being funded , a budget and management plan , and an intellectual property and data management plan . funds are awarded once negotiations regarding the terms and conditions of the award are concluded . arpa - e seeks to complete negotiations regarding the terms and conditions of an award within approximately 100 days of sending a letter notifying an applicant that they have been selected for award negotiations . selectees may be allowed to begin spending money to start work on their projects up to 90 days prior to the completion of award negotiations . however , these expenditures are made with the risk that applicants may not be reimbursed if award negotiations are unsuccessful and arpa - e does not fund the award . monitoring . arpa - e monitors and supports the projects it funds through quarterly reviews and site visits . at any point during the award , arpa - e may decide whether to continue or terminate the project based on whether agreed - upon project milestones are being met . in 2017 , doe developed and implemented a new review process to assess doe financial assistance for new work against the current administration's priorities , including financial assistance for which arpa - e had already made award selections . doe reviewed and approved arpa - e's opportunities for financial assistance on a rolling basis from may to september 2017 , and nearly all were approved to proceed . the formal review of doe financial assistance officially began on may 4 , 2017 , when doe's chief of staff issued a memorandum stating that funding opportunity announcements and determinations of non - competitive financial assistance would be reviewed to ensure consistency with the administration's priorities . according to the memorandum , doe agencies that award financial assistance — referred to in this report as funding organizations — were to provide information about each competitively selected funding announcement and determination of non - competitive financial assistance by may 15 , 2017 . this information included , for example , a brief description of the financial assistance , the number and amount of planned awards , and the technology readiness level of the projects being funded . doe office of management officials told us that the agency's financial assistance review lasted through september 2017 , as some doe organizations continued to submit new financial assistance for review , but that the review was largely completed by august 10 , 2017 .