monitoring . internal control monitoring should assess the quality of performance over time and ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are properly resolved . the chief executive officer generally has primary responsibility for risk assessment and risk management under the direction of the board of directors . a risk assessment process includes such areas as operations , compliance , and financial reporting , in which management comprehensively identifies risks , and considers significant interactions between the entity and external parties as well as internal risks at both the entitywide and activity level . risk assessment is also an integral part of the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission internal control framework and an entity's effective implementation of internal controls . all entities , regardless of size , structure , nature , or industry , encounter risks at all levels within their organizations . through the risk assessment process , management determines how much risk is to be prudently accepted and strives to maintain risk within these levels . auditing standards that became effective on or after december 15 , 2006 , cite ineffective oversight of the entity's financial reporting and internal control by those charged with governance , as well as an ineffective control environment , as indicators of control deficiencies and strong indicators of material weaknesses in internal control . the standards include the following examples of deficiencies in the design of controls that may be control deficiencies , significant deficiencies , or material weaknesses that would be reported by the auditor: ( 1 ) inadequate documentation of the components of internal control , ( 2 ) inadequate design of monitoring controls used to assess the design and operating effectiveness of the entity's internal control over time , and ( 3 ) the absence of an internal process to report deficiencies in internal control to management on a timely basis . according to lsc management , it relies on a cycle memorandum prepared by lsc's external auditor as management's assessment of internal controls . however , the cycle memorandum contains process descriptions and does not identify internal controls , their objectives , or the assertions ( completeness , rights and obligations , valuation , existence , and presentation and disclosure ) that the controls are intended to ensure and the risks that need to be addressed through controls . lsc's treasurer / controller told us that lsc management has not conducted its own formal assessment of internal controls . the treasurer does conduct ongoing , informal assessments of certain financial processes on an ad hoc basis . however , these assessments are not utilized as part of a comprehensive internal control evaluation . without comprehensive internal control assessment and monitoring , lsc is at risk that it will not prevent or promptly detect internal control failures , including unauthorized or improper use of federal funds or violations of laws or regulations in its operations . lsc currently does not have a code of conduct that establishes a conflict - of - interest or ethics policy for its employees .