amp data are currently not made public . the changes represented by this proposed rule would likely affect the prices that manufacturers report to the federal government . only after these regulations are finalized and implemented will there be an opportunity to assess the extent to which they improve the accuracy of prices reported and rebates paid by manufacturers . we and others have reported inadequacies in hrsa's oversight of the 340b drug pricing program , problems related to the lack of transparency in the 340b prices , and overpayments to drug manufacturers . oig recently reported that some of the 340b prices that hrsa calculated were inaccurate and that hrsa did not systematically compare the 340b prices with those that were separately calculated by drug manufacturers for consistency . in addition , we recently reported that hrsa did not routinely compare 340b prices with prices paid by certain eligible entities . we and oig both found that many entities reviewed paid prices for drugs that were higher than the 340b prices . oig estimated that 14 percent of total drug purchases made by entities in june 2005 exceeded the 340b prices , resulting in $3.9 million in overpayments . we also found that the prices of the eligible entities using the rebate option reported to hrsa did not reflect all rebates they later received from manufacturers , and thus we could not determine whether these entities paid prices that were at or below the ceiling established by the 340b prices . because the 340b prices are not disclosed to eligible entities , the entities cannot know how the prices they pay compare with the 340b prices . finally , because 340b prices are based on amp and medicaid drug rebate data , inaccuracies in those amounts affect the 340b drug pricing program . recent legal settlements related to drug manufacturers' overstatement of best prices used in the medicaid rebate program also led to settlements related to the 340b program . this was because overstated best prices could affect rebates and result in inaccurate 340b prices . hrsa has made changes to its oversight of the 340b drug pricing program that are intended to address some of the concerns we and oig raised in our respective reports . for example , while manufacturers are not required to submit their calculated 340b prices to hrsa , the agency has requested that each manufacturer voluntarily submit its calculated 340b prices for comparison to the 340b prices calculated by hrsa . it has also indicated that it was planning to develop systems to allow eligible entities to check that the drug prices they are charged are appropriate while still maintaining the confidentiality of those prices . because amp is used to calculate 340b prices , the requirement under dra that amp become publicly available may enable hrsa to improve the transparency of these prices . however , the public reporting of amp , which is only one element of the 340b price calculation , can only partially improve the transparency of 340b prices . the medicare part d program shares in common certain features with other federal programs that help pay for or reduce the cost of prescription drugs .