nsf did not provide any comments . education and hhs directed many of their comments to our third finding , which updated the status of agency actions to implement recommendations contained in our november 2013 report . in that report , we found that many autism research projects funded by federal agencies had the potential to be duplicative , because the projects were categorized to the same research objectives in the iacc strategic plan . in their comments on this report , education and hhs disagreed that there was potential for duplication and questioned the basis of our analysis . the departments stated that the 78 research objectives — which our analysis was based on — are broad , and therefore , may require attention from researchers of different disciplines in order to address the complexity and heterogeneity of autism . this may necessarily involve funding of multiple projects from more than one federal agency . education stated that a careful review of the projects themselves is needed to determine actual duplication . as we noted in our 2013 report , we agree that it may be appropriate and advantageous to have multiple projects and agencies address the same research objective . we also agree that the specific projects identified as potentially duplicative would need to be reviewed further to identify actual duplication and believe such a review of these data is important to ensure federal funds are used efficiently and effectively so that informed decisions can be made . our finding that agencies are funding research in the same research areas highlights how imperative it is that agencies effectively coordinate and monitor each other's autism research . it was the limited coordination and monitoring that we identified in our prior work that was the basis for our prior recommendations . based on the comments received , we revised the report to acknowledge the breadth of the research objectives and to emphasis our prior findings as they relate to the need for improved coordination and monitoring . hhs also commented that staff in its agencies , including nih , avoid clear and obvious overlap or unnecessary duplication . hhs stated that they do this by utilizing the research project information in their internal database , information for management , planning , analysis , and coordination ( impac ii ) , which contains detailed pre - award and award data for four hhs agencies — ahrq , cdc , the food and drug administration , and hrsa — and some research applications and grants of the department of veterans affairs , as well as participating in the iacc . further , hhs stated that nih's internal autism coordinating committee coordinates research internally within nih . in march 2014 , a group of hhs agencies — the administration for children and families ( acf ) , acl , cdc , cms , hrsa , nih , and the substance abuse and mental health services administration — and education launched the birth to 5: watch me thrive ! we continue to believe that these methods are limited . initiative to encourage developmental and behavioral screening and support for children — including those with autism — their families , and the providers who care for them .