immediate hazards to health . risks of fire or explosion . immediate precautions to be taken in the event of an accident . immediate methods for handling fires . initial methods for handling spills or leaks in the absence of fire . preliminary first aid measures . the hmr also require railroads to have a document , often referred to as the train consist , that identifies basic information about the position in the train of each rail car containing hazardous materials . the consist also typically includes information on the train's contents , including basic descriptions of the hazardous materials transported , and their destinations , and may include supplemental emergency response information , such as details on how to respond to releases of specific hazardous materials . fra provides regulatory oversight for passenger and freight rail , issuing and enforcing safety regulations through its office of railroad safety . fra enforces the hmr and its own regulations through inspections and audits by fra officials , including about 400 federal safety inspectors and state partners in some states . for example , according to dot officials , fra conducts inspections to ensure that railroads carry the required emergency response information mentioned above as well as an emergency response telephone number in train documentation and conduct and keep records of required general - awareness and function - specific hazardous material training for train crews . when a rail accident occurs , local emergency responders — police , emergency medical technicians , and firefighters — and railroad train crews are typically first on the scene of , and often provide the initial response to , a rail accident involving hazardous materials . for example , local and sometimes regional officials may be responsible for advising the public on taking shelter - in - place actions or conducting evacuations of affected populations . in addition , assuming the crews are not affected by an accident , railroad train crews are expected to provide local emergency responders with information about the position , type , and quantity of hazardous materials on the train as well as written emergency - response and contact information for the specific commodities ( see fig . the hmr also requires railroads to provide immediate notice of certain hazardous materials accidents to the national response center . the erg , published every 4 years by phmsa , is a 400-page document that contains emergency response information for thousands of hazardous materials and for all modes of transportation . it is intended to help first responders identify the characteristics of the hazardous materials involved in an accident through a table of markings , labels , and placards , specific risks associated with the hazardous materials how first responders can protect themselves , and procedures for containing the accident as quickly and safely as possible . the erg is organized into four color - coded sections to help users navigate the document . for example , the orange section of the erg divides hazardous materials into 63 categories — such as flammable liquids - toxic , flammable gases , and oxidizers — with an individual guide for each that provides information on types of potential hazards each category poses , including health , fire , or explosion hazards .