pub . l. no.112-81 , § 213 ( b ) ( 2011 ) . of defense ( dod ) acquisition policy.acquisition strategy with officials from the uclass system program office , the naval air systems command , the chief of naval operations , and organizations within the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) including the director of osd cost assessment and program evaluation , the deputy assistant secretary of defense for systems engineering , and the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . see appendix i for additional information on our objectives , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from july 2013 to september 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the navy's uclass system will be the first unmanned aircraft system deployed on an aircraft carrier . efforts to develop an unmanned combat air system for the navy can be traced back to 2003 when dod established a joint navy and air force program called the joint unmanned combat air system ( j - ucas ) . this joint effort drew on knowledge that the air force had gained through early development of the unmanned combat air vehicle , an effort that began in the late 1990s . the j - ucas program was canceled in late 2005 . the following year , the navy initiated the unmanned combat air system demonstration ( ucas - d ) program — the immediate predecessor to uclass — with the intent to design , develop , integrate , test , and demonstrate the technical feasibility of operating unmanned air combat systems from an aircraft carrier . in 2013 , the navy successfully launched and landed a ucas - d on an aircraft carrier . in total the navy invested more than $1.4 billion in the ucas - d program . in 2011 , as ucas - d efforts were ongoing , the navy received approval from dod to begin planning for the uclass acquisition program . in our past work examining weapon acquisition and best practices for product development , we found that leading commercial firms and successful dod programs pursue an acquisition approach that is anchored in knowledge , whereby high levels of knowledge are demonstrated at critical junctures . specifically , there are three critical junctures — knowledge points — in an acquisition program at which decision makers must have adequate knowledge to make large investment decisions . if the knowledge attained at each juncture does not confirm the business case on which the acquisition was originally justified , the program does not go forward . at the first knowledge point , a match must be made between the customers' needs and the available resources — technical and engineering knowledge , time , and funding — before a system development program is started .