( see fig . supports a smartphone app that links to disasterassistance.gov so disaster survivors can access information in the event of power outages and loss of internet connection . a number of factors may drive this trend: lower cost: the cost to connect to the internet via mobile devices has decreased over time , making it more affordable for consumers to access the internet . in a 2013 mobile competition report , fcc notes that through the widespread introduction of smartphones , wireless operators like verizon have responded by competing for customers on price , both by offering more data for the same money or by lowering prices for fixed amounts of data.average price per megabyte of data declined from about $0.11 in the fcc also noted that the 2009 to $0.06 in 2010 and to $0.03 in 2011 across nationwide mobile providers . convenient access: convenience may contribute to increased use of mobile devices to access the internet . smartphones can provide users access to information anytime and almost anywhere . for example , smartphone owners can access government services on mobile devices , such as weather information or automobile recalls and crash - test - rating data . in 2012 , pew research center reported that cellphone owners like the convenience and ease of connectivity associated with mobile devices ( see table 1 ) . technological advances: advances in the technological capabilities of mobile devices have also contributed to this trend , allowing consumers to carry out an ever broadening range of interactions , which previously required the use of a desktop or laptop computer . for example , smartphones can provide users with navigation tools and information relevant to their surroundings based on the user's current location determined by global positioning system ( gps ) and other methods . location - based services have proved popular with mobile device users ; the pew research center reported that three - quarters of smartphone users were using such services as of february 2012 . faster internet speeds: faster connection speeds have also reportedly increased internet access using mobile devices . according to the fcc , four nationwide mobile wireless service providers — verizon wireless , at&t , sprint nextel , and t - mobile — as well as other mobile operators , continue to upgrade and expand their networks and according to the fcc , all of the major providers have either begun to deploy , or announced plans to migrate to long term evolution technology . pew reported that in 2013 , those who are young ( 18-29 years old ) , earn over $75,000 , have a college degree or higher , or are african american have the highest rates of accessing the internet with cellphones ( see fig . hispanics ( 68 percent ) and whites ( 59 percent ) used their cellphones to access the internet slightly less than african americans ( 74 percent ) , according to pew . further , young , above - average income , college educated , and african - american populations all increased their rate of access using cellphones between 2012 and 2013 by 10 percentage points or more .