comparative survey . a federal survey team conducts an independent survey of a home recently surveyed by a state survey agency in order to compare and contrast the findings . this comparison takes place after completion of the federal survey . when federal surveyors identify a deficiency not cited by state surveyors , they assess whether the deficiency existed at the time of the state survey and should have been cited by entering either yes or no to the question , “based on the evidence available to the , should the team have cited this ? ” this assessment is critical in determining whether understatement occurred because some deficiencies cited by federal surveyors may not have existed at the time of the state survey . for example , a deficiency identified during a federal survey could involve a resident who was not in the nursing home at the time of the earlier state survey . by statute , comparative surveys must be conducted within 2 months of the completion of the state survey . however , differences in timing , resident sample selection , and staffing can make analysis of differences between the state and federal comparative surveys difficult . in this report we address two questions: ( 1 ) what information do federal monitoring surveys provide about understatement nationwide , and ( 2 ) how effective are cms management and oversight of the federal monitoring survey program ? while cms headquarters does not require federal surveyors to determine whether a deficiency cited by state survey teams was cited at too low a scope and severity level , some regional offices have developed their own procedures to track this information and use it to provide feedback to state survey agencies . to answer the first question , we analyzed the results of comparative and observational surveys nationwide for fiscal years 2002 through 2007 using the federal monitoring survey database . during this period , federal surveyors conducted 976 comparative surveys and 4,023 observational surveys . some of the regional offices told us that they would like to have a specific way that the federal monitoring survey database could track scope and severity understatement that is similar to how deficiencies missed by state surveyors are tracked . to identify understatement on comparative surveys , we focused our analysis on cases where federal surveyors determined that state surveyors should have cited a deficiency but failed to do so or where state surveyors cited a deficiency at too low a level . we analyzed the results of observational surveys in order to better understand why understatement might occur . for example , cms is uncertain whether regions should only focus on differences that would raise the scope and severity level to actual harm or immediate jeopardy and not assess differences for understatement that occurs at lower scope and severity levels . deficiencies identified during nursing home surveys are categorized according to their scope ( i.e. , the number of residents potentially or actually affected ) and severity ( i.e. we identified two problems in cms's management of the federal monitoring survey database . , the degree of relative harm involved ) .