iv. ) the projects propose to use a variety of alternatives , including partnering and divestiture , and are in varying stages of implementation , as noted in appendix iv . for example , the army previously developed a partnership with the city of monterey , california , to provide municipal services needed for the operation of dod assets in monterey county . because of the success of this project , the army submitted legislation to congress that would allow contracting for municipal services defense - wide . in another example , the navy has identified optical ( eyewear ) fabrication as a potential candidate for divestiture , because that service is readily available in the private sector . however , this project is still in the conceptual phase and no decision will be made until a thorough analysis has been completed to determine the most appropriate sourcing method . dod was required to go to omb for approval of these pioneer projects to determine if they would count toward the competitive sourcing goals set by omb . the criteria for omb approval required that projects involve an element of divestiture , competition , or the transfer of responsibility to other private or public sector performers . all 10 were approved by the business initiative council and presented to the office of management and budget . eight of the projects were approved by omb to be counted toward dod's fair act inventory goal . omb endorsed the pioneer projects whose techniques were waivers to a - 76 , new requirements , direct service contract , and divestiture , but disapproved the projects that proposed reengineering as their technique . subsequently , dod withdrew 2 projects , leaving 6 pilot projects for implementation . a brief description of those projects and their current status is provided below . description: optical fabrication involves eyewear component production and assembly and is performed at about 37 locations within and outside of the united states , employing personnel in the departments of the navy and army . the department of the navy has the lead responsibility for this pioneer project and is now starting its analysis of this divestiture proposal . it anticipates that the analysis will take approximately 6 to 18 months to complete . a final decision regarding the optical fabrication divestiture will be made after the completion of the analysis . description: the brooks city - base partnership involves a partnership between the air force and the city of san antonio for which the congress passed special authorizing legislation in 1999 and 2000 . this divestiture was a way to reduce air force base operating and personnel cost and build public - public and public - private partnerships . as part of this effort , the air force transferred brooks air force base's real property to san antonio in july 2002 in exchange for a leaseback of facilities and for the city to provide municipal services such as fire protection , law enforcement , custodial and landscaping . also , as part of this partnering arrangement , the city of san antonio will provide the air force a share of the revenues generated from the contracts and developments resulting from the land and facilities transferred .