to examine the procedures that the u.s . postal service ( usps ) has established to develop , monitor , and evaluate the performance of its parcel select negotiated service agreements ( nsa ) , including implementation , we reviewed relevant laws and regulations such as the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ) . we also examined usps documents such as the standard procedure for managing nsa contracts that describe the procedures . we also reviewed copies of all 13 parcel select nsas executed by usps along with their supporting file documentation , such as contract performance and business review reports . this includes eight parcel select and five parcel select & parcel return service contracts . for purposes of our report , we refer to both of these contract categories as parcel select nsas , since each includes the parcel select product . we also examined postal regulatory commission ( prc ) documents , such as orders and notices . we did not review the extent to which usps complied with all of its management procedures because this did not fall within the scope of this review . we also did not report volume , revenue , or mailer - specific information for individual nsas because usps and mailers consider the information proprietary , and according to usps officials , public disclosure would violate contractual confidentiality provisions . in addition , we conducted interviews with usps officials from the sales , finance , and legal departments , who are responsible for developing , monitoring , and evaluating the performance of parcel select nsas ; prc officials responsible for reviewing the contracts ; and representatives from eight mailers that signed 12 of the 13 parcel select nsas to determine how usps implements its procedures . the number of mailers is less than the number of implemented contracts because some mailers signed more than one contract . we did not interview representatives from one of the mailers that signed a parcel select nsa , because the company was sold and knowledgeable representatives were no longer available to meet with us . according to usps , no packages were ever shipped under that contract . we compared usps's procedures for managing the contracts against selected leading contract management practices . to select these practices , we: identified criteria sources that included leading contract management practices and then confirmed that these sources were appropriate through consultation with internal stakeholders . these sources included: ( a ) our standards for internal control in the federal government ; ( b ) guidance documents and regulations for federal agencies , such as best practices issued by the office of federal procurement policy ; and ( c ) documents from contract management and administration organizations including the national contract management association and the institute for supply management , which were recognized for their expertise in this area . reviewed information included in each criteria source to identify practices that are relevant to either ( a ) buyers and sellers or ( b ) just sellers . because the postal service is the service provider ( or seller ) under parcel select nsas , we excluded leading practices that are only pertinent to buyers .