v ) . in their comments , all three agencies concurred with our recommendations . in addition , both the department of commerce and nasa reiterated that they are working with their partner agencies to finalize plans for restoring sensors to address the nation's long - term needs for continuity of climate measurements . further , commerce noted that dod and nasa executives need to weigh in to resolve issues at , or immediately below , their levels in order to ensure prompt completion of the key acquisition documents . nasa noted that difficulties in gaining consensus across all three npoess agencies have delayed the signature of key acquisition documents , and reported that they are committed to moving these documents through the signature cycle once all of the issues and concerns are resolved . all three agencies also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated in this report as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of commerce , the secretary of defense , the administrator of nasa , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on our web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov . this recommendation remains open . over the last year , the npoess program has made progress by completing planned development and testing activities on its ground and space segments , but key milestones for delivering the viirs sensor and launching npp have been delayed by about 8 months . moving forward , risks remain in completing the testing of key sensors and integrating them on the npp spacecraft , in resolving interagency disagreements on the appropriate level of system security , and in revising estimated costs for satellite operations and support . the program office is aware of these risks and is working to mitigate them , but continued problems could affect the program's overall schedule and cost . given the tight time frames for completing key sensors , integrating them on the npp spacecraft , and getting the ground - based data processing system developed , tested , and deployed , it is important for the npoess integrated program office , the program executive office , and the executive committee to continue to provide close oversight of milestones and risks . development of the ground segment — which includes the interface data processing system , the ground stations that are to receive satellite data , and the ground - based command , control , and communications system — is under way and on track . for example , the interface data processing system has been installed at one of the two locations that are to receive npp data , and the command , control , and communications system passed acceptance testing for use with npp .