however , the d.c . inspector general concluded that wasa's current initiatives on lead concentrations in the district's tap water were noteworthy ; he also made 12 recommendations to improve wasa's annual monitoring , lead service line replacement , and communication . wasa agreed to all of the inspector general's recommendations except one to develop a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) with the d.c. department of health that defines both agencies' roles and responsibilities , the expert advice each agency can provide in the areas of water quality management , and the frequency and manner of transmission of information between the agencies . these practices include using a variety of media to inform the public , forming partnerships with government agencies and community groups , and targeting educational materials to the audience most susceptible to lead exposure through drinking water . these practices tend to go well beyond the provisions of the lead and copper rule , which require public notification language that is difficult to understand and do not require utilities to notify individual homeowners of the lead concentrations in their homes' drinking water . wasa's experience highlights the importance of conducting an effective public education program . in its june 2004 consent order , epa found that wasa had committed only a few violations of the public education requirements of the lead and copper rule . however , community groups and others have criticized wasa for failing to adequately convey information to its customers about lead in drinking water and for failing to communicate a sense of urgency in the materials provided . as we testified in july 2004 , epa acknowledges that it should have provided better oversight of wasa's public education program . other water systems we contacted have used innovative approaches to educate the public about lead in drinking water . for example , some systems used a variety of media to inform the public . officials from the massachusetts water resources authority ( mwra ) appear for interviews on local radio and television talk shows to spread information about lead in drinking water . the portland ( oregon ) water bureau provides funding for many lead education initiatives , including materials presented to new parents in hospitals ; billboard , movie , and bus advertisements targeted to neighborhoods with older housing ; and education materials produced by the community alliance of tenants to educate renters on potential lead hazards . in addition , only time will tell if or how quickly wasa's ambitious lead service line replacement program will further lower lead levels in drinking water . the district's experience has also exposed weaknesses in the lead and copper rule's public education requirements . epa is collecting information about compliance with the rule and is also considering changes to the lead and copper rule and its accompanying guidance documents and training . we support these efforts and believe the clear deficiencies of the rule's public education requirements — vividly illustrated in the district of columbia — call for action to assist water systems in educating their customers about lead . the district's experience has also underscored gaps in available knowledge about health risks associated with lead - contaminated drinking water .