gao - 13-633t . washington , d.c.: may 22 , 2013 . epa did not provide written comments . in an e - mail received on september 11 , 2015 , the audit liaison stated that epa agreed with our report's findings and provided technical comments . we incorporated these technical comments , as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the administrator of epa , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or gomezj@gao.gov . we determined the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . a more detailed discussion of our objectives , scope , and methodology is presented in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from october 2014 to september 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence we obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the superfund process begins with the discovery of a potentially hazardous site or notification to epa of the possible release of hazardous substances , pollutants , or contaminants that may threaten human health or the environment . epa's regional offices may discover potentially hazardous waste sites , or such sites may come to epa's attention through reports from state agencies or citizens . as part of the site assessment process , epa regional offices use a screening system called the hazard ranking system to guide decision making , and as needed , to numerically assess the site's potential to pose a threat to human health or the environment . those sites with sufficiently high scores are eligible to be proposed for listing on the npl . epa regions submit sites to epa headquarters for possible listing on the npl based on a variety of factors , including the availability of alternative state or federal programs that may be used to clean up the site . in addition , epa officials have noted that , as a matter of policy , epa seeks concurrence from the governor of the state or state environmental agency head in which a site is located before listing the site . sites that epa proposes to list on the npl are published in the federal register . after a period of public comment , epa reviews the comments and decides whether to formally list the sites on the npl . according to epa officials and documents , sems consolidated five stand - alone information systems and reporting tools into one system .