some releases have occurred , however . this status from oie allowed the united states to continue exporting animal products from the mainland after the release was identified . however , these oie officials said that if a similar release were to occur from a facility on the u.s. mainland , oie would most likely not be able to declare the united states disease - free . in their view , the island location provides a natural “zoning” ability that , under oie's rules , more easily allows the country to prove the compartmentalization that is necessary for retaining “disease - free” status . while humans cannot become infected with fmd through contact with infected animals or through eating products of diseased animals , still , fmd can have economic consequences , as recent outbreaks in the united kingdom have demonstrated . although estimates vary , experts agree that the economic consequences of an fmd outbreak on the u.s. mainland could be significant , especially for red meat producers whose animals would be at risk for diseases , depending on how and where such an outbreak occurred . according to a study by the u.k. national audit office , the direct cost of the 2001 fmd outbreak to the public sector was estimated at over $5.71 billion and the cost to the private sector was estimated at over $9.51 billion . by the time the disease was eradicated , in september 2001 , more than six million animals had been slaughtered: over four million for disease control purposes and two million for welfare reasons . compensation and other payments to farmers were expected to total nearly $2.66 billion . they must be allowed sufficient space to move around in . handling large animals within confined spaces — a full size cow can weigh up to 1,430 pounds — can present special dangers for the scientists as well as the animal handlers . moving carcasses from contained areas to necropsy or incineration poses additional risks . for example , one of the internal releases of fmd virus at piadc happened in transporting large animal carcasses from contained rooms through to incineration . although it could not have been known to the study group in 2002 , transferring fmd work to nbaf is to be accompanied by an increase in both scope and complexity over the current activities at piadc . these increases in scope and complexity would mean an increase in the risk associated with work at the new facility . for example , the proposed bsl - 3 ag space at the new nbaf is projected to be almost twice the size of the space currently at piadc and is to accommodate many more large animals . usda's agricultural research service animal holding area requirements at piadc specify space for 90 cattle , 154 swine , or 176 sheep ( or combinations thereof ) . translational studies will involve clinical trials with aerosolized fmd virus challenging groups of 30 to 45 animals and lasting 3 to 6 months . this is contrasted with about 16 large animals that piadc can process today . moreover , unique risks are associated with bsl - 3 ag facilities , where the facility itself is considered the primary containment area .