washington . d.c.: urban institute , august 2011 . derr , michelle and ladonna pavetti . mdrc . july 2007 . for example: san francisco's jobs now ! program uses a community jobs model similar to a transitional employment program to place participants in employment positions . the program includes 6 months of subsidized employment and is targeted to those with limited experience or exposure to work . some participants are placed in public service training programs where they are employed with the local human services agency or other city departments like the office of parks and recreation . other participants who are more job ready are placed in a wage - subsidy program with private businesses . under this program tier , jobs now ! subsidizes 100 percent of the wage for the first month , 75 percent for the second month , and $1,000 for the next 3 months . employers also agree to make a good faith effort to retain the employee after the subsidy ends . administrators reported that the retention rate with private employers — once the subsidy ends — is between 75 and 80 percent . similarly , erie county , new york's pivot wage subsidy program requires a commitment from employers to hire participants after the wage subsidy ends . pivot is designed to serve those tanf recipients who are among the more work - ready , but who did not find jobs on their own during previous job search activities . when participants are referred to the program through the local tanf agency , they receive a skills assessment and enter a job - readiness training program for 45 days while their eligibility is being determined . participants are screened to match their skill levels with employer needs . pivot places participants in local employment — in industries such as banking , hospitality , legal services , manufacturing , health , and childcare — for 6 months during job training . participants' days are typically split between a work experience program and other work activities such as ged classes or barrier remediation , such as english lessons for refugees with language barriers . los angeles county's large subsidized employment program includes a component in which participants can gain work experience with for - profits , nonprofits or government agencies , and an on - the - job training component that places participants with private sector employers . for the latter , a subsidy for the participants' wages is sent to a private job provider during the first two months of employment . after those 60 days , the wage is paid directly by the employer , who receives $350 for each part - time employee and $500 for each full - time employee . three of the ten programs we examined used the treatment and employment services approach to serve participants with one or more physical or mental disabilities , substance abuse , or other work - limiting characteristics . utah's licensed clinical therapist program provides services for clients with substance abuse , domestic violence , and mental health problems . an administrator said participants often enter the program under emotional turmoil that — if untreated — would prevent them from gaining stable employment .