ots reported meeting all of its goals . on the basis of their fiscal year 2003 performance plans , three of the five federal depository institution regulators designed strategies to achieve their performance goals that appear to be reasonable . similar to the fiscal year 2001 performance reports , the performance goals focused on the scheduling of examinations under specific time frames , enforcement actions , and reviewing compliance with consumer protection statutes relating to consumer financial transactions . the board's performance plan outlined strategies that appeared reasonably linked to achieving its goals and objectives for promoting a safe , sound , competitive , and accessible banking system . furthermore , nih commented that there are many formal and informal ways in which it coordinates its work in the prevention arena that are not reflected in its performance plan . for example , nih cites the next - generation smallpox vaccine initiative , an intradepartmental task force consisting of representatives from the office of public health policy , cdc , fda , and nih . we acknowledge this limitation in the scope and methodology section of the report . regarding family poverty , hud commented that , although gao's review focused on two of hud's eight goals , it believes all of its goals and many of its indicators have an impact on family poverty . we do not dispute hud's assertion that many of its goal address family poverty broadly . however , we focused on the goals that appeared to be most directly related to the scope we defined in our scope and methodology section . regarding financial institution regulation , fdic commented that a lack of specific reference in the performance report regarding the completeness , reliability and credibility of the data should not lead to a negative inference . we are sending copies of this report to the president , the director of the office of management and budget , the congressional leadership , other members of congress , and the heads of major departments and agencies . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me or elizabeth curda on ( 202 ) 512-6806 or daltonp@gao.gov . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . in addition to the individual named above , the following individuals made significant contributions to this report: steven j. berke , lisa m. brown , amy m. choi , peter j. del toro , nancy m. eibeck , and debra l. johnson . the general accounting office , the investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet .