( see table 1. ) beyond the required and recommended data matches , at the time of our report , florida , texas , michigan , and one county in north carolina used specialized searches that checked numerous public and private data sources , including school enrollment , vehicle registration , vital statistics , and credit reports to detect potential fraud prior to providing benefits to potential recipients . florida officials we interviewed shifted the majority of their anti - fraud resources to more cost - effective and preventive efforts in identifying potential fraud by developing tools geared towards detecting eligibility fraud and improper benefit receipt , such as identification verification software and profiles that case workers could use to identify error - prone applications . these state officials stated that this focus on preventive efforts was key to helping them manage recent constraints on their investigative budgets . to track potential trafficking , officials in the 11 states reported that they analyzed patterns of ebt transactions and monitored replacement card data and online postings pursuant to fns's requirements and guidance . ( see table 2. ) at the time of our 2014 report , most of the selected states reported difficulties in conducting fraud investigations due to either reduced or stagnant staff levels while snap recipient numbers greatly increased from fiscal year 2009 through 2013 . ( see figure 1. ) furthermore , state investigators in all 11 states we reviewed were also responsible for pursuing fraud in other public assistance programs , such as medicaid , temporary assistance for needy families and child care and housing assistance programs . however , at the time of our report , some states implemented a strategy to leverage their available investigative resources . specifically , four of the states we reviewed — florida , massachusetts , michigan and nebraska — had implemented and two states — maine and north carolina — were in the process of implementing state law enforcement bureau ( sleb ) agreements . according to fns officials , the agency was supportive of states' efforts to establish these agreements between state snap agencies and federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies , which would enable state snap investigators to cooperate in various ways with local , state , and federal law enforcement agents , including those within the usda oig . for example , under these agreements , law enforcement agencies can notify the snap fraud unit when they arrest someone who possesses multiple ebt cards , and snap agencies can provide “dummy” ebt cards for state and local officers to use in undercover trafficking investigations . officials in one county in florida told us at the time of our report that this type of cooperation allowed local police officers to make 100 arrests in its first undercover operation of recipients who were allegedly trafficking snap benefits . at the time of our report , some state officials suggested changing the financial incentives structure to help support the costs of investigating potential snap fraud because some investigative agencies were not rewarded for cost - effective , anti - fraud efforts that could prevent ineligible people from receiving benefits . it does so by supplementing their income with benefits to purchase allowable food items .