( see fig . our review of medical records for 120 newly enrolled veterans found that , on average , the total amount of time it took to be seen by primary care providers was much longer when measured from the dates veterans initially requested va contact them to schedule appointments than it was when using appointment wait times calculated using veterans' preferred dates as the starting point . for example , we found one veteran applied for vha health care benefits in december 2014 , which included a request to be contacted for an initial appointment . the va medical center contacted the veteran to schedule a primary care appointment 43 days later . when making the appointment , the medical center recorded the veteran's preferred date as march 1 , 2015 , and the veteran saw a provider on march 3 , 2015 . although the medical center's data showed the veteran waited 2 days to see a provider , the total amount of time that elapsed from the veteran's request until the veteran was seen was actually 76 days . further , ongoing scheduling errors , such as incorrectly revising preferred dates when rescheduling appointments , understated the amount of time veterans waited to see providers . for example , during our review of appointment scheduling for 120 newly enrolled veterans , we found that schedulers in three of the six va medical centers included in our review had made errors in recording veterans' preferred dates when making appointments . for example , in some cases primary care clinics cancelled appointments , and when those appointments were re - scheduled , schedulers did not always maintain the original preferred dates in the system , but updated them to reflect new preferred dates recorded when the appointments were rescheduled . we found 15 appointments for which schedulers had incorrectly revised the preferred dates . in these cases , we recalculated the appointment wait time based on what should have been the correct preferred dates , according to vha policy , and found the wait - time data contained in the scheduling system were understated . officials attributed these errors to confusion by schedulers resulting from the lack of an updated standardized scheduling directive , which vha rescinded and replaced with an interim directive in july 2014 . as in our previous work , we continue to find scheduling errors that affect the reliability of wait - time data used for oversight , which make it difficult to effectively oversee newly enrolled veterans' access to primary care . as a result of these findings , we recommended that vha monitor the full amount of time newly enrolled veterans wait to receive primary care , and issue an updated scheduling directive . vha concurred with both of these recommendations , and indicated that by december 31 , 2016 , it plans to begin monitoring the full amount of time newly enrolled veterans wait to be seen by primary care providers . it also indicated that it plans to submit a revised scheduling directive for vha - wide internal review by may 1 , 2016 .