( see fig . amtrak owns 650 miles of track , primarily in the northeast corridor , which runs between boston and washington , d.c. about 70 percent of amtrak's service is provided by conventional trains ; the remainder is provided by high - speed trains . it offers high - speed service ( up to 150 miles per hour ) on the northeast corridor . about 22 million passengers in 45 states rode amtrak's trains in 2000 ( about 60,000 passengers each day ) , a small share of the commercial intercity travel market . in comparison , in 1999 , domestic airlines carried about 1.6 million passengers per day , and intercity buses carried about 983,000 people per day ( latest data available ) . proponents see high - speed rail systems ( with speeds over 90 miles per hour ) as a promising means for making trains more competitive with these other modes of transportation . they see introduction of high - speed rail in various areas of the country as a cost - effective means of increasing transportation capacity ( the ability to carry more travelers ) and relieving air and highway congestion , among other things . the federal railroad administration defines high - speed rail transportation as intercity passenger service that is time - competitive with airplanes or automobiles on a door - to - door basis for trips ranging from about 100 to 500 miles . the agency chose a market - based definition , rather than a speed - based definition , because it recognizes that opportunities for successful high - speed rail projects differ markedly among different pairs of cities . high - speed trains can operate on tracks owned by freight railroads that have been upgraded to accommodate higher speeds or on dedicated rights of way . the greater the passenger train's speed , the more likely it is to require a dedicated right - of - way for both safety and operating reasons . ten corridors ( not including amtrak's northeast corridor ) have been designated as high - speed rail corridors either through legislation or by the department of transportation . ( see fig . designated corridors may be eligible for federal funds through several department of transportation programs . according to the department , the designation also serves as a catalyst for sustained state , local , and public interest in corridor development . the 10 federally designated corridors are generally in various early stages of planning . amtrak's northeast corridor is in operation and supports high - speed service up to 150 miles per hour . amtrak's future is uncertain , in part , because it has made limited progress toward achieving operational self - sufficiency , as required by the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 . the act prohibits amtrak from using federal funds for operating expenses , except for an amount equal to excess railroad retirement tax act payments , after 2002 .