faster . fda generally makes decisions on 510 ( k ) submissions faster than it makes decisions on pma submissions . fda's fiscal year 2009 goal is to review and decide on 90 percent of 510 ( k ) submissions within 90 days and 98 percent of them within 150 days . the comparable goal for pmas is to review and decide upon 60 percent of original pma submissions in 180 days and 90 percent of them within 295 days . less expensive . the estimated cost to fda for reviewing submissions is substantially lower for 510 ( k ) submissions than for pma submissions . for fiscal year 2005 , for example , according to fda the estimated average cost for the agency to review a 510 ( k ) submission was about $18,200 , while the estimate for a pma submission was about $870,000 . for the applicant , the standard fee provided to fda at the time of submission is also significantly lower for a 510 ( k ) submission than for a pma submission . in fiscal year 2009 , for example , the standard fee for 510 ( k ) submissions is $3,693 , while the standard fee for original pma submissions is $200,725 . in general , class i and ii device types subject to premarket review are required to obtain fda clearance through the 510 ( k ) process , and class iii device types are required to obtain fda approval through the more stringent pma process . with the enactment of the medical device amendments of 1976 , congress imposed requirements under which all class iii devices would be approved through the pma process before being marketed in the united states . however , certain types of class iii devices that were in commercial distribution in the united states before may 28 , 1976 ( called preamendment device types ) and those determined to be substantially equivalent to them may be cleared through the less stringent 510 ( k ) process until fda publishes regulations requiring them to go through the pma process or reclassifies them into a lower class . prior to 1990 , fda issued regulations requiring some class iii device types to go through the pma process but many class iii device types continued to be reviewed through the 510 ( k ) process . the safe medical devices act of 1990 required fda ( 1 ) to reexamine the preamendment class iii device types for which pmas were not yet required to determine if they should be reclassified to class i or ii or remain in class iii and ( 2 ) to establish a schedule to promulgate regulations requiring those preamendment device types that remain in class iii to obtain fda approval through the pma process . accordingly , all class iii devices are eventually to be reviewed through the pma process . in addition to its responsibilities for premarket review of devices , fda's postmarket activities to help ensure that devices already on the market remain safe and effective include collecting and analyzing reports of device - related adverse events and reviewing annual reports required from manufacturers . fda's reporting framework for device - related adverse events includes both mandatory and voluntary components .