calculated cost recovery . using the cleaned data , we calculated the cost recovery for each transaction and for the usaid and usda programs in total . the program average we reported is a weighted average , the ratio between the sum of sales proceeds and the sum of commodity and freight costs . estimated the difference between the proceeds generated through monetization and the cost the u.s. government incurred to procure and ship the commodities . to do so , subtracted the total cost the u.s. government incurred on procurement and shipping monetized food aid commodities from the total proceeds generated . we also estimated the extent to which freight costs account for the cost to the u.s. government for u.s. food aid procurement and shipping . in addition , we looked at how cargo preference affects cost recovery by examining the freight rate differentials between u.s. - and foreign - flag carriers , in shipping u.s. food aid . ( for a detailed description of our methodology for this analysis , see appendix ii. ) to examine the extent to which usaid and usda meet requirements to ensure that monetization does not cause adverse market impacts , we conducted a literature search to identify relevant studies and papers on the effect of monetization on recipient countries and trade . in addition , we conducted interviews with officials from usaid and usda ; representatives from ngos engaged in monetization ; and experts from academia with extensive research , published work , and experience in the field . we reviewed the federal requirements and agency documents such as policies and guidelines , the bellmon estimate for title ii ( best ) analyses , and the usual marketing requirement ( umr ) . we also analyzed data from kcco , usaid , and usda on commodities that were programmed for monetization between fiscal years 2008 and 2010 , including volumes programmed for monetization , import data , and consumption data in recipient countries . specifically , we examined the total volume programmed for monetization by both agencies for each commodity in each country and each year between fiscal years 2008 and 2010 , for which we could obtain the commercial import volume using the umr . we compared the total volume monetized of a given commodity to the commodity's commercial import volume . to assess the data , we interviewed cognizant agency officials at usda and reviewed documentation ; however , we did not independently verify the underlying source data . we determined that the data we used were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . reviewed the 7 bests and 87 umrs that were available for all of the monetization cases that occurred between fiscal years 2008 and 2010 . for the purposes of this report , we define the term “case” as the total volume of a given commodity programmed for monetization by either usaid and / or usda in a given country in a given year . examined the limits set by the best and the umr and compared them to each other . examined the monetization cases that occurred between fiscal years 2008 and 2010 and compared them to limits set by the best and / or the umr .