this initiative is still evolving . doe originally identified several strategies to help it reduce the time needed to treat and dispose of the waste . based on these strategies , doe set a goal of achieving up to $34 billion in savings at its three high - level waste sites and reducing the waste cleanup schedule by about 20 to 35 years compared to the existing program baseline . as of april 2003 , doe's strategies were still under development , and doe had revised the savings estimate to $29 billion . however , even the $29 billion estimate may not be reliable . while savings are likely if the strategies are successfully implemented , the extent of the savings is still uncertain . for the most part , doe's past efforts to treat and dispose of high - level waste have been plagued with false starts and failures , resulting in steadily growing estimates of the program's total cost . since the cleanup activities began about 20 years ago , doe has spent about $18 billion in its attempts to prepare high - level waste for disposal . however , less than 5 percent of the waste has been successfully treated to date . uncontrolled cost overruns , numerous schedule delays , and unsuccessful attempts to develop treatment processes have pushed the overall estimated cost of the high - level waste program from about $63 billion in 1996 ( when the first comprehensive estimates were developed ) to nearly $105 billion in 2003 . in an attempt to gain control over doe's waste management program and to better ensure its affordability , in february 2002 the assistant secretary for environmental management undertook a new initiative aimed at accelerating cleanup at doe's sites and focusing on more rapid reduction of environmental risks . the initiative came as a result of an internal review of the cleanup program , which identified numerous problems and recommended a number of corrective actions . among other things , the review noted that the cleanup program was not based on a comprehensive , coherent , technically supported risk prioritization ; was not focused on accelerating risk reduction ; and was not addressing the challenges of uncontrolled cost and schedule growth . a main focus of the initiative is high - level waste , including both the technical approach to treating the waste and improving how doe manages the contracts and project activities . doe developed strategies to speed the cleanup and reduce risk at all three sites . many of these proposals involved ways to do one or more of the following: dealing with some tank waste as low - level or transuranic waste , rather than as high - level waste . doing so would eliminate the need to prepare the waste for off - site disposal in the geologic repository for high - level waste . disposing of waste in the repository currently is based on immobilizing the waste in a glass - like substance through a process called vitrification . completing the waste treatment more quickly by using additional or supplemental technologies for treating some of the waste .