history.various age ranges . comparing the selected states' monitoring programs for psychotropic drugs provided to foster children with aacap's guidelines indicates that , as of october 2011 , each of the state programs falls short of providing comprehensive oversight as defined by aacap . though states are not required to follow these guidelines , the six states we examined had developed monitoring programs that satisfied some of aacap's best principles guidelines to varying degrees . such variation is not surprising given that states set their own oversight guidelines and have only recently been required , as a condition of receiving certain federal child welfare grants , to establish protocols for the appropriate use and monitoring of psychotropic drugs prescribed to foster children . hhs has provided limited guidance to the states on how to improve their control measures to monitor psychotropic drug prescriptions to foster children . without formally endorsing specific oversight measures for states to implement , hhs conducts state reviews and provides other online resources , including the aacap guidelines , to help states improve their programs . acf performs child and family services reviews ( cfsr ) of states to ensure conformity with federal child welfare requirements — which include provisions for safety , permanency , and family and child well - being — and to assist states as they enhance their capacity to help families achieve positive outcomes . these reviews include the examination of a limited number of children's case files , in part to determine whether the state foster care agency conducted assessments of children's mental health needs and provided appropriate services to address those needs . however , these reviews are not designed to identify specific potential health risk indicators related to psychotropic medications , and since they occur every 2 to 5 years , states cannot rely on these reviews to actively monitor prescriptions . in addition , acf operates technical assistance centers and provides online resources such as links to state guidance on psychotropic drug oversight , academic studies on psychotropic drugs , and recordings of teleconferences related to the oversight of psychotropic drugs . while hhs makes a variety of resources available to states developing oversight programs for psychotropic drugs , it has not endorsed any specific guidance . in the absence of hhs - endorsed guidance , states have developed varied oversight programs that in some cases fall short of aacap's recommended guidelines . the aacap guidelines are arranged into four categories , including consent , oversight , consultation , and information sharing , that contain practices defined as minimal , recommended , or ideal . the following describes the extent to which the selected states' monitoring programs cover these areas . consent: according to interviews and documentation provided by state medicaid and foster care officials , all six selected states have implemented some practices consistent with aacap guidelines for consent procedures , though in varying scope and application . according to aacap , the consent process should be documented and monitored to ensure that caregivers are aware of relevant information , such as the child's diagnosis , expected benefits and risks of treatments , common side effects , and potentially severe adverse events .