eta . top management at eta has begun to take actions to help ensure that the ui program maintains capacity to achieve its mission with reduced resources , such as reengineering the ui program's accountability and performance measurement process ( as previously described in figure 4 ) . while eta officials and stakeholder organizations raised concerns about the unemployment insurance program's capacity to adequately respond to the next recession , eta reported that it routinely communicates with states through meetings hosted by eta's regional offices and participates in national conferences and that these and other efforts helped inform a number of cost - neutral proposed reforms to the ui program included in the president's budget for fiscal year 2017 . these reforms are intended in part to make the ui program more responsive to economic downturns . for example , the president's budget proposed a new extended benefits program to provide up to 52 weeks of additional federally - funded benefits for states seeing increased and high unemployment , with the number of weeks tied to the state's unemployment rate . although eta has taken steps to communicate with states , eta's data collection efforts have not focused on systematically identifying lessons learned from the most recent recession to help ensure the ui program maintains capacity in response to a future economic downturn and related issues , such as the states' ability to manage changes in workload . in addition to regular communications with the states , eta officials said that they regularly monitor program activities through a wide array of data collection , and that these efforts have helped the agency identify lessons from the effects of the most recent recession on the federal - state ul system . officials , however , also noted that lack of capacity and competing priorities have prevented the agency and state ui programs from systematically gathering lessons learned by states from this recession . eta officials said that they intend to support states gathering and sharing lessons learned in the future when their workload stabilizes . systematically evaluating the challenges that states faced in administering the ui program during the recent recession — such as rapidly ramping up staffing at the start of the recession and ramping down as the economy recovered — and identifying and incorporating any lessons learned from this experience into a longer - term strategy could help further prepare the program for the next economic downturn . eta officials reported that as the economy recovered and federal funding for state administration of the program declined following the recession that began in 2007 , states reduced the number of employees , many with extensive knowledge and experience that state offices will have difficulty replacing in the future . eta reports that many state employees with extensive knowledge have already left state unemployment insurance offices . if actions are not taken promptly , opportunities to gather key lessons from the most recent recession may be missed to help ensure capacity is maintained in the next economic downturn . in addition to oflc workforce efforts underway , eta identified two broad strategies for maintaining oflc's capacity over the longer - term . both would require congressional action ( see text box ) .