the recommendations are listed by report . gao recommendations small business contracting: opportunities exist to further improve hubzone oversight: gao - 15-234 , february 12 , 2015 establish a mechanism to better ensure that firms are notified of changes to hubzone designations that may affect their participation in the program , such as ensuring that all certified firms and newly certified firms are signed up for the broadcast e - mail system or including more specific information in certification letters about how location in a redesignated area can affect their participation in the program conduct an assessment of the recertification process and implement additional controls , such as developing criteria and guidance on using a risk - based approach to requesting and verifying firm information , allowing firms to initiate the recertification process , and ensuring that sufficient staff will be dedicated to the effort so that a significant backlog in recertifications does not recur . hubzone program: fraud and abuse identified in four metropolitan areas: gao - 09-440 , march 25 , 2009 consider incorporating a risk - based mechanism for conducting unannounced site visits as part of the screening and monitoring process . consider incorporating policies and procedures into sba's program examinations for evaluating if a hubzone firm is expending at least 50 percent of the personnel costs of a contract using its own employees . ensure appropriate policies and procedures are in place for the prompt reporting and referral of fraud and abuse to sba's office of inspector general as well as sba's suspension and debarment official . take appropriate enforcement actions on the 19 hubzone firms we found to violate hubzone program requirements to include , where applicable , immediate removal or decertification from the program , and coordination with sba's office of inspector general as well as sba's suspension and debarment official . closed - implemented gao recommendations small business administration: additional actions are needed to certify and monitor hubzone businesses and assess program results: gao - 08-643 , june 17 , 2008 take immediate steps to correct and update the map that is used to identify hubzone areas and implement procedures to ensure that the map is updated with the most recently available data on a more frequent basis . develop and implement guidance to more routinely and consistently obtain supporting documentation upon application and conduct more frequent site visits , as appropriate , to ensure that firms applying for certification are eligible . establish a specific time frame for eliminating the backlog of recertifications and ensure that this goal is met , using either sba or contract staff , and take the necessary steps to ensure that recertifications are completed in a more timely fashion in the future . formalize and adhere to a specific time frame for processing firms proposed for decertification in the future . closed - implemented further develop measures and implement plans to assess the effectiveness of the hubzone program that take into account factors such as ( 1 ) the economic characteristics of the hubzone area and ( 2 ) contracts being counted under multiple socioeconomic subcategories . closed - not implemented this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .