( see fig . research suggests that the dynamics of family decision - making in relation to tanf work requirements , time limits , and other policies have played a key role in the decline in the number of families receiving cash assistance , and experts we interviewed agreed . the decline in participation reflected changes in families' decisions about whether to apply for tanf cash assistance in the first place , and , for those who receive cash assistance , whether to continue or leave the program , as well as responses to state policies such as sanctions and diversion . one of the most important factors affecting whether or not eligible families participate is the requirement to participate in work activities under tanf , according to research as well as the experts we interviewed . how does the participation of eligible families in tanf affect the number of children in extreme poverty and poverty ? in the current recession , what changes are states experiencing in their cash assistance caseloads and what changes , if any , have states made in their tanf – related spending to date to respond to any increases ? to determine which factors contributed to the decline in caseload , we conducted a literature review of relevant research ; interviewed tanf experts , as well as officials at the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ; reviewed tanf caseload and other data ; and reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . in conducting our literature review , we searched various databases for peer - reviewed journals and other publications ; obtained recommendations from tanf researchers and policy experts , including hhs officials ; and reviewed policy and research organization web sites for relevant studies . we cited studies that at least two social scientists had reviewed and assessed for the adequacy of their methodologies . we also contracted with the urban institute to conduct analyses — using the transfer income model , version 3 , known as trim3 — of changes in families' tanf eligibility and receipt of tanf cash assistance . these analyses helped us estimate the extent to which changes in eligibility rules under tanf affected the number of families eligible for cash assistance after welfare reform . for this analysis , we applied tanf eligibility rules for 2005 , including rules established by states , to all families in 1995 , which was the year prior to welfare reform under the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) . we also contacted state - based social service and other organizations in selected states regarding state tanf practices and policies that could affect a family's decision to participate in the program . to determine how tanf cash recipients compare to eligible nonrecipients and to estimate the impact of tanf cash assistance on child poverty and extreme poverty , we requested additional analyses using trim3 . for our analysis of the characteristics of cash recipients and eligible nonrecipients , we used 2005 data , the most recent publicly available trim3 data when we conducted our work . in comparing the characteristics of cash recipients and eligible nonrecipients , differences are statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level unless otherwise noted .