we included these vehicles in our analysis . in more limited cases , vehicles were categorized as a bus when other evidence indicated they should be categorized as a van . we excluded these vehicles from our analysis . the net change in vehicles because of these changes represented less than 3 percent of the total number of vehicles in the 2004 and 2013 analyses . to determine the federal government's role in procurement of transit buses — including funding , oversight and guidance , and procurement requirements — we reviewed applicable federal law , regulations , guidance , and fta documentations on federal grant programs including fta's master agreement ; circular 4220.1e ; circular 4220.1f ; administrator's policy letters ; best practices procurement manual ; triennial , state management , and procurement systems reviews ; and apta's standard bus procurement guidelines . to identify any challenges transit agencies face when procuring transit buses and federal actions that could address those challenges , we conducted six discussion groups with 36 rural and urban transit agencies . we recruited discussion group participants through mass e - mail solicitation to approximately 1,900 transit agencies that report to the ntd . in our email , we requested participation from transit agencies that had received funding from fta since 2009 and that were interested in speaking with us on challenges they faced regarding transit bus procurement . we also solicited the help of three national transit industry groups to send our solicitation e - mail to rural transit agencies — apta , ctaa , and american association of state highway and transportation officials ( aashto ) — that work closely with transit and state transportation agencies . for each volunteer received , we identified whether it was an urban or rural recipient , the number of buses each reported , and their ntd identification number to identify the fta region . we established three size categories to ensure we received input from a range of sizes of urban agencies: large ( more than 100 buses ) ; medium ( 50 – 100 buses ) , and small ( less than 50 buses ) . we did not group rural agencies into size categories because 97 percent of these agencies have less than 50 buses . after grouping the full list of volunteers , we allocated transit agency participants into six homogeneous groups . our six discussion groups included the following: two groups of rural transit agencies ( total of 9 agencies ) ; two groups of small , urban transit agencies ( total of 13 agencies ) ; one group of medium , urban transit agencies ( total of 6 agencies ) ; one group of large , urban transit agencies ( total of 8 agencies ) . in order to ensure the appropriateness of the questions for the discussions , we pretested our moderator guide with three transit agencies and modified the guide based on those pretest results as needed . we conducted four of the six groups with rural and small urban transit agencies due to the proportion of rural and small agencies in the total population of transit agencies .