vha . to ensure that providers develop appropriate approaches to treating veterans with mental health conditions and reevaluate such treatment approaches over time , vha has established certain policies to govern the documentation of mental health treatment decisions by mental health providers in specialty care . for example , in 2008 , vha issued its mental health services handbook to define minimum clinical requirements for mental health services at vamcs , requiring that providers in specialty care document mental health treatment plans in veterans' electronic medical records . the mental health services handbook specifies that plans should include certain components such as documentation that different evidence - based treatment options were considered by mental health providers and that approaches to monitor the outcomes of care were developed . the joint commission . the joint commission is an independent , not - for - profit organization responsible for accrediting and certifying health care organizations and programs in the united states ( including vamcs ) at least once every 3 years , and it has developed standards to use as the basis of its evaluative process . ptsd . those with ptsd have experienced symptoms that have persisted for more than 1 month after exposure to a traumatic event , although the onset of symptoms may be delayed for much longer , and cause significant distress or impairment in social , occupational , or other important areas of functioning . symptoms may include recurrent , involuntary memories of the traumatic event and flashbacks in which the veteran feels or acts as if the traumatic event were recurring . ptsd is strongly associated with reduced quality of life and adverse physical health outcomes . gad . those with gad feel continually worried or anxious about a range of events or activities in their daily lives and have difficulty controlling or stopping this worry . along with feeling worried , those with gad experience symptoms of tension such as restlessness , feeling on edge , being easily tired , difficulty concentrating , and sleep difficulties . veterans with mental health conditions may be offered a variety of treatment options . of the approximate 2 million veterans with at least one diagnosed mental health condition in fiscal year 2018 , 45 percent received non - pharmacologic therapy , 27 percent received a combination of non - pharmacologic therapy and psychotropic medication , and 10 percent received psychotropic medication only . non - pharmacologic therapy . non - pharmacologic therapy , or psychotherapy , involves treating mental health conditions using psychological rather than medical means . there are many different types of therapy options , although not all may be available at every vamc . examples of non - pharmacologic therapies include cognitive behavioral therapy and prolonged exposure therapy . some therapy options may be provided to individual veterans , while others are offered to groups of veterans . psychotropic medications . psychotropic medications are used to affect one's mood , thought , or behaviors . veterans can be prescribed one or more psychotropic medications , from one or more classes , to treat their diagnosed mental health conditions . for example , sertraline — a psychotropic medication commonly known by its brand name zoloft® — is used by vha providers to treat both depression and anxiety .