all of these sources have limitations . for example ,  while contractors and assistance recipients in iraq report their personnel numbers on a regular basis , a usaid official informed us that only about 70 percent of their contractors and assistance recipients in afghanistan provide personnel information ;  a usaid official told us they have a limited ability to verify the accuracy or completeness of the data that are reported , especially for afghanistan where they operate far more projects than in iraq ; the usaid official responsible for preparing the joint report raised concerns about possible inconsistent reporting of security personnel that could result in double counting ; and the data provided to us by usaid for our 2010 report did not include personnel working under several contracts and assistance instruments , such as four cooperative agreements for food security programs in afghanistan . usaid officials also told us that the numbers in the joint report do not include the number of personnel working under certain support service contracts , such as facilities maintenance , or personal services contractors . for example , a usaid official told us that at least 109 contractor personnel supporting the iraq mission were not counted in the joint report because a decision was made not to include support services and personal services contractors . although all three agencies are required to track the number of personnel killed or wounded while working on contracts and assistance instruments in iraq or afghanistan , dod still does not have a system that reliably tracks killed and wounded contractor personnel . for the joint report , dod relied on data maintained by the department of labor ( labor ) regarding defense base act ( dba ) claims . while dod acknowledged in the joint report that claims data from this workers' compensation program do not provide a true reflection of how many dod contractor personnel were killed or wounded while working in either country , dod did not fully disclose the limitations associated with dba claims data . first , the claims data presented in the joint report are for death and injury claims filed in fiscal year 2010 for all u.s. government contractors and civilians — including those employed by state and usaid — and not just dod contractors . further , as we concluded in 2009 , dba claims data do not provide an appropriate basis for determining the number of contractor personnel killed or wounded in either country . most notably , not all deaths and injuries for which claims are filed under dba would be regarded as contractors killed or wounded within the context of the ndaa for fy2011 reporting requirement . for example , we previously identified dba claims filed for occupational injuries and medical conditions such as sprains and appendicitis . also , labor officials previously explained to us that injuries to local and third country contractor personnel , in particular , may be underreported . to provide their data on personnel killed and wounded , state and usaid relied on data collected by state bureaus and usaid missions in iraq and afghanistan . these data were based on reports submitted to state by contractors and to usaid by contractors and assistance recipients .