professional services . housekeeping services . the percentage of obligations for sd / vosb set - asides varied across va contracting organizations . among the contracting offices for vha's 18 visns — which together accounted for about 47 percent of total obligations — the percentage for sd / vosb set - asides ranged from approximately 17 percent to 40 percent in fiscal year 2017 , as shown in figure 5 . total obligations and sd / vosb set - aside obligations also varied across va's three national contracting offices — the national acquisition center , strategic acquisition center , and technology acquisition center — in part because of differences in the types of goods and services they procure . the technology acquisition center had a larger increase in sd / vosb set - aside obligations than other contracting organizations in fiscal year 2017 . this increase is consistent with our finding that it - related categories were among the types of goods and services that had the highest increase in sd / vosb obligations following the supreme court decision . the national acquisition center consistently had the lowest volume and percentage of obligations for sd / vosb set - asides ; officials noted that its areas of focus in pharmaceuticals and high tech medical equipment are markets that have little participation from small businesses and sd / vosbs . figure 6 shows obligations on set - aside and non - set - aside contracts and orders in these three national contracting offices over fiscal years 2014 through 2017 . data from va's osdbu shows consistent increases over the last several years in the number of certified firms listed in its vip database , with a noticeable spike following the supreme court decision . while the number of certified sd / vosbs in vip increased annually from fiscal years 2014 through 2017 , the largest increase — from 8,925 to 11,926 firms — occurred in the last year of this time frame . the number of sd / vosbs that received set - aside contracts or orders also increased over fiscal years 2015 through 2017 . the largest year - to - year increase during this period was in the last year of this time frame , when the number increased from 1,174 to 1,663 , as shown in figure 7 . in response to the supreme court's 2016 decision in the case of kingdomware technologies , inc. v. united states , va released a july 2016 policy for the veterans first program , a revision to its 2007 policy . contracting officers cited perceived negative scrutiny from leadership , osdbu , office of general counsel reviewers , or potential protests from sd / vosbs as reasons for their reluctance to not set aside requirements for sd / vosbs , or to deem prices proposed by sd / vosbs not fair and reasonable . contracting officers explained that objections raised from any of these parties would add time to the procurement process , and a decision to cancel a set - aside because the prices were found not fair and reasonable would require yet more time to start the solicitation process again .