how should the federal government do business ? gpra serves as a bridge between these two questions by linking results that the federal government seeks to achieve to the program approaches and resources that are necessary to achieve those results . the performance information produced by gpra's planning and reporting infrastructure can help build a government that is better equipped to deliver economical , efficient , and effective programs that can help address the challenges facing the federal government . among the major challenges are instilling a results orientation , ensuring that daily operations contribute to results , understanding the performance consequences of budget decisions , coordinating crosscutting programs , and building the capacity to gather and use performance information . the cornerstone of federal efforts to successfully meet current and emerging public demands is to adopt a results orientation ; that is , to develop a clear sense of the results an agency wants to achieve as opposed to the products and services ( outputs ) an agency produces and the processes used to produce them . adopting a results - orientation requires transforming organizational cultures to improve decisionmaking , maximize performance , and assure accountability — it entails new ways of thinking and doing business . this transformation is not an easy one and requires investments of time and resources as well as sustained leadership commitment and attention . based on the results of our governmentwide survey in 2000 of managers at 28 federal agencies , many agencies face significant challenges in instilling a results - orientation throughout the agency , as the following examples illustrate . at 11 agencies , less than half of the managers perceived , to at least a great extent , that a strong top leadership commitment to achieving results existed . at 26 agencies , less than half of the managers perceived , to at least a great extent , that employees received positive recognition for helping the agency accomplish its strategic goals . at 22 agencies , at least half of the managers reported that they were held accountable for the results of their programs to at least a great extent , but at only 1 agency did more than half of the managers report that they had the decisionmaking authority they needed to help the agency accomplish its strategic goals to a comparable extent . additionally , in 2000 , significantly more managers overall ( 84 percent ) reported having performance measures for the programs they were involved with than the 76 percent who reported that in 1997 , when we first surveyed federal managers regarding governmentwide implementation of gpra . however , at no more than 7 of the 28 agencies did 50 percent or more of the managers respond that they used performance information to a great or very great extent for any of the key management activities we asked about . as i mentioned earlier , we are now moving to a more difficult but more important phase of gpra — using results - oriented performance information on a routine basis as a part of agencies' day - to - day management and for congressional and executive branch decisionmaking .