( see fig . all of the 20 stockpile stewardship program managers said that they are involved with workforce planning to at least a moderate extent at their facilities . their involvement encompasses a variety of activities , including identifying current and future critical skill needs , identifying and recruiting candidates for employment , and helping to retain current employees through training and mentoring . all of the eight nnsa contractors undertake annual reviews of their critical skill needs , with managers playing a key role in this assessment . for example , managers at sandia , as part of the facility's annual strategic capabilities assessment , are responsible for identifying workforce skills required and developing projections of the number and type of staff needed to meet their mission . these managers are also asked to identify any increases or decreases in future staffing levels that may result from programmatic changes and any staff who may require specific training to ensure they will be prepared to handle upcoming segments of work . the information gathered from the managers during the strategic capabilities assessment process is used to develop a facilitywide hiring plan that ultimately guides sandia's recruiting efforts . at los alamos , managers prepare annual workforce reviews that identify present and future capabilities of the workforce , including critical skills . these reviews provide an opportunity for managers to identify both strengths and gaps in the capabilities needed to achieve programmatic missions . each review considers , among other items , projections of upcoming retirements , succession planning , recruitment goals and approaches , plans for replacing the lost skills , and mentoring and training needs . while these workforce reviews are comprehensive and help map out workforce needs , they have not yet been used to develop an overall hiring plan for los alamos ; however , human resource managers said that they plan to begin to do this by the end of fiscal year 2006 . in addition , almost all of the 20 stockpile stewardship managers said that they participate in recruiting efforts to at least a moderate extent . program managers identify the critical skill positions needing to be filled ; recruit on campus ; and interview prospective candidates when they visit the laboratory , production plant , or test site . for example , division managers at the kansas city plant identify critical skill needs and process the necessary request forms to fill those needs . these requests are aggregated by the human resource department and used to inform the plant's college recruiting efforts where applicable . managers are also involved in campus recruiting . for example , y - 12 sends line managers , not human resource personnel , out to campuses to recruit . this helps y - 12 develop a better relationship with the schools and faculty and provides students with an opportunity to interact with the managers with whom they may one day be working , according to the human resource officials . managers also play a primary role in interviewing candidates who visit their facility , and many make the final selections .