blm still has not used this option . in 2004 , congress provided blm with an alternative to destroying unadoptable excess animals by amending the act to state that “ny excess animal or the remains of an excess animal shall be sold if — ( a ) the excess animal is more than 10 years of age ; or ( b ) the excess animal has been offered unsuccessfully for adoption at least 3 times.” furthermore , the amendment stipulated that the excess animals “shall be made available for sale without limitation.” blm has instead imposed limitations on the sales of excess animals in an effort to reduce the risk that animals purchased at a low price would be resold to slaughterhouses for profit . as a result , blm is not in compliance with the act . blm officials told us that they have chosen not to destroy excess animals or sell them without limitation because of concerns about public and congressional reaction to the large - scale slaughter of thousands of healthy horses . various blm officials at different levels of responsibility also told us that the agency has not complied with these provisions because doing so would cause an immediate threat to the careers of any officials involved , due to the anticipated negative reaction of the public and congress . nevertheless , as of june 2008 , budget constraints forced blm to reconsider all of its options , officials told us . as part of this discussion , blm should inform congress of its concerns with ( 1 ) the act's requirement for the humane destruction of excess animals and ( 2 ) the possible slaughter of healthy horses if excess animals are sold without limitation , under certain circumstances , as the act requires . we provided a draft of this report to the department of the interior for review and comment . the department concurred with our findings and recommendations and believes they will help to improve the wild horse and burro program . in addition , the department provided several technical clarifications , which we incorporated as appropriate . appendix iv contains the department of the interior's comment letter . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of the interior , the director of blm , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or nazzaror@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v .