segments . prime borrowers typically have strong credit scores and obtain the most competitive interest rates and mortgage terms . in contrast , subprime borrowers typically have blemished credit and lower credit scores , may have difficulty providing income documentation , and generally pay higher interest rates and fees than prime borrowers . mortgages purchased by two government - sponsored enterprises ( gse ) , fannie mae and freddie mac , comprise another , albeit overlapping , market segment . the gses purchase ( primarily conventional prime ) loans and pool them to create securities sold to investors . the gses have goals directed at financing housing for lower - income families and in underserved areas . fha is a major part of the market segment comprising loans with government insurance or guarantees , which primarily serves borrowers who would have difficulty obtaining conventional prime mortgages . the borrowers are allowed to make very low down payments and generally pay interest rates that are competitive with prime mortgages but also pay fees or premiums to cover the cost of the guaranty . to provide insights into fha's role in the mortgage market , this report discusses ( 1 ) trends in fha's share of the market for home purchase mortgages and selected submarkets from 1996 through 2005 , and how they compared with the trends for the prime , subprime , and gse market segments ; and ( 2 ) the major factors associated with the trends in fha's market share and the implications of these trends for homebuyers and fha . in addition , appendix iii of this report provides information on selected borrower and loan characteristics of fha mortgages and mortgages in the prime and subprime market segments . to analyze trends in the overall market for home purchase mortgages , we compiled and analyzed loan data for 1996 through 2005 collected under the home mortgage disclosure act ( hmda ) . hmda requires lending institutions to collect and publicly disclose information about housing loans and applications for such loans . hmda data capture about 80 percent of the mortgage loans funded each year , according to estimates by the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , and are one of the most comprehensive sources of information on mortgage lending . hmda data have a number of limitations that affected our analysis . more specifically , the data ( 1 ) understate the number of loans purchased by the gses , ( 2 ) do not include a precise indicator for subprime loans , and ( 3 ) do not distinguish first mortgages from “piggyback” loans ( i.e. , the junior lien in a pair of loans used to finance the same property ) for most of the period we examined . we concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also reviewed relevant academic literature and government and industry studies , including internal fha analysis of sfdw data . in addition to our data analysis , we interviewed representatives of four fha lenders ( countrywide financial , wells fargo , bank of america , and lenders one — a mortgage cooperative representing 87 independent mortgage bankers ) .