the reports are to be available online . division a , title v , ยง 507 gao is required to report on the actions of the small business administration ( sba ) in implementing the authorities established in certain provisions of the recovery act . the report is to include a summary of the activity of sba under these provisions and an analysis of whether sba is increasing liquidity in the secondary market for sba loans . gao , along with the congressional budget office , is to comment on estimates of the numbers of jobs created and retained by projects and activities as reported by recipients of federal funds appropriated by the recovery act . gao is required to report on the best practices related to the disclosure among health care providers of protected health information of individuals for purposes of treatment . the report is to include an examination of the best practices implemented by states and other entities ; the extent to which these best practices improve the quality of the health care provided to individuals ; the ability of health care providers to manage the best practices ; and the use of electronic informed consent for disclosing protected health information for treatment , payment , and health care operations . gao is required to perform a study regarding the health care credit allowed under section 35 of the internal revenue code , and report on the results of the study and include in the report an analysis of the administrative costs of the federal government and qualified health insurance providers ; the health status and relative risk status of individuals covered under by qualified health insurance ; the participation in the health care credit any advance payments under the credit ; and the extent to which covered individuals obtained health insurance other than qualifying health insurance or went without health insurance . gao is required to study and report on the impact of 2007 and 2008 increases in the minimum wage in american samoa and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands on the rates of employment and the living standards of workers , and estimate the impact of any further wage increases on rates of employment and the living standards of workers in those territories , with full consideration of other factors that may impact the rates of employment and the living standards of workers , including how the profitability of major private sector firms may be impacted by wage increases in comparison to other factors such as energy costs and the value of tax benefits . we will continue to coordinate closely with the rest of the accountability community . we also are committed to completing our recovery act work on the timetable envisioned by the act and will keep the congress fully informed as our plans evolve . mr. chairman , senator collins , and members of the committee this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . the comptroller general is required to appoint 13 members of the health information technology ( hit ) policy committee .