i know what is expected of me on the job . my talents are used well in the workplace . i know how my work relates to the agency's goals and priorities . the strength of the eei supervisors component suggests that the employee - supervisor relationship is an important aspect of employee engagement . these questions focus on the interpersonal relationship between worker and supervisor and concern supervisors' support for employee development , employees' respect , trust , and confidence in their supervisor , and employee perceptions of an immediate supervisor's performance . overall , how good a job do you feel is being done by your immediate supervisor ? these questions reflect employees' feelings of motivation and competency related to their role in the workplace , such as their sense of accomplishment and their perception of utilization of their skills . i feel encouraged to come up with new and better ways of doing things . my work gives me a feeling of personal accomplishment . intrinsic work experience was the strongest eei component prior to 2011 , but fell during the period of government - wide decline in engagement levels . our ongoing work has found that government - wide , the demographic groups with the widest gap between most engaged and least engaged were pay category and supervisory status . for example , respondents in progressively lower general schedule ( gs ) pay categories had progressively lower levels of engagement government - wide . my supervisor treats me with respect . i have trust and confidence in my supervisor . in contrast , employees in the ses pay category reported consistently higher engagement levels — at least 10 percent more than any lower pay category . according to our preliminary analysis , while there was less difference between the engagement levels of other pay categories , employees in the gs 13-15 categories were consistently higher than all other lower gs pay categories . employees in the federal wage system consistently reported the lowest levels of engagement . similarly , respondents with fewer supervisory responsibilities had progressively lower levels of engagement government - wide . generally , employees with higher supervisory status have more autonomy in how they do their work . employees in higher pay categories are likely to have more supervisory responsibilities , so it is not surprising that the trends for each are similar . variations in engagement by supervisory status are shown in figure 4 . with respect to other demographic cohorts , our preliminary analysis shows that engagement levels tended to be similar , regardless of the respondents' gender , ethnicity ( hispanic or non - hispanic ) , or work location ( agency headquarters or field ) . for our ongoing work we used regression analysis to test which selected fevs questions best predicted levels of employee engagement as measured by our index , after controlling for other factors such as demographic characteristics and agency .