the personnel and parts shortages are discussed below . alc officials told us that personnel shortages occurred because 7 of their 14 experienced mechanics were transferred to another engine repair line beginning in fiscal year 2008 even though orders for repairing the engine did not decline . the alc transferred the mechanics because ( 1 ) the serviceable engines in air force's worldwide inventory exceeded its wartime requirements and ( 2 ) there was an urgent need for the mechanics on another engine repair line . alc officials also told us that work on the engines was delayed because parts were not always available in the supply system . at the end of fiscal years 2009 and 2010 , program office officials estimated that there were about 129 and 137 backorders for parts , respectively . for example , the production unit could not obtain enough service life extension packages to overhaul the engines . according to officials and documentation , another delay occurred when some of the engines' front stator assemblies were identified as having excessive wear — a new failure mode . the alc could not repair the assemblies because it did not have a certified process for repairing the parts . thus , the alc negotiated and awarded a contract to a vendor . the process to competitively award the contract and have the parts repaired by the vendor created delays in the program during fiscal years 2009 and 2010 . specific examples of these factors are discussed below . since the actual outlay rates were higher than the outlay rates used for budgeting for certain appropriations funding orders received by afwcf , the actual allowable carryover amount was less than the budgeted amount . for example , our analysis of air force data determined that the outlay rate used to compute the allowable amount of carryover from customers that were internal to afwcf changed from 61 percent to 75 percent for fiscal year 2006 between budget and execution . because the rate increased by 14 percentage points , the allowable amount of carryover was less than the planned amount for fiscal year 2006 . the budgets underestimated the amount of new orders that would be received from customers external to afwcf for fiscal years 2006 , 2007 , and 2009 . for example , the actual new orders exceeded budgeted new orders by $242 million in fiscal year 2009 due to the air force not including oco - funded orders in the afwcf budget . this contributed to carryover being higher than planned in fiscal year 2009 . for fiscal year 2009 , the afwcf encountered several problems that affected production ( work performed ) and contributed to carryover being higher than planned . specifically , the air force forecasted a declining workload for the alcs in fiscal year 2009 . as a result , the air force directed afmc to reduce its workforce at the alcs . however , workload increased instead of decreased in fiscal year 2009 . furthermore , work in several areas such as engines , was delayed because the depots could not obtain the spare parts when needed to perform the work .