( see fig . these companies are foreign - owned and operate foreign - built vessels . carnival cruise lines is incorporated in panama with its north american ships flying the bahamian or panamanian flag . royal caribbean is a liberian corporation , with ships flying the bahamian or norwegian flag . ncl is a subsidiary of star cruises , a bermuda corporation headquartered in hong kong , with its ships in north america flying the bahamian flag . while there are several u.s. companies in the cruise industry , such as disney and radisson seven seas , these companies also elect to operate foreign - built vessels under a foreign flag in order to operate under the same capital and operating cost structure as their foreign competitors . currently , there are no large u.s. - flag cruise ships in operation , and no large new cruise ships have been built in the united states since 1958 . this use of foreign - built ships is largely due to the higher costs anticipated when building a ship in the united states , rather than in shipyards in italy , germany , and elsewhere that have the infrastructure , expertise , and economies of scale for this segment of the market . over the past decade , several bills have been introduced into the u.s. congress with the objective of stimulating the development of a u.s. - flag fleet and growth in the domestic cruise ship trade , the travel industry , and port cities , although none have been enacted . generally , these bills would have allowed foreign ships either to operate in the domestic trade or to be reflagged with the u.s. flag under certain specified conditions . for example , the u.s. cruise vessel act ( s. 127 ) , introduced in 2001 , would have allowed u.s. - owned , foreign - built cruise ships to enter the domestic market for a limited time if the operators agreed to build replacement vessels in the united states . this law was designed to allow new companies to enter the domestic market with existing vessels and immediately increase the size of the u.s. commercial fleet , thus providing new jobs for merchant mariners . under the proposal , these foreign - built cruise ships would have been required to fully comply with all applicable u.s. laws , regulations , and tax obligations . many federal agencies oversee u.s. maritime policy . for example , in the department of transportation , the maritime administration's ( marad ) primary mission is to strengthen the u.s. maritime transportation system — including infrastructure , industry , and labor — to meet the economic and security needs of the nation . marad also seeks to ensure that the united states maintains adequate shipbuilding and repair services , efficient ports , and effective intermodal water and land transportation systems . marad programs are designed to promote the development and maintenance of an adequate , well - balanced , u.s. merchant marine .