gao - 15-781 . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2015 . dhs agreed with both recommendations . with respect to the challenges reported by state and local officials , fema officials said it would seek input from federal , tribal , state , and local stakeholders as part of its efforts to reengineer the pa program , which it believes will address many of the issues raised in the report . in addition , dhs said that fema , though its leadership role in the mitflg would take action to complete an investment strategy by august 2017 . we currently have work underway for this committee assessing several of fema's disaster response and recovery programs . for example , we are reviewing fema's urban search and rescue program , incident management assistance teams , and evacuation planning , as well as national disaster assistance programs for children and special needs populations . in addition , we are reviewing dhs's national emergency communications programs and efforts to implement the national disaster recovery framework . in december 2014 , we reported on fema's progress in taking steps to reduce and better control administrative costs — the costs of providing and managing disaster assistance . for example , fema issued guidelines intended to better control its administrative costs in november 2010 . in addition , fema recognized that administrative costs have increased and it has taken steps such as setting a goal in its recent strategic plan to lower these costs , and creating administrative cost targets . specifically , fema established a goal in its strategic plan for 2014-2018 to reduce its average annual percentage of administrative costs , as compared with total program costs , by 5 percentage points by the end of 2018 . to achieve this goal , fema officials developed administrative costs goals for small , medium , and large disasters , and are monitoring performance against the goals . however , fema does not require these targets be met , and we found that had fema met its targets , administrative costs could have been reduced by hundreds of millions of dollars . we found that fema continued to face challenges in tracking and reducing these costs . fema's average administrative cost percentages for major disasters during the 10 fiscal years 2004 to 2013 was double the average during the 10 fiscal years 1989 to 1998 . further , we found that fema did not track administrative costs by major disaster program , such as individual or public assistance , and had not assessed the costs versus the benefits of tracking such information . in our december 2014 report , we recommended that fema ( 1 ) develop an integrated plan to better control and reduce its administrative costs for major disasters , ( 2 ) assess the costs versus the benefits of tracking fema administrative costs by the disaster relief fund program , and ( 3 ) clarify the agency's guidance and minimum documentation requirements for direct administrative costs . fema agreed with the report and its recommendations . as of august 2015 , fema told us it is developing an integrated plan to control and reduce administrative costs for major disaster declarations .