licensing requirements . unlike in 2003 when the state regulator we surveyed reported that funeral homes are not regulated , as of 2010 , funeral homes are required to be registered to operate in the state . funeral directors or embalmers are required to practice at a registered funeral home but are not required to be registered with the state . funeral home applicants for registration are required to , among other things , ( 1 ) pay a registration fee , ( 2 ) provide a list of services provided at the funeral home , and ( 3 ) appoint an individual as designee of the funeral home . what happens to the money you've prepaid ? states have different requirements for handling funds paid for prearranged funeral services . what happens to the interest income on money that is prepaid and put into a trust account ? are you protected if the firm you dealt with goes out of business ? can you cancel the contract and get a full refund if you change your mind ? what happens if you move to a different area or die while away from home ? some prepaid funeral plans can be transferred , but often at an added cost.” “if your family isn't aware that you've made plans , your wishes may not be carried out . and if family members don't know that you've prepaid the funeral costs , they could end up paying for the same arrangements . you may wish to consult an attorney on the best way to ensure that your wishes are followed.” states' guides provide similar educational information and cautions . for example , a pamphlet published by an oregon regulator discusses pre - need planning and resources and notes that there are many honest and reputable people and companies that offer pre - need funeral planning . however , the pamphlet also cautions consumers to become educated and obtain complete information on the laws and their rights because “there are unscrupulous con artists who sell overpriced plans or will take your money with no intention of fulfilling their promises.” likewise , a massachusetts consumer guide states that preplanning gives consumers the opportunity to shop around and the ability to designate their own preferences . the massachusetts guide also provides a summary of consumer rights that are protected by law , and includes a checklist for pre - need funeral planning and arrangements . for example , massachusetts informs consumers that if they wish to prepay for their funerals , the funeral director is to provide a standardized contract approved by the board of registration in embalming and funeral directing , which includes an itemized statement of funeral goods and services that is ftc compliant , and a trust document with a bank or insurance policy . shopping ahead of time , getting correct information , and planning in advance allows you to make informed decisions before you purchase , and may save you money.” also , like other states , the california guide discusses various aspects of pre - need insurance and trusts , and provides information to educate consumers what is allowable under california law .