mo . ark . miss . similarly , texas and tennessee disqualify applicants for delinquency on child support . the other 7 states in our case study that issue permits did not cite this as a factor for denial or revocation . see table 2 below for a listing of state disqualifiers for the 9 states included in our case study . the laws of 8 of the 9 states we examined that issue permits also require applicants to complete training related to firearms safety to qualify for a permit ; however , the training requirements differ considerably . these requirements range from a list of approved training courses with no specified curriculum to a prescriptive state curriculum that can include a combination of classroom and live fire proficiency testing , which table 3 illustrates ( also see app . i for state summaries ) : further , differences in the information required by issuing authorities for eligibility determination exist not only between states but within states . issuing authorities in some decentralized states augment their application process with additional requirements , which means the steps an individual must take to get a permit will vary by jurisdiction . for example , the issuing authority in one of the california counties we interviewed reported that it requires applicants to have three letters of reference before considering applicants for a permit . other california counties in our review do not have this requirement . in another example , in virginia , a shall - issue state , the decision of requiring applicants to submit fingerprints was left to the discretion of each issuing authority , however this discretion has been removed by the virginia legislature effective july 1 , 2012 . as of march 2012 , 39 of the 48 states that issue permits and vermont allow concealed carry , and recognize permits from other states . of these , the number of other states whose permits they recognize varies , as follows: 7 states recognize permits issued in 1 to 19 states , 17 states recognize permits issued in 20 to 39 states , and 15 states recognize permits issued in 40 or more states — of these , 13 states recognize permits issued in all 47 other states that issue permits . vermont does not require a permit to carry concealed handguns and does not issue permits ( residents and nonresidents can carry concealed handguns ) . the other 9 states that issue permits do not recognize permits issued from other states ; 8 of these states are may - issue states . in addition , illinois and the district of columbia do not allow concealed carrying of handguns or issue permits , nor do they recognize other states' permits . over the last 10 years , shall - issue states have increasingly honored more states' permits . for example , georgia honored 12 states' permits in 2002 , but increased that number to 26 by 2012 . similarly , louisiana honored 5 states' permits in 2002 , but honored 38 states' permits as of march 2012 . figure 3 shows which states' permits each state will recognize ( see app . vii for a listing by state ) .