the draft report is currently out for comment . we anticipate issuing the report later this summer . in conducting our work for that report , we addressed the first objective by analyzing documents , including reports by the presidentially appointed identity theft task force on strengthening efforts to protect against identity theft ; office of management and budget ( omb ) guidance to agencies on protecting ssns and other pii ; and office of personnel management ( opm ) guidance on protecting federal employee ssns . we also interviewed officials from omb , opm , and the social security administration ( ssa ) , which led or participated in efforts to eliminate the unnecessary use of ssns on a governmentwide basis . to address the second objective , we analyzed documentation obtained from the 24 agencies covered by the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act , including their ssn reduction plans and annual updates , and compared them to key elements of effective performance plans , as defined in federal guidance and the government performance and results act modernization act of 2010 . we also administered a questionnaire to these agencies and interviewed relevant officials to gain additional insight on the agencies' efforts and the associated challenges . all the work on which this statement is based was conducted or is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in may 2007 , omb issued a memorandum officially requiring agencies to review their use of ssns in agency systems and programs to identify instances in which the collection or use of the number was superfluous . not all agencies maintain an up - to - date inventory of their ssn collections developing a baseline inventory of systems that collect , use , and display ssns and ensuring that the inventory is periodically updated can assist managers in maintaining an awareness of the extent to which they collect and use ssns and their progress in eliminating unnecessary collection and use . agencies were also required to establish a plan , within 120 days from the date of the memorandum , to eliminate the unnecessary collection and use of ssns within 18 months . lastly , the memorandum required agencies to participate in governmentwide efforts , such as surveys and data calls , to explore alternatives to ssn use as a personal identifier for both federal employees and in federal programs . since issuing its may 2007 memorandum requiring the development of ssn reduction plans , omb has instructed agencies to submit updates to their plans and documentation of their progress in eliminating unnecessary uses of ssns as part of their annual reports originally required by the federal information security management act of 2002 and now required by the federal information security modernization act of 2014 ( fisma ) .