this matter is now under appeal . plymouth county includes the cities of hull , hingham , and cohasset , all in the flight path of the over - the - water operations . these local municipalities alleged that the state environmental permit was invalid because massport misled the massachusetts executive office of environmental affairs about the project's impact by providing incomplete and inaccurate technical data . table 3 summarizes the history of the boston logan runway project . what have airports and other stakeholders done or proposed to do to address the challenges they experienced in building runways ? to determine the amount of time that airports spent to complete runway projects , along with challenges that airports and other stakeholders faced during this process and initiatives to address these challenges , we surveyed 30 airports that had built or planned to build a total of 32 runways between 1991 and 2010 . based on survey responses , we selected 5 airports that were diverse in size , location , and challenges at which we conducted in - depth site visits in order to understand the perspectives of numerous stakeholders . at these locations , we interviewed airport , airline , federal and state , and community officials about their experiences . we also visited the lester b. pearson international airport in toronto , canada , to gain a perspective on the canadian runway development process . a more detailed explanation of the scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . the decision to build runways has traditionally elicited strong and often emotional reactions among stakeholders , both negative and positive . generally , these reactions are directed at the decision to build a runway — usually in response to the perceived environmental or economic impacts that the proposed project will have on the surrounding communities . often , opponents to a runway project base their opposition on the belief that the negative impact of the runway on their quality of life will outweigh the projected benefits of the project . at other times , opponents contend that alternatives such as high - speed rail , regional airports , or demand management are better alternatives to resolving delay issues than building new runways . in contrast , proponents of new runway projects generally contend that building new runways can increase the level of service and reduce delay at the airport , can result in a positive economic impact to the region served by the airport , and in some cases can reduce noise pollution by distributing flights over a larger geographical area . airports that plan to build runways must comply with what can become a complex process involving three general phases that often overlap: planning , environmental review , and design and construction . in addition , airports can be involved in legal actions that can occur in any or all of the three phases . the first phase in the runway development process is planning . according to faa guidance , airports should begin planning for a new runway when the airport has reached 60 to 75 percent of total annual flight capacity .