4 for examples ) . representatives from ecos told us that usps bilateral and multilateral agreement mail products and express mail service products enjoy certain advantages , such as easier customs clearance , that make usps's products more attractive to customers . however , the representatives added that the effects of usps bilateral agreements on their business are unclear , because usps considers the rates to be proprietary information that is not publicly available . the representatives also noted that they did not believe their products are able to compete directly with usps bilateral and multilateral mail products because the rates for these products are based on comparatively low terminal dues rates . a 2015 usps oig study found that ecos' rates are generally much higher than rates for usps bilateral agreement and direct entry products , therefore ecos' products are not price competitive with usps's products . express mail service and parcel products are priced higher than terminal dues rates and offer special features similar to those offered by ecos , such as priority shipping and tracking , making those products more attractive for higher value and time sensitive items , and thus may compete with ecos' products . the effects of the alternatives on other international mail stakeholders , such as u.s. businesses that are affected by inbound or outbound international mail , are also unclear . for example , usps bilateral agreements may increase mailer options by providing faster service and more product features , all at a lower price that discourages competition from ecos . however , the full effects of bilateral agreements are unclear , in part because these rates are not public . the extent that u.s. businesses related to outbound mail have access to and use direct entry options into other countries is also unclear . in addition , other non - postal related factors such as monetary exchange rates and product prices affect the competitiveness of u.s. businesses that are affected by inbound or outbound mail could be more important than mailing prices to their international competitiveness . it is also difficult to quantify the effects of alternatives to the terminal dues system because of limited information . the information needed to determine the effects on domestic stakeholders from express mail service products and bilateral agreements are not publicly available , as usps regards this information as business proprietary . effects on stakeholders from direct entry mail are also unclear , in part because this type of inbound mail may be difficult to distinguish from other domestic usps mail , and information on direct entry mail is not collected by usps . most inbound letter mail to the united states in fiscal year 2016 was “packets,” defined by the upu as small packages that weigh no more than 2 kilograms ( about 4.4 pounds ) , often generated by e - commerce . usps officials stated that packets generate higher costs as usps's delivery and processing costs for packets are higher than they are for letters . the current terminal dues system does not distinguish mail based on shape , and there is no separate rate for packets .