cash payment . company to provide various promotions 2 . deca to provide a minimum of 1 endcap or shop - of a specified value in coordination with deca's category manager . around display in specified stores . in other specified stores , deca to provide a table , rack , or other display space for company use . deca to promote two specific brand products . competitors to have “proper allocation” of shelf space . company shelf space to be based on sales volume and agreed formula . 1 year deca to execute specified number of primaries / power buys in various product categories . 1 year 1 . deca to allow racks for display of company products . deca announces a category review including the goals of the review , and invites companies supplying products to supply information and analyses of product sales and trends within the category . deca conducts individual meetings with interested companies , including manufacturers , brokers , and broker - distributors , at fort lee , virginia . deca receives information developed by participating companies and listens to company presentations and recommendations for the category . deca's category buyer obtains market information from information resources , inc. , on the performance of products within the category . this information is gathered from cash register scanner data , and it shows for each product such data as number of items sold , dollar value of sales , and changes from prior periods . rack types specified in agreement . 7 months 1 . deca to expand bulk sales sections where practical . company to pay a specified amount per rack . specific products to be displayed in off the shelf locations a specified number of times per year . 1 year deca to use company display rack at all commissaries for company product . details of our scope and methodology are discussed in appendix i . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . we will then send copies to other appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the director , defense commissary agency ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or charles adams at 202-512-8010 or e - mail us at dyckmanl@gao.gov or adamsc@gao.gov . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . to determine the extent to which deca requires grocery suppliers to pay for shelf space in commissaries , and deca's large suppliers select the products that are sold by commissaries , we reviewed u.s. federal trade commission documents and industry studies concerning slotting practices and category management , reviewed deca documents , and interviewed deca and industry officials .