by dioxins . holds public meetings . meetings . reassessment . epa completes epa completes external review external review meetings and workshops . workshops . interim toxic interim toxic equivalency equivalency factor ( tef ) factor ( tef ) by dioxins . and comments . and comments . is pending . is pending . stockholm meeting . stockholm meeting . in rome , italy , in rome , italy , evaluate risks evaluate risks associated with associated with dioxins in foods dioxins in foods and establish a and establish a in geneva , switzerland , switzerland , reevaluate the reevaluate the risks to human risks to human dioxins . dioxins . dioxins . dioxins . sweden , derive consensus tefs daily intake daily intake for dioxins . for dioxins . for dioxins for for dioxins for human , fish , human , fish , and wildlife risk assessments . assessments . exposure to dioxins can produce a wide variety of effects in animals ( including cancer and noncancer health effects ) and might produce many of the same effects in humans . exposure to dioxins may be linked to a variety of adverse effects . short - term human exposure to high levels of dioxins may result in skin lesions ( such as chloracne ) and altered liver function . epa characterizes dioxin and related compounds as carcinogenic and developmental , reproductive , immunological , and endocrinological hazards and makes the following specific points . long - term exposure is linked to impairment of the immune system , the developing nervous system , the endocrine system , and reproductive functions . exposure to tcdd leads to an increased risk of generalized cancers at multiple organ sites , including lung cancer . long - term noncancer consequences of exposure to tcdd in types of cancer . human data from occupational or accidental exposure has produced evidence of increased risks for all cancers combined , along with less strong evidence of increased risks for cancers of particular sites . adults include chloracne , elevated gamma glutamyl transferase levels , and altered testosterone levels . among the possible noncancer consequences of exposure to tcdd or other dioxin and dioxin - like compounds are dermatological conditions such as chloracne ; liver diseases ; and kidney , nervous system , and lung disorders . although available data suggest an association between tcdd exposure and other adverse outcomes , further study is required of circulatory and heart disease , diabetes and glucose metabolism , reproductive and developmental outcomes , and immunologic disorders . mode of action through which exposure to dioxins can lead to adverse effects dioxins are structurally related and elicit their effects through a common mode of action — binding of dioxins to a cellular protein called the aryl hydrocarbon receptor . binding to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor appears to be necessary for all well - studied effects of dioxins but is not sufficient , in and of itself , to elicit these responses . a broad variety of data has shown the importance of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in mediating the biological effects of dioxins . the precise chain of molecular events by which the receptor elicits these effects is not yet fully understood .