did not meet: no key practices were addressed . in cases where analysts differed on the assessments , we discussed what the rating should be until we reached a consensus . we also interviewed agency officials to corroborate our analysis and identify the causes and impacts of any variances . we conducted this performance audit from january 2015 to april 2016 in accordance to generally accepted government auditing standards . a hybrid cloud is a composite of two or more other deployment models ( private , community , or public ) that are bound together by standardized or proprietary technology . according to federal guidance , these deployment models determine the number of consumers and the nature of other consumers' data that may be present in a cloud environment . ( further details of our scope and methodology are in app . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the federal government spends more than $80 billion dollars on it annually , with more than $2 billion of that amount spent on acquiring cloud - based services . this amount is expected to rise in coming fiscal years , according to omb . a goal of these investments is to improve federal it systems by replacing aging and duplicative infrastructure and systems that are costly and difficult to maintain . cloud computing helps do this by giving agencies the ability to purchase a broad range of it services in a utility - based model that allows an agency to pay for only the it services it uses . according to nist , an application should possess five essential characteristics to be considered cloud computing: on - demand self - service , broad network access , resource pooling , rapid elasticity , and measured service . essentially , cloud computing applications are network - based and scalable on demand . according to omb , cloud computing is economical , flexible , and fast: economical: cloud computing can be a pay - as - you - go approach , in which a low initial investment is required to begin and additional investment is needed only as system use increases . flexible: it departments that anticipate fluctuations in user demand no longer need to scramble for hardware and software to meet increasing need . with cloud computing , capacity can be added or subtracted quickly . fast: cloud computing eliminates long procurement and certification processes , while providing a wide selection of services . in addition , according to nist , cloud computing offers three service models: infrastructure as a service — the agency has the capability to provision processing , storage , networks , and other fundamental computing resources and run its own software , including operating systems and applications . the agency does not manage or control the underlying infrastructure but controls and configures operating systems , storage , deployed applications , and possibly , selected networking components ( eg , host firewalls ) .