gao - 14-259t . ( washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2014 ) . the program is replacing the component . according to the muos program office , the program is on track to meet the launch schedule of subsequent satellites , which is important because most of the communications satellites that muos is replacing are past their design lives . synchronizing deliveries of muos satellites with compatible army handheld , manpack , small form fit ( hms ) terminals remains a challenge . currently over 90 percent of the first satellite's on - orbit capabilities are being underutilized because of terminal program delays . consequently , military forces are relying on legacy communication terminals and are not able to take advantage of the superior capabilities offered by the muos satellites . operational testing and initial fielding of muos - capable hms terminals is planned for fiscal year 2014 , with a production decision expected in september 2015 . we have reported in the past that dod and congress are taking steps to reform and improve the defense acquisition system , and in the past year additional actions have been taken towards these goals . in november 2013 , dod published an update to its instruction 5000.02 , which provides acquisition guidance for dod programs . with this update , dod hoped to create an acquisition policy environment that will achieve greater efficiency and productivity in defense spending . air force officials noted that , for satellite programs , there are two major changes that they believe will improve the acquisition process . first , the instruction was changed to formally allow satellite programs to combine two major program milestones , b and c , which mark the beginning of the development and production phases , respectively.force , satellite programs have typically seen a great deal of overlap in the development and production phases , mainly because they are buying small quantities of items . they are often not able to produce a prototype to be fully tested because of the high costs of each article , so the first satellite in a production is often used both for testing and operations . air force officials believe that this change to the acquisition guidance will allow for streamlining of satellite development and production processes , and provide more efficient oversight without sacrificing program requirements . gao has not assessed the potential effects of this change . in the past , we have reported that committing a program to production according to the air without a substantive development phase may increase program cost and schedule risks , and we plan to look at the impacts of this change as it begins to be implemented . a second change made this year , according to air force officials , is the requirement that dod programs , including space programs , undergo independent development testing . while development testing for dod programs is not new to this policy revision , now the testing organization will be an independent organization outside the program office .