( fig . 7 shows the status of several key initiatives. ) for example , it has not implemented a new compensation system for about 20 percent of its 50,000 employees — those staff whose unions have not reached agreements with faa . among the factors affecting faa's progress in implementing this initiative were the wide range of skills represented in faa's workforce and the multiple unions representing faa employees . faa has not developed data to assess the effects of its human capital reforms . for example , it has not systematically surveyed managers and employees or analyzed their views on the new compensation system . although faa human capital officials cited positive effects of the system , nearly two - thirds ( 110 out of 176 ) of the managers and employees we interviewed disagreed or strongly disagreed that the new system is fair to all employees . the lack of data on the effects of its human capital reforms is an indication that faa has not fully incorporated elements that are important to effective human capital management into its overall reform effort . these elements include data collection and analysis , performance goals and measures , and links between reform goals and program goals . evaluations of faa's human capital reforms have cited these shortcomings , but faa has not developed specific steps and time frames for building the missing elements into its human capital management and for using these elements to evaluate the effects of its initiatives , make strategic improvements , and hold the agency's leadership accountable . addressing these weaknesses and developing a more strategic approach to its human capital reforms is particularly important as faa faces the likelihood of hiring thousands of air traffic controllers in the next decade to replace retiring controllers . while the exact number and timing of the controllers' departures is impossible to determine , faa's and our analyses show that the attrition rate will grow substantially in the near and long term as thousands of controllers hired over a 3- to 4- year period in the 1980s become eligible to retire . in june 2002 , we reported that faa's strategy for replacing controllers was generally to hire new controllers only when current , experienced controllers leave — an approach that makes it challenging to ensure that well - qualified new controllers are available when needed . for example , we found that faa's hiring process did not adequately take into account the time needed to fully train replacements , which could take up to 5 years ; there was uncertainty about agency's tools for screening and testing the aptitude of applicants ; and the agency had not addressed the resources that may be needed to train these replacements . we recommended , among other things , the development of a comprehensive workforce strategy to address faa's impending controller needs . while faa has made some changes in this area since our report appeared , it remains to be seen whether the agency's actions will be sufficient to ensure that qualified new controllers are available when needed . figure 8 shows an air traffic controller monitoring and handling air traffic .