them to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we used these data to identify expenditures of federal funds that appeared to be for purposes covered under title iv - b . we excluded foster care maintenance payments and adoption subsidies from the scope of our review , because they are typically not covered under title iv - b . due to their similarity to foster care maintenance payments and adoption subsidies , we also excluded maintenance payments made to relative caregivers of children in foster care and subsidies to relatives who become legal guardians of children leaving foster care . we interviewed acf officials and various child welfare experts who had published reports on topics relevant to our research questions . we also conducted a discussion group with officials from seven state child welfare agencies at acf's 18th national conference on child abuse and neglect . we assembled officials for the discussion group with the help of the american public human services association and the national association of social workers . we conducted this performance audit from january 2012 through january 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in 2011 , an estimated 6.2 million children were referred to child welfare agencies by sources including educators , law enforcement officials , and relatives because they were allegedly maltreated . after an initial screening process , agencies conducted abuse or neglect investigations and assessments on behalf of more than half of these children . devooght et al. , federal , state , and local spending to address child abuse and neglect in sfys 2008 and 2010 ( washington , d.c.: annie e. casey foundation and casey family programs , june 2012 ) . on service needs and service receipt from acf's national survey of child and adolescent well - being ( nscaw ) and analyzed findings on the availability of services from an aggregate acf report on its child and family services reviews . further , we used data from a survey funded by casey family programs to describe waiting lists for various types of child welfare prevention services reported by states . we determined through interviews with knowledgeable officials and reviewing existing information about the data that the data sources cited above were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . lastly , in response to our congressional mandate , we reviewed academic studies that explored the impact of substance abuse treatment on family reunification outcomes . states vary in how they fund and organize their child welfare programs . the majority of states administer their child welfare programs centrally , but some supervise child welfare programs that are administered by localities . over 675,000 children were found to be the victims of abuse or neglect .