pub . omb circular a - 11 establishes policy for planning , budgeting , acquisition , and management of federal capital assets . 1. determine whether the us - visit fiscal year 2005 expenditure plan satisfies the 2. determine the status of our us - visit open recommendations , and 3. provide any other observations about the expenditure plan and dhs's management of us - visit . we conducted our work at us - visit offices in rosslyn , virginia , from june 2004 through november 2004 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . details of our scope and methodology are described in attachment 1 of this briefing . satisfies or provides for satisfying many , but not all , key aspects of the condition that we reviewed . satisfies or provides for satisfying every aspect of the condition that we reviewed . actions are planned to implement the recommendation . actions are under way to implement the recommendation . actions have been taken that fully implement the recommendation . the software acquisition capability maturity model ( sa - cmm® ) developed by carnegie mellon university's software engineering institute ( sei ) defines acquisition process management controls for planning , managing , and controlling software - intensive system acquisitions . with respect to the fiscal year 2005 expenditure plan . the purpose of independent verification and validation is to provide an independent review of processes and products throughout the acquisition and deployment phase . results in brief: objective 3 observations the program office has acquired the services of a prime integration contractor to augment its ability to complete us - visit . the fiscal year 2005 expenditure plan does not describe progress against commitments ( eg , capabilities , schedule , cost , and benefits ) made in previous plans . the exit capability alternatives evaluation is faced with a compressed time line , missed milestones , and potentially reduced scope . us - visit and automated commercial environment ( ace ) 3 collaboration is moving slowly . us - visit system capacity is being managed in a compartmentalized manner . the cost estimating process used for increment 2b did not follow some key best practices . ace is a new trade processing system planned to support the movement of legitimate imports and exports and strengthen border security . results in brief: objective 3 observations to assist dhs in managing us - visit , we are making five recommendations to the secretary of dhs . in their comments on a draft of this briefing , us - visit program officials stated that they generally agreed with our findings , conclusions , and recommendations . collecting , maintaining , and sharing information on certain foreign nationals who enter and exit the united states ; identifying foreign nationals who ( 1 ) have overstayed or violated the terms of their visit ; ( 2 ) can receive , extend , or adjust their immigration status ; or ( 3 ) should be apprehended or detained by law enforcement officials ; detecting fraudulent travel documents , verifying traveler identity , and determining traveler admissibility through the use of biometrics ; and facilitating information sharing and coordination within the border management community .