ds does not document its annual eap review process . we requested the results of the emergency plans review officer reviews , including data on who conducted them and what deficiencies , if any , were found . these drills are shown in figure 2 . the required frequency of drills is determined by a post's threat ratings in the two security environment threat list categories: political violence and terrorism . posts rated high or critical in either political violence or terrorism are required to conduct each of the drills at least twice every fiscal year . all other posts are required to conduct these drills at least once every fiscal year . overseas post staff we visited reported that in addition to maintaining eaps and conducting required drills , other activities and training help their posts prepare for crises and evacuations . for instance , staff at one overseas post we visited reported that the foreign affairs counter threat ( fact ) training course and new arrival briefings help them prepare for crises and evacuations . state established fact to help safeguard and prepare personnel serving in high threat countries by providing instruction in personal security skills necessary for recognizing , avoiding , and responding to potential terrorist and other threat situations . fact training will be required for all overseas post foreign affairs personnel and certain family members by 2019 . new arrival briefings — which the fam requires each post's rso to provide — are helpful because they acquaint new post staff and family members with the post's current security situation and threat environment . the fah establishes processes for overseas posts to follow when considering or implementing a drawdown of post personnel , including evacuations under an authorized departure or an ordered departure . when a post determines that there is imminent danger to the lives of post staff or their family members , the post's chief of mission is to cable a request for either an authorized or an ordered departure to state's under secretary for management . under an authorized departure , certain post staff and all family members can voluntarily choose to depart the post by submitting a request through the post's eac , which forwards it to the chief of mission for a final decision . under an ordered departure , certain post staff and family members are ordered to depart the post . authorized and ordered departures can be tailored to fit the posts' particular circumstances . for instance , a chief of mission could recommend an ( 1 ) authorized departure for certain family members only , such as children of a certain age or spouses ; ( 2 ) ordered departure of certain family members only ; or ( 3 ) ordered departure of certain family members coupled with authorized departure of certain post staff . the fah also outlines how authorized and ordered departures are to be coordinated among various sections at an overseas post , the relevant regional bureau , and with others in state headquarters . state guidance establishes that authorized and ordered departures are approved for an initial period of 30 days , which may be extended in 30- day increments for a maximum of 180 days .