accurate . accurate estimates are unbiased and contain few mathematical mistakes . we reported in june 2016 that the estimate partially met best practices for this characteristic , in part because we could not independently verify the calculations the bureau used within its cost model , which the bureau did not have documented or explained outside its cost model . well - documented . cost estimates are considered valid if they are well - documented to the point they can be easily repeated or updated and can be traced to original sources through auditing , according to best practices . in june 2016 , we reported that , while the bureau provided some documentation of supporting data , it did not describe how the source data were incorporated . credible . credible cost estimates must clearly identify limitations due to uncertainty or bias surrounding the data or assumptions , according to best practices . in june 2016 , we reported that the estimate minimally met best practices for this characteristic in part because the bureau carried out its risk and uncertainty analysis only for about $4.6 billion ( 37 percent ) of the $12.5 billion total estimated life - cycle cost , excluding , for example , consideration of uncertainty over what the decennial census's estimated part will be of the total cost of cedcap . in june 2016 , we recommended that the bureau take action to ensure its 2020 census cost estimate meets all four characteristic of a reliable cost estimate . the bureau agreed with our recommendation . we also reported in june 2016 that risks were not properly accounted for in the cost estimate and recommended that the bureau properly account for risk to ensure there are appropriate levels for budgeted contingencies , and those recommendations have not yet been implemented . in october 2017 , bureau officials told us they were making progress towards implementing our recommendations and would provide us with that documentation when the cost estimate and supporting documentation are finalized . moreover , bureau officials also told us that an updated cost estimate would be available by the end of this fall . however , until the bureau updates its estimate and we have the opportunity to review its reliability , questions will surround the quality of the 2020 census cost estimate and the basis for any 2020 census annual budgetary figures . while the bureau has not updated its october 2015 cost estimate , several events since then indicate that the cost of the current design will be higher . for example: as previously mentioned , in august 2016 an $886 million it integration contract was awarded . according to bureau officials , there was no reference to this contract in the documentation for the planned contract costs supporting the october 2015 life - cycle cost estimate . in march 2017 , the bureau suspended part of how it is verifying address in - office procedures using on - screen imagery — one of its four key design innovations intended to control the cost of the 2020 census .