( see table 2. ) the first category of recommendations was directed at streamlining vr&e program eligibility and entitlement for veterans in most critical need , including ( 1 ) servicemembers who have been medically discharged or are pending medical discharge ; ( 2 ) veterans with a combined service - connected disability rating of 50 percent or greater ; and ( 3 ) veterans receiving compensation for the loss , or loss of the use , of a limb . in our report , we commented that , among other things , va's outmoded disability criteria raise questions about the validity of its disability decisions because medical conditions alone are generally poor predictors of work incapacity . 15 , 2004 ) vocational rehabilitation: opportunities to improve program effectiveness ( gao / t - hehs - 98-87 , feb. 4 , 1998 ) veterans benefits administration: focusing on results in vocational rehabilitation and education programs ( gao / t - hehs - 97-148 , jun . 5 , 1997 ) vocational rehabilitation: va continues to place few disabled veterans in jobs ( gao / hehs - 96-155 , sept. 3 , 1996 ) vocational rehabilitation: evidence for federal program's effectiveness is mixed , ( gao / pemd - 93-19 , aug. 27 , 1993 ) vocational rehabilitation: va needs to emphasize serving veterans with serious employment handicaps ( gao / hrd - 92-133 , sept. 28 , 1992 ) va can provide more employment assistance to veterans who complete its vocational rehabilitation program ( gao / hrd - 84-39 , may 23 , 1984 ) this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we agree with the task force finding that the vr&e system needs to be modernized . our high risk report emphasized that outmoded criteria used to establish eligibility need to be updated . the task force made 105 recommendations , which we grouped into six categories . for example , advances in prosthetics and technology for workplace accommodations can enhance work capacity by compensating for impairments . we did our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , gao's past work and the recent task force report point to the need for vr&e to increase its emphasis on finding jobs for veterans with disabilities and managing its operations . we reported as early as 1984 that the vr&e program primarily focused on training veterans and not finding them suitable employment . twenty years later , the task force reached similar conclusions and recommended most notably that vr&e institute an employment - driven system for providing services to veterans that would re - emphasize the importance of employment . we noted that implementing a system focused on employment would require a cultural shift away from vr&e's long - standing emphasis on education .