standard surveys . by law , every nursing home receiving medicare or medicaid payment must undergo a standard survey not less frequently than once every 15 months , with a statewide average frequency of once every 12 months . during a standard survey , teams of state surveyors conduct a comprehensive on - site evaluation of compliance with federal quality standards . in 2005 , cms launched a new survey process called the quality indicator survey ( qis ) , designed to improve the accuracy and consistency of standard surveys and the documentation of deficiencies . to identify trends in clinical quality measures , we analyzed data from cms's minimum data set — the data set containing the standardized clinical assessments nursing homes complete for all residents and report to cms — for years 2011 through 2014 . we selected eight cms quality measures to include in our analysis based on factors such as endorsement by the national quality forum and data reliability . six of the eight measures are used by cms for long - stay residents — the percentage of residents who report moderate to severe pain ; the percentage of high - risk residents with pressure ulcers ; the percentage of residents who lose too much weight ; the percentage of residents who were physically restrained ; the percentage of residents experiencing one or more falls with major injury ; and the percentage of residents who received antipsychotic medication — and the remaining two measures are used for short - stay residents — the percentage of residents who report moderate to severe pain and the percentage of residents with pressure ulcers that are new or worsening . to create an annual score for each quality measure we averaged quarterly data . analysis across four data sets . for each of the four data sets , we ranked nursing homes by quartile and identified those at the upper quartile ( worst performing ) and lower quartile ( best performing ) for each year . we then counted the number of years each home fell into the upper or lower quartile for each quality measure to identify homes with consistently poor or good performance . cms sets guidelines state survey agencies should follow when recording , investigating , and resolving complaints . staffing data . nurse staffing levels are considered a key component of nursing home quality . higher nurse staffing levels — particularly registered nurse staffing levels — are typically linked with higher quality nursing home care . cms currently tracks nurse staffing data in nursing homes . clinical quality measures . nursing homes are required to provide data on certain clinical quality measures — such as pressure ulcers — for all residents to cms . cms currently tracks data for 18 clinical quality measures . nursing homes with consistently poor performance can be selected for the special focus facility ( sff ) program , which requires more frequent surveys . to select nursing homes for the sff program , cms scores the relative performance of nursing homes and identifies the poorest performing homes in each state as candidates . state survey agencies then work with cms to choose some of the candidates to participate ; homes that are selected receive more intensive oversight , including more frequent surveys .