inspections . the usace manual requires daily safety inspections of contractors' worksites by both contractor and usace personnel , and officials told us that usace procedures require these inspections to be entered in usace's resident management system . the manual also requires the accident prevention plan or the usace project safety and occupational health plan to provide for “frequent” safety inspections of the work sites , material , and equipment to ensure compliance with the plan and the usace manual . for one of the usace contracts we selected for review , cpars documentation provided by usace officials indicated that usace staff noted repeated issues with safety requirements , including exposed live electrical wiring , lack of adequate lighting , and improper use of extension cords . this cpars example indicates that the contractor worked to increase safety compliance . finally , usace's manual states that when an employee is deemed to be in imminent danger , contractor or usace officials must immediately stop the unsafe work being performed . for navsea , officials told us that safety requirements and oversight responsibilities will vary depending on the type of work involved . for new construction , the navy supervisor of shipbuilding , conversion , and repair ( supship ) oversees safety . for repair and maintenance , the regional maintenance centers are charged with safety oversight , among other administrative responsibilities . at both organizations , if problems are found , personnel issue corrective action requests . for example , a regional maintenance center staff member issued a corrective action request because the contractor failed to monitor the use of personal protective equipment and a contractor employee fell through a deck opening . as previously noted , the cpars assessments for one of our selected contracts specifically noted that safety corrective action requests had been issued to that contractor . navsea officials told us that quality assurance staff also have regular meetings with the contractors and monitor workplace safety . accident reporting . usace policy is to investigate and report usace accidents in order to prevent recurrences and to comply with osha , dod , army , and other requirements . usace regulation requires contracting officials to inform contractors of their responsibilities for accident reporting and investigation , and ensure all accidents that occur within their area of responsibility are investigated and reported . usace also collects information about accidents at contractors' worksites , and disseminates summaries of incidents on a regular basis . for example , one summary described a fall by a contractor employee resulting in stitches and a broken nose . the summary reminds usace personnel of the importance of protective equipment to prevent this type of incident . usace officials also told us that they have on - site engineers who would typically address any safety concerns directly with the contractor and inform the contracting official responsible for entering information into cpars . navy policy requires significant problems , including severe personnel injuries , to be reported to the navsea commander through the use of trouble reports . in addition , the supship supervisor implements hazard identification and reporting processes and ensures the collection , evaluation and reporting of data for the determination of contractor award fees and past performance data bases .