however , agencies are not required to use the guidance . this is a very important issue , since it would serve to provide a precedent with significant governmentwide implications . more specifically , gsa has historically been unable to generate sufficient revenue through fbf and has thus struggled to meet the requirements for repairs and alterations identified in its inventory of owned buildings . we reported in 2003 that the estimated backlog of repairs had reached $5.7 billion , and consequences included poor health and safety conditions , higher operating costs , restricted capacity for modern information technology , and continued structural deterioration . federal real property managers operate in a complex and dynamic environment . numerous laws and regulations govern the acquisition , management , and disposal of federal real property . the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 , as amended ( property act ) , and the public buildings act of 1959 , as amended , are the laws that generally apply to real property ; and gsa is responsible for the acts' implementation . agencies are subject to these acts , unless they are specifically exempted from them , and some agencies may also have their own statutory authority related to real property . agencies must also comply with numerous other laws related to real property . for example , it would establish a pilot program for the expedited disposal of excess , surplus , or underutilized real property assets identified and would enact many of the requirements of executive order 13227 into law . in particular , pursuing this pilot program , as outlined in title i , would allow for assessing lessons learned and help determine the merits of the program and whether it should continue . furthermore , making the requirements of the executive order law , as outlined in title ii , would serve to elevate their importance and show that congress and the administration are unified in pursuing real property reform . the interagency security committee ( isc ) , which is chaired by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , is tasked with coordinating federal agencies' facility protection efforts , developing standards , and overseeing implementation . solving the problems in this area will undeniably require a reconsideration of funding priorities at a time when budget constraints will be pervasive . without effective incentives and tools ; top management accountability , leadership , and commitment ; adequate funding ; full transparency with regard to the government's real property activities ; and an effective system to measure results , long - standing real property problems will continue and likely worsen . however , the overall risk to the government and taxpayers could be substantially reduced if an effective transformation strategy is developed and successfully implemented , reforms are made , and property­ holding agencies effectively implement current and planned initiatives . since our high - risk report was issued , omb has informed us that it is taking steps to address the federal government's problems in the real property area . specifically , it has established a new federal real property council to address these long - standing issues .