release no . 6188 , dated february 1 , 1980 , reiterated the sec's view that , while employee interests in pension plans generally are securities , employee interests should be registered only when the plan is both voluntary and contributory and may invest in stock of the employer an amount greater than that paid into the plan by the employer . ( see app . this information is presented in appendix iii . to determine the number and types of private pension plans invested in employer securities , we analyzed plan financial information filed annually ( form 5500s ) with the department of labor's pension and welfare benefits administration ( pwba ) . we analyzed data for the fortune 1,000 companies for plan year 1998 , which was the most recent year for which complete plan - specific data were available for our review . to calculate the percentage of pension plan assets held as employer securities , we first subtracted certain assets that cannot be specifically identified as employer securities from total plan assets to arrive at “known assets.” to describe the risks of investing in employer securities through employer - sponsored plans , we focused on six companies whose private pension plans according to industry data were heavily invested in employer securities . we used these companies as examples to illustrate the risks that employees face when their employer - sponsored plans have high concentrations of employer securities or real property . for four of the companies we used publicly available information . we obtained information directly from the other two companies , but we agreed not to disclose their names . in addition , as part of our review of regulatory provisions , we interviewed officials from the department of labor ( dol ) , sec , and industry associations about the laws governing employer securities purchases by retirement plans and the investment information that employers provide to plan participants . we conducted our work between february and august 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . employee plans that are owners of securities that are registered under the exchange act may be subject to different exchange act reporting requirements . a plan that becomes the beneficial owner of more than 5 percent of a class of equity securities registered under the exchange act must file a report with the sec on schedule 13g . when a plan acquires stock for the benefit of officers and directors of an employer , the officers and directors are required to follow the section 16 reporting requirements . transactions of these company insiders may be subject to the short swing profit recovery rules if the insider switches into or out of an employer stock fund or takes a cash distribution from the fund in a “discretionary transaction” if the transaction occurs less than 6 months after any previous “opposite way” transaction . section 10 ( b ) of the exchange act prohibits the use of any manipulative or deceptive practices in connection with the purchase or sale of a security . rule 10b - 5 makes it unlawful for any person to make a material misstatement or omission in connection with the purchase or sale of a security .