the project has two components . the first seeks to extend the agency's normal forest sampling program , which traditionally has not sufficiently sampled urban forests . the second component seeks to implement a roadside tree assessment using plots established within public rights - of - way in urban areas . to date , the agency has implemented pilot projects in colorado , indiana , maryland , massachusetts , new jersey , tennessee , and wisconsin . since only seven states were covered by this pilot , systematic monitoring of urban areas is still not adequate . according to the director of the agency's urban and community forestry program , there is a strong case to be made for expanding monitoring to cover urban areas that are now classified as nonforest but that have trees and are at risk from such pests as the emerald ash borer . as a result of the limited nature of these and other usda monitoring efforts , there are still many high - risk locations that are not adequately covered . to reduce these risks , we recommended that the secretary of agriculture expand current efforts to monitor forest health conditions , particularly in urban and suburban areas that are at high risk of receiving invasive insects and diseases . in response to this recommendation , usda noted that other governmental and nongovernmental organizations have a role to play in combating invasive species , including monitoring . we agree that other entities have that role , but also believe that usda has an important leadership role to play in developing and supporting the forest health monitoring capabilities of nonfederal entities . the infestations of the three species we reviewed , as well as others , began when the pests passed through u.s. ports of entry , hitchhiking in vehicles , cargo , or travelers' personal belongings . that pests have become established indicates that the first line of defense at the border has been breeched over the years . in may 2006 , we reported that dhs and usda face management and coordination problems that increase the vulnerability of the united states to foreign pests and disease . for example , we found that dhs has not developed or used a risk - based staffing model to ensure that adequate numbers of agricultural inspectors are staffed to ports and other areas of greatest vulnerability . in addition , despite an interagency agreement intended to facilitate coordination and communication between dhs and usda , agricultural specialists are not consistently receiving notifications of changes to inspection policies and urgent inspection alerts . for example , we estimated that 20 percent of agricultural specialists do not regularly receive notices that policy manuals have been updated , and only 21 percent of agriculture specialists always receive urgent inspection alerts in a timely manner . these breakdowns in communication could hamper inspectors' ability to search for and detect new pest threats . we also found that dhs has allowed its canine detection program ( dogs trained to sniff out items that may harbor pests ) to deteriorate . the number and proficiency of canine teams has decreased substantially over the last several years . this limits the essential contributions these dogs can make to prevent the entry of prohibited agricultural items .