dot denied the petition . hagerstown has not met the 10 enplanements per - day requirement since fiscal year 2013 ( except fiscal year 2016 ) , and has exceeded the $200 subsidy cap each fiscal year since fiscal year 2015 . dot did not grant a waiver to hagerstown because of its proximity to a large hub airport — hagerstown is less than 70 miles from washington dulles international airport — and the fact that there was not sufficient evidence to indicate that hagerstown would be able to meet eligibility requirements in the future . in august 2019 , hagerstown filed a petition to dot for reconsideration . dot denied the petition , and hagerstown filed suit to challenge the decision in federal court . athens , ga , which did not meet the 10-enplanements per - day requirement , was eligible to submit a waiver request but did not do so . the number of communities in the contiguous united states receiving eas changed little since the beginning of fiscal year 2010 to the beginning of fiscal year 2018 — from 104 on october 1 , 2009 , to 109 on october 1 , 2017 . officials from four of 17 communities we interviewed suggested that dot adjust its calculation to account for local factors , such as the time required to drive the shortest route , the condition of the road , and the most common route that members of the community use to get to the nearest large - or medium - hub airport . considering these factors could result in communities not being subject to the limit on eligibility of requiring an annual subsidy per passenger of $200 or less , if the more commonly used or faster route is more than 210 miles from the nearest large or medium hub airport . allow communities to regain eligibility: officials from two communities and two carriers we interviewed suggested that subject to the availability of funds , communities that lost eligibility for the eas program should be allowed to regain it if they are having difficulty obtaining air service without a subsidy . officials from one community and one carrier we interviewed said communities that lost eas eligibility as a result of unreliable service from their carrier should not be penalized by losing eas program eligibility . according to dot , they consider such circumstances when deciding to grant a community a waiver . in other instances , communities lost eligibility because they were not receiving eas in fiscal year 2011 . an official from one carrier suggested communities that regain eligibility could pay a co - share of the subsidy costs , possibly limiting the effect on the cost of the program . some of the options that communities and carriers suggested , such as revising dot's process for carrier selection and restructuring dot's contracts with carriers could address the challenges in the eas program but not necessarily increase program costs .