pub . 101-189 , § 251 ( 1989 ) pub l. no . 103-160 , § 845 ( 1993 ) pub . 109-58 , § 1007 ( 2005 ) advanced research projects agency - energy ( arpa - e ) pub . financial assistance . financial assistance mechanisms include grants and cooperative agreements , which differ in the amount of federal involvement in the project . under the federal grant and cooperative agreement act , an agency is to use a grant agreement when the principal purpose of the relationship is to transfer a thing of value to the recipient to carry out a public purpose of support or stimulation authorized by law and substantial involvement by the agency is not expected . for grants , an agency's involvement is essentially administrative , which includes standard federal stewardship responsibilities such as reviewing performance to ensure that the objectives , terms , and conditions of the grant are accomplished . under cooperative agreements , an agency expects to be substantially involved in the project through tasks such as reviewing and approving one stage of a project before work can begin on a subsequent stage . cooperative research and development agreements . first authorized in the 1980s , cooperative research and development agreements are written agreements between a federal laboratory and a nonfederal partner to work together on a project ; typically , the project focuses on technology transfers . under cooperative research and development agreements , agencies and nonfederal partners , such as private companies , are able to share resources , technical expertise , and any intellectual property that emerges from the effort , as well as increase the commercialization rate of the federally developed technology . in addition to these authorities , congress established “other transaction authority” for certain agencies through separate legislation . under these authorities , agencies may develop agreements that are not required to follow a standard format or include terms and conditions that are typically required when using traditional mechanisms . agreements entered into using traditional mechanisms , such as a contract , grant , cooperative agreement , or cooperative research and development agreement , contain terms and conditions to ensure compliance with statutory requirements applicable to those mechanisms . agreements entered into using other transaction authority , conversely , are not generally subject to these requirements , and the terms and conditions of each individual other transaction agreement may be tailored to meet the specific situation . this flexibility can help agencies attract and partner with entities that have not done business with federal agencies due to concerns about standard government requirements . other transaction agreements may include various funding arrangements or may be nonreimbursable , where each party bears the costs of their participation and funds are not exchanged . in addition , the length of an other transaction agreement is also negotiable , with some agreements lasting a few days and others for years . agencies may use other transaction agreements for a variety of projects and activities . for example , agencies can use other transaction agreements for research , development , and demonstration ( rd&d ) projects and activities that help advance new technologies or processes .