( see fig . 2 for a depiction of the judgment fund claims process. ) depending on the claim amount , fiscal service staff perform a minimum of two levels of review on judgment fund claims , whether the claims are received by fax or mail or directly entered into the jfics system by agencies . first , the claims analyst reviews the claim to ensure that the agency has provided all of the information necessary to process it . additional details about our scope and methodology are discussed in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from february 2018 to december 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the judgment fund is a permanent , indefinite appropriation , statutorily created in 1956 , available to pay many types of eligible monetary claims that may be judicially or administratively ordered against the u.s. government . the judgment fund is also available to pay interest and costs on claims in certain circumstances . administration of the judgment fund has changed substantially since its inception , with varying degrees of control and oversight by congress , gao , and treasury . originally , the judgment fund was limited to paying judgments of less than $100,000 , as certified by the comptroller general and entered by the u.s. court of claims ( the predecessor to the current u.s. court of federal claims ) or a u.s. district court , as well as authorized interest and costs . in the 1960s , new laws extended the judgment fund's availability to awards and compromise settlements . in the next decade , the supplemental appropriations act , 1977 , eliminated the judgment fund's $100,000 payment ceiling , resulting in no upper limit on the amount that could be paid from the judgment fund on any particular claim . the general accounting office act of 1996 transferred certification of payments from the judgment fund from gao to treasury . since 1996 , treasury has managed the judgment fund , including certifying payments . treasury established fiscal service in october 2012 , and delegated key judgment fund functions to that bureau . fiscal service is responsible for , among other things , providing central payment services to federal agencies . fiscal service is the primary disburser of payments to individuals and businesses on behalf of federal agencies , including benefit payments made by the u.s. social security administration and the u.s. department of veterans affairs , federal income tax refund payments , and payments to businesses for goods and services provided to the federal government . annually , fiscal service disburses more than a billion payments , with an associated total dollar value of more than $2.4 trillion . administering the judgment fund is among the services that fiscal service provides .