here are some examples . strengthening integrated product teams . these teams , the coast guard's primary tool for managing the program and overseeing the contractor , consist of members from subcontractors and the coast guard . in 2004 , we found these teams often lacked training and in several cases lacked charters defining clearly what they were to do . most now have charters setting forth the team's purpose , authority , and performance goals , among other things , and more training is now being provided . however , roles and responsibilities in some teams continue to be unclear , and about one - third of team members have yet to receive entry - level training . holding the systems integrator accountable for competition . the coast guard has taken a number of steps to improve cost control through competition . for example , to improve competition among second - tier suppliers , coast guard officials said they will incorporate an assessment of the steps the system integrator is taking to foster competition at the major subcontractor level as one of the factors they take into account in deciding whether to award the first contract option . besides the risks noted in table 1 , the program also bears careful watching because it is still being affected in midcourse by the coast guard's additional homeland security responsibilities . planning for the deepwater program had been set in motion before the terrorist attacks of september 11 , and while the initial program included consideration of homeland security responsibilities , these responsibilities have grown considerably in the interim . in march 2004 , the coast guard developed a revised mission needs statement ( mns ) that indicated that current specifications for deepwater assets lacked some functional capabilities needed to meet mission requirements . the mns was approved by dhs in january 2005 . according to the coast guard , some of the functional capabilities now deemed to be required include the following: rotary wing airborne use of force and vertical insertion / vertical delivery greater speed , a larger flight deck , and automated defensive and weapons systems for the national security cutter and offshore patrol cutter classes ; a common operating picture ( cop ) for the entire coast guard ( and maritime ports of a unified department of homeland security cop ) , an interoperable network to improve performance in all mission areas , and a secure compartmentalized information facility for improved intelligence capabilities ; and chemical , biological , radiological defense and decontamination capability while we have not conducted an analysis of the likely cost and schedule impact of the revised mns requirements , they undoubtedly will have an effect on cost and schedule . the coast guard's own estimates identified in the march 2004 mns show an increased acquisition cost for the original 20-year acquisition of about $1 billion . according to the coast guard , the revised mns requirements and associated cost and schedule information have been forwarded to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the office of management and budget for approval . as of this time , the implementation plan has not been approved .