type of valves . the type of valve an operator has installed on a pipeline segment can affect how quickly the segment can be isolated . automated valves , which can be closed automatically or remotely , can shorten incident response time compared to manual valves , which require that personnel travel to the valve site and turn a wheel crank or activate a push - button actuator to close the valve . conversely , if an incident occurs during the evening or on a weekend , the operator's response personnel could be able to reach the facility more quickly , because of lighter traffic . for example , one natural gas pipeline operator told us about an incident that occurred on a saturday afternoon , which meant that traffic did not delay response personnel traveling to the scene . weather conditions . weather conditions can affect how quickly an operator can respond to an incident . for example , one natural gas pipeline operator described an incident caused by a hurricane's storm surge that pushed debris into the pipeline at a facility , and flooding prevented the response personnel from reaching the site for several days , during which time the pipe continued to leak gas . winter conditions can also make it more difficult for the operator's response personnel to reach a facility or to access valve sites in remote areas . as another example , windy conditions can disperse natural gas and make it hard to detect a leak . other operators' pipeline in the same area . if two or more operators own pipeline in a shared right of way , determining whose system is affected can increase incident response time . operators may delay responding if they have not confirmed that the incident is on their pipeline . for example , one natural gas pipeline operator told us about an incident that took 2 days to repair because when their personnel first detected a leak , the personnel initially contacted another operator , whose line crossed over theirs , to make sure the leak was not the other operator's . operators we spoke with stated that the amount of time it takes to respond to an incident can depend on all of the variables listed above and can range from several minutes to days ( see table 1 ) . we and others have recommended that the federal government move toward performance - based regulatory approaches to allow those being regulated to determine the most appropriate way to achieve desired , measurable outcomes . for example , executive order 13563 calls for improvements to the nation's regulatory system , including the use of the best , most innovative and least burdensome tools for achieving regulatory ends . we have also previously reported on the benefits of a performance - based framework , which helps agencies focus on achieving outcomes . such a framework should include: 1 ) national goals ; 2 ) performance measures that are linked to those national goals ; and 3 ) appropriate performance targets that promote accountability and allow organizations to track their progress towards goals .