gsa reported that it had no comments on this report . the agencies also face unique recruitment and retention challenges and have different strategies for addressing them . dos is a cabinet - level federal agency responsible for u.s. foreign affairs and diplomatic initiatives with a mission of creating a more secure , democratic , and prosperous world for the benefit of the american people and the international community . headquartered in washington , d.c. , dos has 250 embassies and consulates worldwide with approximately 40,000 employees comprised of foreign service employees , civil service employees , and foreign service national employees . most of these repayments were made on behalf of attorneys . according to sec officials , the agency generally does not have trouble attracting job candidates , but it does have a relatively high attrition rate . an official remarked that the agency has a highly skilled workforce comprised largely of securities attorneys , accountants , and examiners , many of whom are highly sought after by the private sector , and it historically has been a challenge for sec to retain them . sec , therefore , uses the program only for retention . sec officials said that thus far they have had only a few employees leave before the 3-year service agreement was completed . in addition , they reported that a large percentage of employees are reapplying for benefits , indicating their willingness to stay with the agency long enough to reduce or pay off their student loan debt . although the program is used for retention , sec advertises in its recruitment efforts that the benefit is available after 1 year of service , making it an indirect recruiting incentive . doe stated that the report did not fully describe the efforts of opm in assessing program implementation as part of its annual reporting process to congress . we added language in the report to more comprehensively characterize what opm included in its most recent report . doe also suggested that gao recommend that opm assist agencies in measuring the effectiveness of specific student loan repayment , recruitment , and retention incentives by including questions in the federal human capital survey . while this may be a feasible and effective approach to collecting data on program results , we did not prescribe the methods opm should develop or use to measure the effectiveness of the program , but instead recommended that opm work jointly with the agencies and the chco council to devise these means . sba said that the agency will periodically monitor the use of the program in other agencies through the chco council so that should the need arise , sba will be in a position to implement the best aspects of other agencies' programs . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional parties , the director of opm , the secretary of state , the attorney general , the chairman of the sec , and the heads of the other federal agencies discussed in this report . in addition , we will make copies available to other interested parties upon request . this report also will be made available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .