that analysis has not yet been completed . the program office and boeing continue to collect most of the necessary manufacturing knowledge to make informed decisions as the program approaches its low - rate production decision in october 2015 . however , the program is behind in some of these activities , which will make it difficult for program officials to assess the reliability of the aircraft prior to production , and could also mean less efficient production processes . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the air force ; and the director of the office of management and budget . the report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . last year we began reporting on the program's efforts to capture manufacturing knowledge that is important to make a well informed low - rate production decision . this knowledge is based on practices we identified in previous work that are used by leading commercial companies , including ( 1 ) identifying key system characteristics and critical manufacturing processes ; ( 2 ) establishing a reliability growth plan and goals ; ( 3 ) conducting failure modes and effects analysis ; ( 4 ) conducting reliability growth testing ; ( 5 ) determining whether processes are in control and capable ; and ( 6 ) testing a production - representative prototype in its intended environment . table 4 provides a description of these activities and progress the kc - 46 program has made for each . identify key system characteristics and critical manufacturing processes: since the 767-2c will be manufactured on boeing's existing 767 production line , the program office and boeing have focused their attention on identifying the key system characteristics and critical manufacturing processes for the military unique subsystems . they have identified these processes and completed two prior rounds of assessments in support of the preliminary and critical design reviews . currently , they are assessing nine critical manufacturing processes for low - rate production , such as the assembly and installation of aerial refueling components . six of the assessments have been completed , including the assembly and test of the wing aerial refueling pod and centerline drogue system that had been delayed over four months . as mentioned previously , the supplier has had difficulty delivering these subsystems on time due to design and manufacturing issues with a number of parts . the program did not identify any action items for two of the completed assessments . for the other four , boeing must undertake several actions , including developing a plan on how it would qualify and deliver key parts on time , such as the telescope actuator and the refueling receptacle panel . the remaining three assessments are expected to be completed in early summer 2015 .