ii ) . according to our analysis , bia owns 20 percent ( 29,456 miles ) of the existing road miles on tribal lands and the tribes own almost 12 percent ( 17,029 miles ) , leaving about 68 percent ( 100,796 miles ) of the existing road miles under the control of state , local , and other entities . the nttfi is a database maintained by bia . while bia is responsible for ensuring the accuracy of data in the system , data are entered and owned by individual tribes . nttfi data includes transportation facilities eligible for assistance under the ttp . in fiscal year 2016 , the ttp received an authorization of $465 million in federal funding from the fixing america's surface transportation act , with the authorized amount increasing by $10-million per year until the funding level reaches $505 million in fiscal year 2020 . the rmp is administered by bia and funds the maintenance of only bia roads on tribal lands . according to bia officials , this review and verification may correct some of the problems with the proposed road data in nttfi . bia officials told us that they are in the process of developing the details of how the review will work and what options they may be able to take to ensure the proposed road data are accurate , including possibly removing proposed road sections containing data errors from the inventory . the dmr system provides an inventory of bia roads by location , length , and route that may be maintained with rmp funds . separate from the nttfi , bia maintains the dmr system containing the inventory of bia - owned roads eligible for maintenance funded by the rmp . dmr records consist of data on individual road sections with fields pertaining to the description , such as surface type , level of service , and maintenance needed , performed , and deferred of each section . road sections with either the construction need data field equal to “4” ( proposed ) or the existing surface type data field equal to “0” ( proposed ) were classified as a proposed road section . road sections with neither the construction need data field equal to “4” ( proposed ) nor the existing surface type data field equal to “0” were classified as existing . if both of those data fields were blank , we categorized the road section as unknown . our review did not include ensuring that the road sections in the inventory met the current statutory requirements for inclusion in the nttfi , and we did not physically inspect roads to assess the accuracy of road section length or surface type entries . the dmr system includes inventory and condition data for all bia roads in 10 of the 12 bia regions . there are no bia roads in the alaska and eastern oklahoma bia regions , according to bia officials , so these regions were not included in our assessment of dmr data .