performance standards . tsa in conjunction with the coast guard developed standards for determining performance for the twic pilot , but the standards do not fully address important aspects of the pilot assessment , such as those needed to assess the business and operational impacts of using twic with biometric card readers . for example , the master plan identifies some operational performance requirements , suc as a minimum reliability threshold , that the card reader is to meet . the plan also identifies technical requirements readers are to meet , such asmeeting specific biometric standards or , for example , transaction times . however , the performance standards mostly focus on technology and do not fully identify standards for the business and operational circumstances that using twic with biometric card readers will demand . business an d operational circumstances include , for example , the experience a worke will have when attempting to access a secure area of a mtsa - regulated facility , additional steps a worker may need to take to successfully enter a facility , or changes to business processes to accommodate the use of twic with readers . neither the master plan nor subsequent test plans identify performance standards for assessing business and operational performance . for example , there is no test for when a user presents a g valid but non - functioning twic at an access - control point , and assessinthe impact of that scenario on the flow of commerce . tsa officials stated that they had not included this test in the pilot but would consider adding it and others we identified as part of their pilot test . in addition , dhs noted that they expect to identify the business and operational impacts that occur during respective phases of the pilot . while identifying and collecting information on activities as they occur during a pilot can enhance address important aspects of the pilot assessment could strengthen dhs's efforts in determining to what extent the piloted methods are effective the amount of data collected , incorporating criteria that fully . clearly articulated evaluation methodology . the methodology for evaluating the twic pilot is not fully defined and documented , does not account for differences in pilot design , may not be representative of future plans that individual port facilities have for using twic , and does not provide for testing some of the known requirements under consideration for inclusion in the card reader rule . thus , such weaknesses may adve impact the sufficiency and reliability of the information collected from pilot . the unit of analysis for conducting the pilot , pilot site selection criteria , and the sampling methodology are not fully defined and documented . the unit of analysis — or the level at which the analysis is ies to be conducted — had not been defined prior to selecting the facilit and vessels to participate in the twic pilot . specifically , while tsa and coast guard intended the unit of analysis to be focused on secure areas , they did not determine whether analysis of pilot test results would be conducted at the port level , facility / vessel level , or the acce control point level . establishing the duration of all activities .