the report did not provide details on how it will accomplish this . members of the army's individual ready reserve , which is composed of about 112,700 members , include individuals who were previously trained during periods of active service but who have not completed their service obligations , individuals who have completed their service obligations and voluntarily retain their reserve status , and personnel who have not completed basic training . most of these members are not assigned to an organized unit , do not attend weekend or annual training , and do not receive pay unless they are called to active duty . further , as we have previously reported , the department faces challenges in transforming forces for the future , such as meeting increased requirements for high - demand skills . for example , we have reported on problems in dod's mobilization and demobilization of reservists as well as the issues raised by continuing demands for reserve personnel to deploy . however , current army plans project a decrease in personnel to 482,400 active duty forces by fiscal year 2011 . the primary advantage of increasing the army's end strength and funding associated positions would be that the army could provide more active duty personnel to meet operational requirements for iraq and afghanistan , to accommodate the requirements for the modular force , and to help meet the army's rotational force planning goal of having active personnel deployed for no more than 1 out of every 3 years . budgetary concerns could be a major drawback to this option . decision makers would have to weigh the increased cost of permanently increasing the army's end strength . these operations have required large numbers of forces with support skills , such as military police and civil affairs . while some of these skills have been in high demand across the army , some skills , such as civil affairs , reside heavily in the army's reserve components and sometimes in small numbers of critical personnel . reserve forces may be called to active duty under a number of authorities . as shown in table 1 , two authorities enable the president to involuntarily mobilize forces , but with size and time limitations . full mobilization , which would enable the mobilization of forces for as long as they are needed , requires a declaration by congress . on september 14 , 2001 , president bush declared that a national emergency existed as a result of the attacks on the world trade center in new york and the pentagon in washington , d.c. , and he invoked the partial mobilization authority . as table 1 shows , this authority restricts the duration of reservists' active duty to 24 consecutive months . osd implements the activation of reservists for iraq and afghanistan under this partial mobilization authority . the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs , who reports to the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , is responsible for providing policy , programs , and guidance for the mobilization and demobilization of the reserve components .