gao - 16-45 . washington , d.c.: february 18 , 2016 . military base realignments and closures: process for reusing property for homeless assistance needs improvements . gao - 15-274 . washington , d.c.: march 16 , 2015 . further information about our scope and methodology is in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from january 2016 to january 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since 1988 , dod has relied on the brac process as an important means of reducing excess infrastructure to meet changing force structure needs . dod has undergone five brac rounds: 1988 , 1991 , 1993 , 1995 , and 2005 . under the five brac rounds , dod has closed a total of 120 major installations and implemented a number of major and minor realignment actions . table 1 shows the number of major installation closures , major realignments , and minor closures and realignments for each of the five brac rounds . in accordance with the brac statute , dod must complete closure and realignment actions no later than 6 years following the date that the president transmits his report on the brac recommendations to congress . for brac 2005 , the round's completion date was september 15 , 2011 . the statute allows environmental cleanup and property transfer actions associated with brac sites to exceed the 6-year time limit , and does not set a deadline for completion . in our prior work , we have reported that the cleanup of contaminated properties has been a key factor related to delays in transferring unneeded property through the brac process . in conducting assessments of potential contamination and determining the extent of cleanup required on installations closed because of brac decisions , dod must comply with cleanup standards and processes under all applicable environmental laws , regulations , and executive orders . the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 ( cercla ) , as amended , authorizes cleanup actions at federal facilities where there is a release of hazardous substances or the threat of such a release that can present a threat to public health and the environment . the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 added provisions to cercla specifically governing the cleanup of federal facilities , including active military installations and those closed under brac , and required the secretary of defense to carry out the defense environmental restoration program . under the defense environmental restoration program , dod conducts environmental restoration activities at active installations , formerly used defense site properties , and brac locations in the united states to address dod contamination from hazardous substances , pollutants , or contaminants ; unexploded ordnance , discarded military munitions , or munitions constituents ; or building demolition and debris removal .