monitor each ccp . establish monitoring activities that will ensure that the process is under control at each ccp . establish corrective actions . define actions to be taken when monitoring discloses a deviation from established critical limits . establish verification procedures . establish verification procedures to ensure that haccp plans accomplish their intended goal — ensuring the production of safe products . establish record - keeping and documentation procedures . maintain documentation , including the haccp plan , ccp monitoring , critical limits , and verification activities . under the haccp rule , seafood - processing firms are responsible for conducting a hazard analysis and for developing and implementing haccp plans for hazards determined to be reasonably likely to occur: natural toxins , microbiological contamination , chemical contamination , pesticides , drug residues , decomposition in certain species , parasites , unapproved use of food or color additives , and physical hazards . for each hazard identified , the firms must establish critical control points to prevent or reduce contamination . firms must also establish and monitor sanitation procedures to ensure , among other things , the ( 1 ) general cleanliness of food contact surfaces , including utensils , gloves , and outer garments , and ( 2 ) control of employee health conditions . to assist industry with haccp compliance , fda published the fish and fisheries products hazards and controls guide , which discusses , among other things , how to perform a hazard analysis , develop a haccp plan , and identify critical control points . the guide provides species - specific and process - related examples of hazards reasonably likely to occur , but as its name suggests , this document is only guidance ; seafood firms are not required to follow it . the guide , according to fda , has been translated into other languages , is used by regulatory authorities in other countries , and has served as a catalyst for discussions between the seafood industry , other interested stakeholders , and fda about the scientific merits of hazards and controls . according to the national fisheries institute , seafood firms generally support the haccp system because it has , among other things , caused the industry to look at how best to manage hazards and how to look at food safety from a science - based perspective — for example , what hazards are likely to cause illness , how frequently people are becoming ill , and how serious those illnesses are . also , according to fda , two surveys of the industry taken by the new york sea grant extension program and others report that in response to haccp , the industry is engaging in upgrades to facilities , equipment , and daily plant operations to ensure safety . to help implement and oversee haccp systems , for industry personnel and fda inspectors , fda developed a training and certification program that is intended to ensure that they have the necessary expertise to evaluate haccp systems . the training program is offered by the national seafood haccp alliance — an academic , government , and industry consortium .