we disagree . the version of the study provided to us notes that it includes an “assessment of the deficiencies of the current state” ( p. 3 ) and identifies issues that “limit the efficiency and effectiveness of passport operations” ( p. 4 ) . these deficiencies included the reliance on a manual , paper - based work flow , ineffective communications , and inflexible passport systems . we did not intend to suggest that the department should have adopted all of the 2005 study's recommendations and have made slight modifications to our finding to clarify this point . our intent was to note that the department has developed a variety of recommendations to improve its passport operations — many of which were developed by staff in consular affairs — but still needs a comprehensive strategy to prioritize and synchronize the improvements it intends to undertake . while our report recognizes that state has developed several plans designed to increase passport production capacity , improving the department's ability to respond to near - term increases in demand , these plans are not the same as a comprehensive strategy for improving passport operations . our recommendation addresses state's need for such a strategy to guide its modernization efforts , by using a business enterprise approach , and not just to increase capacity . state notes that it has improved its efforts to track the 72 percent of passport applications it receives from u.s . postal service acceptance facilities for accountability purposes . from a customer service standpoint , we believe that the department should track all applications from the time of execution in order to give the customer an accurate estimate of when to expect his or her passport . doing so would help eliminate customer confusion , which contributed to the strain on state's customer service operation experienced during the 2007 surge . in addition to the person named above , michael courts ( assistant director ) , robert ball , melissa pickworth , and neetha rao made key contributions to this report . technical assistance was provided by carl barden , joe carney , martin de alteriis , chris martin , and mary moutsos . appendix i contains a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . a passport is an official government document that certifies an individual's identity and citizenship and permits a citizen to travel abroad . according to state , many people who have no overseas travel plans have applied for a passport because it is viewed as the premier citizenship and identity document , which allows the bearer to board an airplane , prove citizenship for employment purposes , apply for federal benefits , and fulfill other needs not related to international travel . under u.s. law , the secretary of state has the authority to issue passports , which may be valid for up to 10 years . only u.s. nationals may obtain a u.s. passport , and evidence of nationality is required with every passport application . the deputy assistant secretary for passport services oversees the passport services office , within state's bureau of consular affairs .