ii ) . in addition , to determine the number and types of injuries and illnesses sustained by their workers , we looked at the nature and causes of the injuries and illnesses reported by the four agencies and , where possible , the number of injuries and illnesses reported for each month . because some incidents reported by epa and usace contained more than one injury or illness , we used more than one code to report on the type of injury or illness sustained . for example , we classified an injury reported by epa where an employee had “pulled and strain neck and back from a motor vehicle accident,” as a “motor vehicle accident” and a “pain / strain.” as a result , the total number of injuries and illness reported by the agencies may differ from the numbers we reported . ( 2 ) to what extent did osha track injuries and illnesses sustained by these workers ? ( 3 ) how well did osha meet the safety and health needs of these workers ? to address these objectives , we reviewed reports and documents related to the federal response efforts for hurricane katrina and other recent disasters ; interviewed officials from 10 federal agencies identified by fema and osha as having deployed response and recovery workers to the gulf coast: osha ; the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ; the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; the coast guard ; the department of defense ( dod ) ; the national guard ; the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) ; and the departments of agriculture , health and human services , and the interior . we also conducted site visits in alabama , mississippi , and louisiana where we interviewed federal officials in all three states and selected state and local officials who were part of the rescue and recovery efforts . to obtain information on the number of response and recovery workers who responded to hurricane katrina , we contacted the 10 agencies identified by fema and osha and asked them to provide information on the number of workers each agency employed in the gulf coast . to obtain information on injuries and illnesses sustained by these workers , we asked these same agencies for this information for their workers . of the 10 agencies , only four — usace , epa , the coast guard , and the department of the interior — had data on workers' injuries and illnesses that were sufficiently reliable for us to report . we also obtained data on injuries and illnesses related to hurricane katrina from workers' compensation claims filed by federal workers , and information on worker fatalities from osha and other federal agencies . to assess the reliability of the agencies' data , we talked with agency officials about their data quality - control procedures and reviewed relevant documentation . we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . finally , we interviewed workers' rights organizations , including the mississippi immigrant rights alliance , boat people sos , the center to protect workers' rights , and the new york committee for occupational safety and health .