dod concurred with this recommendation . no components identified an accountable official with their fiscal year 2014 inventory submission . however , dod's march 2016 guidance for the fiscal year 2015 inventory explicitly required the identification of an accountable official to help ensure that the inventory is integrated into key management decisions . as of july 2016 , 41 components had submitted their fiscal year 2015 inventories , of which 30 identified an accountable official in their transmittal letter . however , none of the three military departments , which represent 73 percent of service contract obligations reported in the fiscal year 2014 inventory , have yet identified an accountable official . in its transmittal letter for fiscal year 2015 , the air force stated that it first needs to better understand the roles and responsibilities of the inventory management support office . the army's fiscal year 2015 transmittal letter states that it is in the process of identifying an appropriate official . as of july 2016 , the navy has not yet submitted its fiscal year 2015 transmittal letter . dod has twice conducted reviews in the past two years to assess its approach to conducting the inventory . dod officials noted that , to some degree , these reviews have contributed to delays in choosing the path forward for its underlying inventory data collection system , staffing the support office , and formalizing the roles and responsibilities of that office and its relationship to the military departments and other stakeholders . these delays may , in turn , hinder the development and implementation of plans and enforcement mechanisms for using inventory data to inform workforce and budget decision - making processes . as shown in figure 5 , dod has struggled since 2011 to determine the best way forward for collecting data for the inventories . since 2011 , we have made 13 recommendations to help improve how dod collects , reviews , and uses the data from the inventory of contracted services ( see appendix i for a complete list and the status of dod's actions to address them ) . we are not making any new recommendations in this report , but rather we underscore the need to address the 8 recommendations that remain open . in particular , dod needs to resolve the long - standing delays and uncertainties regarding implementation of the ecmra system — or an alternative to that system — which have hindered efforts to provide reliable and accurate data . over five years ago , we recommended that dod develop a plan of action with timeframes and necessary resources to measure dod's progress in implementing a common data system and we offered a similar recommendation two years ago when it began to explore options for an appropriate enterprise solution to facilitate data collection . delays in making that decision have had a cascading effect on fully staffing its management support office , as well as defining the roles , responsibilities , and relationships between this office , the military departments , and other stakeholders . continued delays in making a decision increase the risk that dod will remain unable to collect and analyze service contract data and develop associated business processes in a manner that supports workforce and budget planning .