b . secondary market: please enter any comments you may have relating to your answer to question 15 above . following maturities ? ( select one answer in each row. ) d. 30-year tips ( if introduced ) 10 . what are the primary reasons your organization purchases tips or plans to purchase tips in the future ? ( please list up to five reasons in order of importance. ) in your opinion , what effect , if any , would a 30-year tips have on demand for tips securities with other maturities ? would increase demand would have no effect on demand would decrease demandno basis to judge treasury inflation - protected securities ( tips ) - continued 12 . do you anticipate any change in your organization's demand for tips from this year to next year ? yes - continue with question 13 . no ( click here to skip to question 15 ) no basis to judge ( click here to skip to question 15 ) . ( check all answers that apply. ) a reallocation into tips from nominal treasury securities a reallocation out of tips into nominal treasury securities a reallocation into tips from an increase in total assets a reallocation out of tips from a decrease in total assets a reallocation into tips from non - treasury assets a reallocation out of tips into non - treasury assets other change ( s ) - please specify below . no basis to judge if you answered "other change ( s ) " above , please specify below . what are the primary reasons behind the change in demand for tips from this year to next year ? ( please list up to five reasons in order of importance. ) in your estimation , about what percent of your organization's tips purchases in the next year will be made through the following means ? would the following actions by treasury increase the likelihood that your organization would: 1 ) participate in a tips auction , and 2 ) buy more securities at each auction ? ( select one answer in each row. ) increase the frequency of tips auctions and b . increase tips issuance amounts per auction c. purchase off - the - run tips securities d. other - please answer and specify below . e. other - please answer and specify below . f. other - please answer and specify below . if you answered "other" above , please specify other ways to increase participation or amount of securities bought . specify entry in d. above: specify entry in e. above: specify entry in f. above: 17 . the liquidity of tips has been found to be less than nominal treasury securities . in your opinion , what actions could treasury take to enhance the liquidity of tips ? ( please list up to five actions in order of importance. ) action #5: 18 . in your opinion , what are the risks that your organization faces as an investor in treasury markets ? ( please list up to five risks in order of importance. ) in your opinion , what actions could be taken to address and mitigate the risks identified in question 18 above ?