additional funding . forty - three of the state programs indicated a need for additional funding to train and support the additional staff levels they believe would be necessary to estimate improper payments . additional funding also was requested for automation projects . one state requested enhanced funding to update its eligibility system to include fraud detection . another state requested additional funding for developing an automated quality management system to capture data from all levels of reviews and programs . sharing of best practices and available guidance . fifteen of the state programs also expressed interest in the creation of groups to discuss trends and best practices in improper payment - related areas , while other states wanted general information on ipia and the states' roles . assessing risk / risk assessment instruments . thirteen of the state programs requested procedures for assessing risk of improper payments , including items to take into consideration when assessing their programs for risk susceptibility . recognition of state input . seven of the state programs want an opportunity to comment on any proposed regulations prior to implementation of any requirements to estimate or report improper payment information . for example , one state responded in its survey that the state , in coordination with its cognizant federal agency , should determine its own plans to detect improper payments . additionally , another state program inquired as to the purpose of involving the states , particularly those that have had little occurrence of audit findings , and another wanted clarification on what sanctions would be assessed for those that identified improper payments . other guidance and resources . forty - eight of the state programs requested other types of guidance and resources relating to enhancing the use of information technology , overcoming legislative barriers , and establishing incentives and penalties for subrecipients , among others . for example , one state program wanted the creation of a national database to track the activity of medical providers that operate in multiple states . omb has continued to conduct its improper payments work through cfoc and pcie's erroneous and improper payments workgroup . the workgroup periodically convenes to discuss and develop best practices and other methods to reduce or eliminate , where possible , improper payments made by federal government agencies . it has issued reports and other products to cfoc / pcie , reflecting workgroup deliberations and determinations . omb officials have told us that they have started to draft a plan on developing and maintaining partnerships with states to facilitate state's estimating and reporting information to the federal agencies . for federal agencies' fiscal year 2005 par reporting , omb included a new requirement in circular no . a - 136 , financial reporting requirements , that federal agencies were to report on their actions and results at the grantee level . however , based on our review of selected federal agencies' fiscal year 2005 pars , reporting of fund stewardship at the grantee level was limited .