our analysis was reviewed by navy supply system officials . we analyzed the business plan to identify the major elements that contributed to projected annual recurring savings . our analysis indicated that the business plan included savings from an initiative to reduce aviation maintenance costs referred to as airspeed . we interviewed navy officials to determine the relationship of airspeed to the brac recommendation . to assess the reliability of the data used to generate estimates of costs and savings and the validity of underlying assumptions used to generate cost and savings estimates , we reviewed navy regulations and instructions for reporting aviation maintenance data and interviewed officials at navy air systems command , navy aviation depots , navy aviation intermediate maintenance departments , and naval supply systems command knowledgeable about the data and the assumptions underlying estimated costs and savings . based on this , we believe that the assumptions underlying estimated costs and savings are generally valid , and that the data used were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to determine the challenges to successfully implement the fleet readiness centers , we analyzed pertinent documents and reports and interviewed officials responsible for developing the original proposal and the business plan . we also interviewed navy officials at the aircraft intermediate maintenance departments at whidbey island , washington ; north island , california ; and mayport , florida ; and at naval aviation depots at north island , california , and jacksonville , florida . in addition , we also reviewed statutes related to continuing congressional oversight of annual depot maintenance funding , related reports , and court cases involving depot personnel . we conducted our work from february 2006 to march 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . fleet readiness centers ( ind 19 ) a. realign naval air station oceana , va , by disestablishing the aircraft intermediate maintenance department oceana , the naval air depot cherry point detachment , and the naval air depot jacksonville detachment ; establishing fleet readiness center mid atlantic , naval air station oceana , va ; and transferring all intermediate maintenance workload and capacity to fleet readiness center mid atlantic , naval air station oceana , va. b. realign naval air station patuxent river , md , by disestablishing the aircraft intermediate maintenance department at naval air warfare center aircraft division ; establishing fleet readiness center mid atlantic site patuxent river , naval air station patuxent river , md ; and transferring all intermediate maintenance workload and capacity to fleet readiness center mid atlantic site patuxent river , naval air station patuxent river , md .