dot agreed with our recommendations . on october 18 , 2015 , dot issued a draft national freight strategic plan for public comment . the draft noted that dot should work closely with state and local governments and international partners , as well as private stakeholders , to coordinate strategies and investments and noted that new freight traffic data sources and improved public - private cooperation on state freight plans will assist in this effort . the draft also noted that dot should continue to engage in strong border infrastructure planning with border states through working groups with canada and mexico . we will continue to monitor the status of dot's response to our recommendations and dot's efforts related to the national freight strategic plan . a dot strategy on data to prioritize the impacts of freight related traffic congestion in the national freight strategic plan , along with improvements to the national highway - rail crossing inventory , could help address data limitations at both the national and local levels and help communities — including poe communities — better define impacts from blocked highway - rail grade crossings and prioritize projects to mitigate such impacts . we provided a draft of this report to dot and cbp for review and comment . in a response ( reproduced in app . ii ) , dot highlighted efforts to minimize community impacts of international freight rail movement . dot and cbp provided technical comments , which we incorporated . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the department of transportation , and the secretary of the department of homeland security , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact susan fleming at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or flemings@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report ( 1 ) describes factors that affect the movement of freight rail through selected ports of entry and the actions taken by federal agencies and others to expedite freight rail in these locations , and ( 2 ) examines what is known about the impacts of freight rail operations on highway - rail grade crossings in u.s. port of entry communities . to determine the factors that affect the movement of freight rail through selected ports of entry and the actions taken to expedite freight rail in these locations , we interviewed officials and reviewed documents from customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) , the federal railroad administration ( fra ) , and department of state . we also interviewed representatives from the american association of state highway and transportation officials , the border trade alliance , the association of american railroads , and the brotherhood of locomotive engineers and trainmen ( blet ) — a union which represents train operators that we identified from prior gao work .