much has been done to facilitate the drawdown from iraq . for example , to ensure unity of effort , the dod organizations most closely associated with the drawdown have issued coordinated plans outlining the specific means by which their respective drawdown - related tasks will be accomplished . furthermore , several new dod organizations have been created to oversee and help synchronize the effort , and goals and metrics have been established to measure progress . according to dod reports , these efforts to date have contributed to the meeting or exceeding of established goals for drawing down forces and retrograding equipment . however , while dod has made significant progress executing the drawdown , there remains a large amount of personnel , equipment , and bases yet to be drawn down , and several actions needed to facilitate this are incomplete . other factors also add uncertainty to the disposition of equipment . in light of these supporting the iraqi government and its security forces . in light of these developments , multi - national force - iraq ( mnf - i ) issued a phased plan developments , multi - national force - iraq ( mnf - i ) issued a phased plan aligned with goals and time frames set forth by the security agreement aligned with goals and time frames set forth by the security agreement and the president , including a transition in mission , the reduction of u.s. and the president , including a transition in mission , the reduction of u.s. troops to 50,000 by august 31 , 2010 , and a complete withdrawal of forces troops to 50,000 by august 31 , 2010 , and a complete withdrawal of forces by the end of 2011. by the end of 2011 . the drawdown is one of several tasks u.s. forces in iraq are conducting the drawdown is one of several tasks u.s. forces in iraq are conducting concurrently in a continuously evolving environment during a period of concurrently in a continuously evolving environment during a period of iraqi political uncertainty . for example , besides overseeing operations in iraqi political uncertainty . lessons learned and documented during the logcap transition in kuwait indicate that other upcoming major contract transitions may be problematic . with the exception of the logcap contract for iraq , which is discussed in more detail below , four other major service contracts in iraq and kuwait , which provide field support maintenance , base and life support , and convoy trucking services , have reached their expiration dates . for example , besides overseeing operations in iraq , mnf - i and its subordinate headquarters merged into a single iraq , mnf - i and its subordinate headquarters merged into a single headquarters called united states forces - iraq ( usf - i ) in january 2010 . in headquarters called united states forces - iraq ( usf - i ) in january 2010 . for example , according to the usf - insurgency in iraq remains dangerous .