sex . we categorized veterans as either being female or male . race and ethnicity . we created categories to describe veterans' race and ethnicity ( hispanic and non - hispanic ) . these categories are consistent with the office of management and budget's 1997 standards for maintaining , collecting , and presenting federal data on race and ethnicity . extent to which veterans diagnosed with mdd were prescribed at least one antidepressant . using data from the pharmacy benefits management database , we examined the extent to which va providers prescribed at least one antidepressant for veterans diagnosed with mdd from fiscal years 2009 through 2013 . this includes antidepressants prescribed to treat depression as well as those prescribed to treat other conditions . the percentage of veterans with mdd dispensed a 12-week and a 6-month supply of an antidepressant . using va data we obtained from the medical sas inpatient datasets , acute care dataset ; outpatient encounter files ; fee basis outpatient and inpatient services files ; and pharmacy benefits management database , we calculated the percentage of veterans with mdd dispensed a 12-week and a 6-month supply of an antidepressant according to statistical programming logic provided by va . these measures are intended to assess the effectiveness of antidepressant medication management and are based on performance measures developed by the national committee for quality assurance . in addition , these measures are consistent with the va / dod clinical practice guideline for management of major depressive disorder , which indicates that continued antidepressant treatment , after acute depressive symptoms have resolved , decreases the incidence of relapse of mdd . we selected six va medical centers ( vamc ) at the following locations to visit: canandaigua , new york ; gainesville , florida ; iowa city , iowa ; philadelphia , pennsylvania ; phoenix , arizona ; and reno , nevada . these vamcs represent different facility complexity groups , serve populations of veterans that differ in terms of the extent of use of mental health services , and are located in different veterans integrated service networks ( visn ) , to gather additional perspectives , for each or regional networks of care.vamc we visited , we selected one associated community - based outpatient clinic to visit . in particular , we visited community - based outpatient clinics in the following locations: cedar rapids , iowa ; globe , arizona ; gloucester , new jersey ; lecanto , florida ; fallon , nevada ; and rochester , new york . ( see table 4. ) as part of our site visits , we reviewed a nongeneralizeable sample of five medical records for each of these six vamcs for a total of 30 veterans . we reviewed these medical records to determine if the diagnostic code entered for all encounters — starting with the initial encounter in 2012 when the veteran was diagnosed with mdd and prescribed an antidepressant — was consistent with a diagnosis of mdd . to select medical records for review , we completed the following steps: randomly generated a list of individuals with a new prescription for an antidepressant in calendar year 2012 . selected the first five individuals in the list that met the following veteran status .