aggression or seize the initiative . joint seabasing is one of several evolving concepts describing how joint seabasing is one of several evolving concepts describing how commanders in the future will project and sustain forces for conducting commanders in the future will project and sustain forces for conducting joint military operations without relying on immediate access to nearby joint military operations without relying on immediate access to nearby land bases . seabasing is defined as the rapid deployment , assembly , land bases . seabasing is defined as the rapid deployment , assembly , command , projection , reconstitution , and reemployment of joint combat command , projection , reconstitution , and reemployment of joint combat power from the sea , while providing continuous support , sustainment , and power from the sea , while providing continuous support , sustainment , and force projection to select expeditionary joint forces without reliance on force projection to select expeditionary joint forces without reliance on land bases within the joint operations area . joint seabasing is a scalable land bases within the joint operations area . joint seabasing is a scalable concept with many potential options for achieving its desired capability . concept with many potential options for achieving its desired capability . these options range from a single ship to a larger family of amphibious these options range from a single ship to a larger family of amphibious and logistics ships , with supporting surface and air connectors , as well a and logistics ships , with supporting surface and air connectors , as well a concept of operations and employment options . enhancing a seabasing concept of operations and employment options . enhancing a seabasing capability is expected to be costly , in light of the many options that could capability is expected to be costly , in light of the many options that could be developed to support joint seabasing , and could be the source of be developed to support joint seabasing , and could be the source of billions of dollars of investment if dod chooses an option involving the billions of dollars of investment if dod chooses an option involving the development of new ships . while joint seabasing is one option for how the development of new ships . while joint seabasing is one option for how the joint force commander could conduct joint military operations in the joint force commander could conduct joint military operations in the future , other means of projecting and sustaining forces in an antiaccess future , other means of projecting and sustaining forces in an antiaccess environment exist and continue to evolve . these include rapid strategic airlift and fast sealift of forces from the united states to the area of operation , airfield and port seizure , rapid base construction , and several others . at a time when dod is under pressure to control costs , it is increasingly important for decision makers to evaluate competing priorities and alternatives to determine the most cost - effective solutions for conducting future military operations . joint seabasing represents a major change in the way dod would manage its forces .