these standards were implemented in 2011 . we conducted this performance audit from april 2011 to june 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . under the care act , part a and part b grantees are awarded grants to provide a range of services — both medical and support — to uninsured and underinsured clients with hiv / aids . however , this guidance was not in place during the period covered by our review . federal regulations require grantees to oversee their service providers . in april 2011 hrsa compiled existing requirements into a comprehensive document called the national monitoring standards.designed to help part a and part b grantees meet federal requirements for program and financial management , and to improve program efficiency . prior to hrsa's issuance of the standards , guidance on how to ensure grantee compliance with program requirements and how to monitor service providers was found in multiple sources . hrsa expects the standards to provide direction to grantees for monitoring their own compliance with care act program and financial requirements and the performance of their service providers . hrsa officials told us that the national monitoring standards were developed in response to two hhs office of inspector general reports that identified the need for a specific standard regarding the frequency and nature of grantee monitoring of service providers and a clear po role in monitoring grantee oversight of service providers.were compiled by hrsa with assistance from a national team of financial and program experts and a working group of part a and part b grantees . according to hrsa , the working group provided feedback on drafts of the standards . additionally , according to hrsa , the standards were presented to all part a and part b grantees in a 2010 grantee meeting . grantees were notified of their obligation to comply with these standards in fiscal year 2011 . hrsa maintains three different grantee files to assist in its provision of oversight , monitoring , and ta to part a and part b grantees and there is a different record retention period for each of these three files . single audit reports and related financial documentation are maintained in hard copy audit files by hrsa's dfi . hrsa's record management program requires these files to be kept onsite at hrsa for at least 2 years after the final close of the audit or upon resolution of any adverse audit findings . the files are then to be sent to the federal records centers to be maintained for an additional 4 years.official grantee reports in response to care act grantee reporting requirements listed in appendix i . it is maintained electronically by the hrsa division of grants management operations and the division of service systems and documents in ehb are accessed by pos and other grants management staff as part of their routine monitoring responsibilities .