this is not the case . we checked whether the facilities we visited offered alternative means to make telephone connections when the pro bono system was not working . with the exception of the broward transitional center , we were not able to satisfy ourselves through interviews with facility officials and detainees that routine assistance was available to detainees to make pro bono calls when they were unable to make these calls on the telephones provided for this purpose . third , dhs stated that it believes that figure 2 in our report , which shows low connection rates for the pro bono network , does not properly represent the number of calls that are not connected due to problems with the network or provider . dhs's comments included contractor data that point out that a detainee may input a wrong number , hang up before completing the call process , or call a pro bono attorney after business hours . we acknowledge there could be a variety of reasons why some calls may not have been completed over the period we reported on . this report focuses on the following questions: ( 1 ) to what extent do selected facilities comply with established detention standards ? ( 2 ) to what extent does ice's compliance review process identify deficiencies ? to address our objectives we , conducted visits to a nonprobability sample of detention facilities to observe conditions of confinement , implementation of the standards , and extent of compliance with alien detention standards ; interviewed dhs and ice officials responsible for compliance with alien detention standards and analyzed documentation on staffing levels devoted to ensuring compliance with alien detention standards and associated guidance and training provided to personnel to oversee compliance with the standards ; interviewed dhs and ice officials and analyzed dhs documentation on efforts , methodologies , and internal controls used to evaluate compliance with the standards ; analyzed data on pro bono telephone system performance provided by the ice telephone contractor ; and analyzed data on detention - related complaints filed by alien detainees or their representatives with the oig , and reviewed information on the number and type of detainee complaints received by dhs and ice components , and nongovernmental organizations assisting alien detainees . on the basis of interviews with the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , aba , and oig officials , we selected a nonprobability sample of 8 of 38 ice national detention standards to review at the detention facilities we visited . the 8 standards we selected are telephone access , medical care , hold rooms procedures , use of force , food services , recreation , access to legal materials , and detainee grievance procedures . according to the officials we interviewed , these standards pertained to the basic treatment of detainees and were representative of areas of concern and common complaints received in their organizations . we also observed whether the population in the facilities we visited exceeded rated capacity . we visited all 3 family detention facilities , 2 of 19 juvenile detention facilities , and 18 of 330 adult detention facilities for our visits on the basis of geographic diversity , facility type , and prior inspection ratings .