this system had several disadvantages . first , delays in the process meant that medicare+choice requirements went into effect before tma could authorize contractors to implement them . in order to achieve the demonstration's timely compliance with medicare+choice requirements , lead agent staff wanted contractors to move forward without a formal change order — which they sometimes did — although tma contracting officials cautioned against this practice . second , lack of timely payment was a major concern at the managed care support corporate level . third , the fact that contractors had already incurred actual costs may have put dod at a disadvantage when negotiating change orders . finally , tma was authorizing changes without knowing what they would actually cost . unsettled change orders could represent a significant future liability for the defense health program if they are settled at higher amounts than dod estimated . the backlog in processing contract changes and the practice of implementing changes before their costs were negotiated have long been problems for tricare . efforts initiated in 1997 to remedy the problem were not successful . in july 2000 , tma began an effort to negotiate and pay for all of its outstanding change orders . this effort eliminated most of the backlog , but the $900 million cost of the settlements contributed to a shortfall in funding for the defense health program for fiscal year 2001 . tma has instituted a new process that requires costs to be negotiated and settled before changes are implemented , but evidence of the effectiveness of this process is not yet available . senior prime , while demonstrating that dod can operate a medicare+choice plan , also illustrated the complexities of offering managed care within the military health system . some lessons from the demonstration apply to military managed care generally . these include the difficulties of linking mtfs with network care and the importance of re - engineering the previous managed care support contract change order process . other lessons apply specifically to military managed care for seniors . these include the importance of accurately estimating mtfs' capacity for enrolling seniors , especially given the potential for age - ins ; the need to provide seniors with more complex care , including case management and post - acute care ; and the value of contacts with hcfa and private medicare+choice plans . much of senior prime's experience in providing care to seniors may be applicable to the new tricare for life program . dod officials may be able to draw on lessons learned from senior prime as they define the new program's options for seniors . dod and hcfa provided written comments on a draft of this report , which are reprinted in appendixes i and ii . both agencies said the report contained an accurate description of implementation issues encountered in the demonstration . dod noted that expanding medicare subvention or making it permanent should be approached cautiously , with an understanding of cost and funding issues . we will address cost issues in future reports . the two agencies also provided suggestions for clarity and technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and the administrator of hcfa .