from the room . the door to the room is opened by a swipe card lock , and there are no cameras or other security measures inside the room . we observed that one of the irradiators was sitting on a wheeled pallet . when we asked the radiation safety officer ( rso ) — the designated hospital official responsible for the security of radiological sources — if he had considered removing the wheels , he said no . this response was given even though the irradiator room is located in close proximity to an external loading dock , and the cameras along the corridor to the loading dock are displayed on a single monitor . this facility had passed its most recent nrc security inspection because access to the room where the irradiators were located was restricted through use of a swipe card . however , it could be vulnerable because of the limited security we observed and the potential mobility of the device . at a hospital in a major u.s. city , we observed that the interior door to the hospital blood bank , which had a cesium - 137 blood irradiator of approximately 1,500 curies , had the combination to the lock written on the door frame . the door is in a busy hallway with heavy traffic , and the security administrator for the hospital said that he often walks around erasing door combinations that are written next to the locks . according to nrc , a single lock is not necessarily a security weakness , however , they noted that writing combinations on the door is a weakness . the rso at a university hospital in another state told us that he did not know the exact number of individuals with unescorted access to the hospital's radiological sources , although he said that there were at least 500 people — the current data system does not allow for entering records of individuals beyond 500 . becquerels . national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a separately organized agency within the department of energy ( doe ) has more than 20 programs that are intended to , among other things , secure nuclear warheads ; reduce the risk of nuclear smuggling ; and protect , consolidate , and dispose of weapon - usable nuclear material and radiological sources . the two other u.s. agencies that conduct major nuclear nonproliferation programs and activities overseas are the departments of defense ( dod ) and state . dod administers the cooperative threat reduction program , which has facilitated the removal of nuclear weapons from ukraine , belarus , and kazakhstan and has helped russia and ukraine meet their arms control commitments by assisting in the elimination of strategic delivery systems . state manages its own nonproliferation programs , such as the export control and related border security program , provides support to nnsa and other u.s. agencies' nuclear nonproliferation programs working overseas , and conducts bilateral and multilateral diplomacy to address proliferation threats around the world under its bureau of international security and nonproliferation . the department of homeland security is responsible for , among other things , developing and deploying technologies to detect , prevent and interdict nuclear materials smuggled into the united states .