monetary penalties can be significant . for example , in 2017 , the enforcement bureau issued a $120 million proposed fine to an individual for allegedly making almost 100 million spoofed robocalls — telephone calls that caused the display of misleading or inaccurate caller id information with the intent to defraud , cause harm , or wrongfully obtain anything of value — in violation of the truth in caller id act . in 2008 , we found fcc's enforcement program lacked clear performance goals and data on the outcomes of fcc's enforcement efforts . fcc implemented our recommendations by taking steps to establish performance goals and update its enforcement data . recently , however , some stakeholders have raised questions about the openness , transparency , and fairness of fcc's enforcement processes . for example , some have noted an apparent shift away from enforcing regulations such as those regarding the operation of unlicensed radio stations , or “pirate radio” , and stated the enforcement bureau may not be setting the appropriate priorities and is less productive than it used to be . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . you asked us to review fcc's management of its enforcement program . this report examines ( 1 ) actions taken by fcc in the last 5 years to update its enforcement program ; ( 2 ) performance goals and measures for fcc's enforcement program ; and ( 3 ) selected stakeholders' views on fcc's enforcement program and fcc's communication with these stakeholders . to describe what actions fcc has taken in the last 5 years ( calendar years 2012 through 2016 ) to update its enforcement program we reviewed fcc documentation , such as policies and reports related to internal improvement efforts . in addition , we interviewed fcc headquarters officials about recent changes to the program including investments in new technology , management , and process changes . we also interviewed fcc officials located in two field offices ( columbia , md , and dallas , tx ) , chosen , in part , because , in the past , they have conducted greater numbers of investigations than some other field offices . to determine what performance goals and measures are in place for the enforcement program we reviewed fcc's annual performance and budget reports and strategic plans from 2008 to present ; 2008 was the last time we reviewed fcc's enforcement program performance goals and measures . we evaluated goals and measures — as listed in fcc's fiscal year 2015 annual performance and fiscal year 2017 budget reports against criteria for developing federal agency performance goals and measures as established in the government performance and results act , as enhanced by the gpra modernization act of 2010 , and office of management and budget ( omb ) guidance related to implementing performance measures . in addition , we reviewed the most recent annual performance reports of three other independent regulatory agencies with enforcement divisions: the securities exchange commission ( sec ) , commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) , and federal trade commission ( ftc ) .