however , the implementation process does not end there . details follow on each aspect of planned competition . under the mac - mo strategy , more opportunities for contractors to compete for work will exist because the multiple award contract structure allows the navy to compete orders for each individual availability among the pool of idiq awardees . figure 3 shows a drydock and crane . to support the execution of complex maintenance availabilities , the navy has established a certification process to ensure that contractors are qualified to conduct the work . navsea will grant a “master ship repair agreement” after certifying a ship repair firm's capability and capacity to perform all aspects of shipboard work . see appendix i for more information about our scope and methodology . we performed this analysis because under the mac - mo strategy , individual availabilities — which were previously covered by a single msmo contract — could now be competed as individual orders among the pool of idiq awardees . as shown in table 4 , our analysis indicates that over a 5- year period , the navy could have realized over 350 competitive orders for the destroyer availabilities it completed in norfolk , had a mac - mo idiq contract with associated competition opportunities been in place . in addition , navsea officials told us they plan to broaden the pool of potential competitors for idiq complex and noncomplex awards by setting up rolling admissions for additional proposals , meaning that qualified contractors can apply to become a part of the pool of idiq awardees beyond the initial idiq solicitation period . they plan to release a solicitation for rolling admissions in san diego and norfolk in early fiscal year 2017 . the purpose of the rolling admission is to expand the contractor base for modernization of surface combatants and amphibious ships . a representative from one small business , which did not hold a msmo contract , told us it would consider applying for an idiq award for complex availabilities once the mac - mo strategy is fully implemented because of the flexibility offered by rolling admissions . the mac - mo strategy broadens the pool of prime contractors qualified to compete for work in norfolk , virginia and san diego , california by setting aside noncomplex availabilities in those locations for small businesses . small businesses told us that historically they were more likely to work as subcontractors to msmo contract holders , offering specialized services such as electrical work , sometimes under a teaming agreement with the prime contractor . under mac - mo , small businesses are not required to hold a master ship repair agreement ( msra ) certification in order to compete for noncomplex availabilities . in march 2016 , a navsea official briefed contractors that , alternatively , small businesses competing for noncomplex contracts would be required to have “msra - like” capabilities and capacity to successfully compete for the contract . the term “msra - like” means that small businesses will be required to have similar management and quality processes to that required of a certified msra holder , and the capability to successfully complete typical work requirements associated with continuous maintenance availabilities .