detect . controls that detect an intruder could include video cameras and alarm systems . they could also include roving guard patrols . delay . controls that delay an intruder increase the opportunity for a successful security response . these controls include barriers such as perimeter fences . deny . controls that can deny an intruder include visitor screening that only permits authorized individuals to access the building housing the lab . furthermore , a lack of windows or other obvious means of accessing a lab is an effective denial mechanism . some security controls serve multiple purposes . for example , a perimeter fence is a basic security feature that can deter , delay , and deny intruders . however , a perimeter fence on its own will not stop a determined intruder . this is why , in practice , layers of security must be integrated in order to provide the strongest protection . thus , a perimeter fence should be combined with an intrusion detection system that would alert security officials if the perimeter has been breached . a strong system would then tie the intrusion detection alarm to the closed - circuit television ( cctv ) network , allowing security officers to immediately identify intruders . a central command center is a key element for an integrated , active system . it allows security officers to monitor alarm and camera activity — and plan the security response — from a single location . table 3 shows 15 physical security controls we focused on during our assessment work . in addition to the contact named above , the following individuals made contributions to this testimony: andy o'connell , assistant director ; matt valenta , assistant director ; christopher w. backley ; randall cole ; john cooney ; craig fischer ; vicki mcclure ; anthony paras ; and verginie tarpinian . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . see table 1 below . lab c: lab c had in place only 3 of the 15 key security controls we assessed . the lab was in an urban environment and publicly accessible , with only limited perimeter barriers . during our assessment , we saw a pedestrian access the building housing the lab through the unguarded loading dock entrance . in addition to lacking any perimeter barriers to prevent unauthorized individuals from approaching the lab , lab c also lacked an active integrated security system . by not having a command and control center or an integrated security system with real - time camera monitoring , the possibility that security officers could detect an intruder entering the perimeter and respond to such an intrusion is greatly reduced . lab e: lab e was one of the weakest labs we assessed , with 4 out of the 15 key controls in place .