madam chairwoman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members have at this time . for questions regarding this testimony , please contact cathleen a. berrick , director , homeland security and justice issues , at ( 202 ) 512-3404 or berrickc@gao.gov . other key contributors to this statement were mona blake , danny r. burton , ryan consaul , r. eric erdman , michele c. fejfar , richard b . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . dhs and tsa officials generally agreed to implement the recommendations and reported that they are making progress doing so . according to tsa officials , the “initial cutover” or assumption of the watch - list matching function from one or more air carriers for domestic flights is scheduled to begin in january 2009 . concurrently , revised internal guidance for tsa's inspectors can help ensure that compliance inspections of air carriers are conducted using the standards specified within the security directives as evaluation criteria . these efforts included a special emphasis assessment conducted in 2005 and regular inspections conducted in conjunction with annual inspection cycles . however , the 2005 special emphasis assessment focused on air carriers' capability to prescreen passengers for exact - name matches with the no fly list , but did not address the air carriers' capability to conduct similar - name comparisons . regarding inspections conducted as part of regular inspection cycles , tsa's guidance establishes that regulatory requirements encompassing critical layers of security need intensive oversight , and that testing is the preferred method for validating compliance . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on the audit objectives . tsa is responsible for ensuring air carriers' compliance with regulatory requirements , including requirements reflected in tsa security directives . related to watch - list matching , tsa outlines air carrier requirements in the no fly list procedures security directive , requiring domestic air carriers to conduct checks of passenger information against the no fly list to identify individuals who should be precluded from boarding flights , and the selectee list procedures security directive , directing domestic air carriers to conduct checks of passenger information against the selectee list to identify individuals who should receive enhanced screening ( eg , additional physical screening or a hand - search of carry - on baggage ) before proceeding through the security checkpoint . since 2002 , tsa has issued numerous revisions to the no fly and selectee list security directives to strengthen and clarify requirements , and has issued guidance to assist air carriers in implementing their watch - list - matching processes . tsa conducts inspections of air carriers throughout the year as part of regular inspection cycles based on annual inspection plans to determine the extent to which air carriers are complying with tsa security requirements .