risk management . about 75 percent of the investments were unable to demonstrate that they were actively addressing the risk elements that omb specifies in circular a - 11 , or how they had determined that any of those risks were not applicable . in addition , documentation of risk management that was provided had significant weaknesses . in one case , a risk management plan was approximately 9 years old and had not been updated , and for three investments , the risk documentation addressed only the project development phase , even though the systems had exited that phase and were in full operation . analysis of alternatives . in addition , several project officials told us that they believed some of the 19 risk management areas required in the exhibit 300 were not applicable to their investment , but they reported on those categories nonetheless to fulfill the requirement . although the guidance instructs agencies to indicate whether the risk category was not applicable , officials stated that their impression is that “not applicable” responses might lower the evaluation of their investments and reduce or eliminate their funding . further , agency officials generally responded that the training they received for preparing the exhibit 300 was not sufficient . for example , one agency commented that agencies would benefit from targeted omb training that would address agency - specific questions . several agencies stressed that omb training should occur earlier in the budget cycle . in addition , one agency said that it needed omb training on preparing each section of the exhibit 300 . overall , the lack of documentation supporting the exhibit 300s raises questions regarding the sufficiency of the business case for the investment and the quality of the projects' management . compliance with omb and other federal guidance and related federal laws helps ensure that agency investments are managed in a manner consistent with the intent of the congress and that key information is available to omb and agency managers on which they can base informed decisions . the security section of the exhibit 300 requires that agencies demonstrate that they have developed information security plans in accordance with the federal information security management act of 2002 ( fisma ) ; according to fisma , these plans must include rules of behavior for system use , technical security controls , and procedures for incident handling — that is , how to respond to system security breaches . in addition , agencies ensure that employees and contractors receive security awareness training . guidance from the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) supports fisma by outlining the necessary components of key security documentation , including security plans , certification and accreditation packages , and security controls testing .