irtpa . as noted earlier , irtpa initiated a reform effort that includes goals and requirements for improving the personnel security clearance process government - wide . for example , irtpa established specific objectives for the timeliness of security clearance processing . it also required that all security clearance background investigations and determinations completed by an authorized investigative agency or authorized adjudicative agency be accepted by all agencies ( known as reciprocity ) , subject to certain exceptions . appendix ii provides additional details on irtpa as it relates to personnel security clearances . relevant executive orders . the personnel security clearance process and reform efforts are governed by various executive orders . key executive orders affecting personnel security clearance reform include executive orders 12968 , 13467 , 13741 , and 13764 , which , among other things , provide definitions , processes , responsibilities , and authorities related to eligibility for access to classified information , suitability and fitness for government employment , and security clearance reform . aspects of the reform effort covered by the executive orders include the establishment of the pac and nbib , the transfer of it responsibilities to dod , the definition of continuous evaluation , and the addition and amendment of certain roles and responsibilities . recent legislation . section 951 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 requires , among other things , the secretary of defense to develop an implementation plan for the defense security service to conduct background investigations for certain dod personnel — presently conducted by opm — after october 1 , 2017 . the secretary of defense was to submit the plan to the congressional defense committees by august 1 , 2017 . dod provided the plan to the congressional defense committees on august 25 , 2017 . section 951 also requires the secretary of defense and the director of opm to develop a plan by october 1 , 2017 , to transfer investigative personnel and contracted resources to dod in proportion to the workload if the plan for the department to conduct background investigations were implemented . in november 2017 , after the conclusion of our audit work , congress passed a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 . the bill includes a provision that , among other things , would authorize dod to conduct its own background investigations and would require dod to begin carrying out the implementation plan required by section 951 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 by october 1 , 2020 . it would also require the secretary of defense , in consultation with the director of opm , to provide for a phased transition . to help guide the personnel security clearance reform effort , in june 2007 , the director of national intelligence and the under secretary of defense for intelligence established the joint reform team through a memorandum of agreement to execute joint reform efforts to achieve irtpa timeliness objectives and improve the processes related to granting security clearances and determining suitability for government employment . the team consisted of cognizant entities within omb , opm , odni , and dod .