operations . to help validate and expand on the cost and progress data , we interviewed bureau headquarters and regional officials . we also interviewed key bureau officials from headquarters and , where applicable , regional officials responsible for the planning and implemention of the person interviewing operation . although we verified with bureau officials that the data were final , we did not independently verify data contained in the bureau's cost and progress management information system . to obtain a local perspective on how person interviewing was implemented , we interviewed temporary a.c.e . workers in 12 locations , covering over 60 local census office areas ( out of the 520 in the united states and puerto rico ) and corresponding to 8 of the 12 census regions ( atlanta , boston , charlotte , chicago , dallas , denver , los angeles , and seattle ) . to provide further context , we also interviewed a.c.e . managers of seven of these regions . we selected these areas primarily for their geographic dispersion , variation in type of enumeration area , and their proximity to our field offices . the results of the visits could not be generalized to all person interviewing . in addition to these field locations , we performed our audit work on eight of the bureau's a.c.e . regions at bureau headquarters in suitland , md ; as well as in washington , dc , from june 2000 through january 2001 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . on september 7 , we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of commerce . on october 5 , 2001 , the secretary of commerce forwarded written comments from the bureau ( see appendix i ) , which we address in the “agency comments and our evaluation” section of this report . the bureau appears to have generally completed person interviewing according to its operational schedule . failure to collect data in a timely manner could have reduced the interview completion rate or increased the bureau's dependence on less reliable sources of data , such as proxy data , thus reducing the quality of data collected . in addition , the bureau believes that the more time that passes from census day ( april 1 ) to the time of the survey interview , generally the more likely that the survey respondent will err in his or her recall of census day information . finally , data processing and other operations depended on the data from person interviewing , and could have been delayed had person interviewing not been completed on time . about 84 percent — 439 — of 520 local census office areas completed all of their fieldwork at least 2 weeks before the end of the operation in their areas . by the deadline for completing all person interviewing , september 1 , 2000 , only 45 cases ( out of over 314,000 nationally ) remained to be completed , and they were all in the area of a single local census office , which had received an extension of its deadline .