mr . chairmen and members of the committee and subcommittee , this concludes our statement . we would be happy to respond to any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have at this time . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony , please contact mathew j. scirè at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or david a. powner at ( 202 ) 512- 9286 or by email at sciremj@gao.gov or pownerd@gao.gov . other key contributors to this testimony include carol cha , betty clark , vijay d'souza , sarah farkas , richard hung , andrea levine , catherine myrick , lisa pearson , cynthia scott , and niti tandon . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . when or how these tests will be completed is not clear . the bureau's plans for nonresponse follow - up will also require changes in local census office infrastructure . the bureau expects it will need additional hardware , including printing and scanning equipment , computers , and telephones . further , the bureau expects to scale the fdca network to support a system for keying in large volumes of data related to hiring and payroll for over 700,000 field workers it plans to hire for the nonresponse follow - up operation . previously , the bureau expected to maintain field worker time reporting using the handheld computer . the bureau's 2010 census program management plan , issued may 5 , 2008 , contains information about the risk management process and notes that 24 program - level or high level - risks have been identified , were currently being validated , and that each of these 24 risks would have either mitigation or contingency plans associated with them . however , according to bureau officials , these 24 risks were associated with an automated operation and the bureau had not yet developed risks related to the paper - based nonresponse follow - up operation . we requested information on these 24 risks , and on june 4 , 2008 , the bureau provided us with an updated program - level risk document . the update now includes 25 program - level risks and identifies several risks related to the redesign including late design changes and testing . however , the bureau has not updated project - level risks — which are risks specific to an operation or system — for nonresponse follow - up since the change to paper was announced . once the bureau provides project - level risk documents , we will assess the bureau's actions to identify , prioritize , and manage risk for the replanned nonresponse follow - up operation . the bureau has taken steps to strengthen the fdca program office leadership and expertise . the bureau has recently assigned an experienced bureau manager to manage the fdca program office . according to the bureau , the manager has extensive experience in directing major it projects .