mortality rates . the assumed mortality rate reflects death rates associated with known or assumed characteristics of the participant population , with some adjustments to account for future potential improvements in mortality . administrative expenses , taxes , and other costs . administrative expenses for annuities include the cost of setting up accounts and tracking payments . ii. ) interest rates are adjusted to produce the insurer's target level of capital requirements and profits from the annuity . many insurers assume a flat rate for each annuitant in pricing some administrative expenses , such as account set - up charges . some insurers reduce their interest rate assumption to account for those expenses . information about insurance company assumptions , or premium payments and projected benefits , would be needed to estimate actual group annuity purchase rates ; however , this information is often not available publicly . for example , employers who decide to terminate their pension plans typically contact a broker or consultant who then solicits bids for a group annuity contract from qualified insurance companies . insurance companies bid on the contract through the broker or consultant . negotiations or an auction may take place , which may further affect the price . insurance companies typically do not disclose assumptions made during this process . thirty - year treasury bonds had several desirable characteristics when they were selected to approximate group annuity purchase rates in 1987 . for example , the american academy of actuaries said that in 1987 , the 30-year treasury bond rate plus 0.3 percentage points ( 30 basis points ) would have replicated group annuity purchase rates . this would indicate that the difference between the rate of return on 30-year treasury bonds and the typical insurance company investment ( such as long - term , high - quality corporate bonds ) approximated the expenses and other annuity pricing factors that insurance companies would consider . the extent to which 30-year treasury bond rates maintained their proximity to group annuity purchase rates would depend upon how closely treasury rates continued to approximate insurance company investment rates of return , after adjusting them for expected administrative expenses and other annuity pricing factors . additionally , policymakers said that 30-year treasury bond rates were selected as the interest rate in 1987 in part because interested parties could not easily manipulate treasury rates . two characteristics of 30-year treasury bonds that would indicate their rates could not be easily manipulated were their “transparency” and “liquidity.” thirty - year treasury bond rates were transparent . for a rate to be transparent , information about it must be widely available and frequently updated . the federal reserve board of governors , using data provided by the department of the treasury , published information on 30-year treasury rates . the department of the treasury constructed 30-year treasury bond rates using data collected from private vendors and reviewed and compiled by the federal reserve bank of new york . thirty - year treasury bonds were liquid . for a bond to be liquid , the market in which it is traded must be large and active so that isolated events or erratic behavior by a single market participant are unlikely to have a major effect on market prices .