tax compliance data are also useful outside of irs . other federal agencies and offices use compliance data for tax policy analysis , revenue estimating , and research . further , the longer the time between compliance measurement surveys , the less useful they become given changes in the economy and tax law . without current compliance data , irs has limited capability to determine key areas of noncompliance to address and actions to take to maximize the use of its limited resources . using its recently collected compliance data , irs has estimated that underreporting of individual income taxes represented about half of the tax gap for 2001 ( the estimate ranges from $150 billion to $187 billion out of a gross tax gap estimate that ranges from $312 billion to $353 billion ) , as indicated in table 1 . within the underreporting estimate , irs attributed about $150 billion to $187 billion , or about 50 percent of the total tax gap , to individual income tax underreporting , including underreporting of business income , such as sole proprietor , informal supplier , and farm income ( about $83 billion to $99 billion ) ; nonbusiness income , such as wages , interest and capital gains ( about $42 billion to $57 billion ) ; overstated income adjustments , deductions , and exemptions ( about $14 billion to $16 billion ) ; and overstated credits ( about $11 billion to $14 billion ) . underreporting of corporate income tax contributed an estimated $30 billion , or about 10 percent , to the 2001 tax gap , which included both small corporations ( those reporting assets of $10 million or less ) and large corporations ( those reporting assets of over $10 million ) . employment tax underreporting accounted for an estimated $66 billion to $71 billion , or about 20 percent , of the 2001 tax gap and included several taxes that must be paid by self - employed individuals and employers . self - employed individuals are generally required to calculate and remit social security and medicare taxes to the u.s. treasury each quarter . the data do not represent the population of noncompliant taxpayers but rather only those who had their tax returns examined . one method to ensure that forms and instructions are sufficiently clear is to test them before use . however , we reported in 2003 that irs had tested revisions to only five individual forms and instructions from july 1997 through june 2002 , although hundreds of forms and instructions had been revised in 2001 alone . in terms of enforcement , irs will need to use multiple strategies and techniques to find noncompliant taxpayers and bring them into compliance . in particular , as figure 1 shows , a pair of tools have been shown to lower levels of noncompliance: withholding tax from payments to taxpayers and having third parties report information to irs and the taxpayers on income paid to taxpayers . for example , banks and other financial institutions provide information returns ( forms 1099 ) to account holders and irs showing the taxpayers' annual income from some types of investments .