implemented . completed september 2001 with publication of museums and facilities: critical assessment and improvement objectives . develop a fully integrated and prioritized 10-year plan for executing the revalidated backlog of requirements and brief the office of management and budget ( omb ) examiners and congressional staffs on the total facilities requirements , even though the annual budget constraints may preclude requesting the full amount of funding actually needed . implemented . briefings with omb and congressional staff held spring 2002 based on museums and facilities: critical assessment and improvement objectives ; subsequent briefings held annually to apprise of progress . cost estimates for all the capital improvements projects that are included in the smithsonian's annual budget requests to omb and congress should be based on the completion of at least 35 percent of final design , with cost escalation included to improve the accuracy and reliability of the estimates . implementation under way . project management handbook includes this provision . discussions have already taken place with omb on this topic . additional funding in facilities planning and design will be required before the smithsonian can consistently complete 35-percent design of future year projects before requesting construction funding . implement and adhere to strict control measures over project scope and cost increases . for selected major capital improvement projects , such as the patent office building , consider establishing a formal review group to help control increases in project scope and cost . implemented . implemented . the budget format for the rr&a program should be changed and simplified to succinctly state the actual requirements , estimated costs , and construction schedules . implemented . fiscal year ( fy ) 2003 and 2004 budgets reflect new format of project descriptions . new structure for entire facilities program budget request implemented with fy 2004 request . responsiveness to congress and omb 2.1 . place significantly increased emphasis on responding to congressional questions and requests in a timely and accurate manner . implemented . all requests since 2002 have been dealt with expeditiously . develop and implement a well - structured maintenance program that includes preventive maintenance , periodic testing and inspection , and programmed maintenance . implemented . plan provided to omb and congress january 2002 . funds received in fy 2004 and requested for fy 2006 will begin to address capability to focus on planned maintenance activities , as guided by reliability centered maintenance ( rcm ) . reorder budget priorities to provide for an increase to at least $10 to $15 million annually in a preventive maintenance category . implementation under way . increase of $5.4 million received in fy 2004 salaries and expenses ( s&e ) appropriation as an initial increment of increase . additional increase of $4.7 million included in fy 2006 request to congress . estimate of total requirement revised upward to reflect national research council ( nrc ) guidelines of 2-4 percent of physical plant current replacement value . consider budgeting all maintenance and minor repair requirements , excluding personnel costs , in one separate account in the rr&a budget to provide improved visibility and funds control . implemented . budget restructured to create facilities maintenance line item in the s&e portion of the smithsonian's fy 2004 budget request .