transparency . for example , in the 2002 biennial review , fcc bureaus and offices issued public notices listing rules for review under their purview and requesting comments regarding the continued necessity of rule parts under review . the bureaus and offices published staff reports on the fcc web site summarizing public comments and making determinations as to whether the commission should open proceedings to modify or eliminate any of the reviewed rules . the commission released notices of proposed rulemaking , seeking further public comments . officials reported that if the commission modifies or eliminates any regulations as a result of its proceeding , that decision is announced in a rulemaking order , which is published in the federal register . similarly , in the 2006 quadrennial review ( which was in process at the time this report was written ) the commission released a further notice of proposed rulemaking ( fnpr ) and posted a web page providing background information and hyperlinks to fcc documents relevant to the review . the fnpr requests public comment on the media ownership rules and factual data about their impact on competition , localism , and diversity . the commission reported that it will hold six public hearings in locations around the country and make available for public comment 10 economic studies commissioned by fcc on issues related to the media ownership rules . despite the opportunities for public participation in these regulatory reviews , the mandated structure of some review processes presents a challenge to the usefulness of fcc reviews . for example , according to an fcc official , the requirement to review the commission's telecommunications rules every 2 years forces bureau staff to be constantly reviewing regulations . this official reported that the quadrennial requirement is a more appropriate time period for review , as it provides greater opportunity for regulatory changes to take hold . additionally , an official reported that too much time between reviews can be problematic . for example , rules that require section 610 review every 10 years may have been modified or previously reviewed as part of an overlapping review requirement or as part of a discretionary review occurring prior to the 10-year review requirement . during the 2001 through 2006 period covered in our review , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , has performed numerous retrospective reviews of its existing regulations in response to mandatory authorities such as section 610 of the regulatory flexibility act and the economic growth regulatory and paperwork reduction act of 1996 ( egrpra ) and at its own discretion . the focus of fdic's reviews has been on burden reduction , which is part of the agency's strategic goals . the process that fdic used to plan , conduct , and report its reviews was coordinated by a larger organizational body . the centralized review effort helped to leverage the agencies' resources and facilitate the regulatory changes recommended as a result of the egrpra reviews . fdic , along with members of the federal financial institutions examination council ( ffiec ) has examined 131 regulations under egrpra . fdic conducted two section 610 reviews after 2001 , but before the initiation of the egrpra reviews in 2003 .