components reported that they have generally been successful in filling mcos . while dhs components are largely responsible for specific activities and efforts to recruit and hire for their mcos , dhs has taken steps to help ensure greater coordination and resource sharing among components . specifically , in 2011 , d&i — through the crc — developed the cros to better coordinate and link component recruiting and outreach efforts to hiring for dhs mission and workforce needs ( for all positions , including mcos ) , and leverage resources as well as reduce recruiting costs , among other things . dhs expects to complete this effort by december 31 , 2013 . if fully implemented , dhs's planned actions will address the intent of this recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . this report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or maurerd@gao.gov . crc is chaired by d&i and has representatives from all of dhs's components . nevertheless , components in our review have taken steps to better determine return on investment for recruiting and outreach events . for example , three of the four components prepare and review after - action reports to identify events that led to interaction with promising candidates . d&i officials said that opm is working with departments within the federal government to compile applicant data to help better link applicants and new hires to various recruiting and outreach efforts , which d&i officials said could help them better determine their return on investment for various recruiting and outreach events . d&i officials told us they anticipate obtaining data later this calendar year , noting that the data would provide information on each candidate through the entire hiring cycle from initial application up to selection . d&i officials told us that officials from other departments said that they believe the response rate will be about 40 to 50 percent . while this response rate would not represent all or most new hires , d&i officials said analysis of this information could help them better understand the nature of the applicants it is getting , including new hires that resulted from specific recruiting events or the percentage of new hires that came from colleges and universities it visited or targeted . federal agencies follow similar processes of identifying and selecting the most qualified candidates . this process generally includes , among other things , rating and ranking candidates and preparing ranked lists of the best - qualified candidates ; selecting candidates to interview ; conducting reference checks and applying veterans' preference criteria ; and making job offers , including conducting any preemployment checks ( such as medical examinations ) and security clearance checks . however , variation in how this process is carried out may occur across the four dhs components selected for our review .