( fig . 8 identifies the location of federal borderlands in washington , as well as designated ports of entry. ) since september 11 , congress has appropriated funds to deploy additional technology and border patrol agents along the canadian border , adding about 630 more agents to bring the total number agents to 1,000 . in washington , this translates to an increase in the number of border patrol agents stationed in two sectors by 155 agents over fiscal years 2002 and 2003 . in addition , the border patrol installed additional ground sensors and a remote video surveillance system covering 43 miles . following a similar strategy employed along the mexican border , the additional agents and technology improvements have generally been deployed to the more populated areas near the ports of entry — not on remote federal lands . in addition , since september 11 , the u.s. customs and border protection has shored up enforcement efforts at ports of entry by increasing the number of inspectors and deploying more technology . according to a department of the interior official stationed on the canadian border , increased staffing and improvements in technology both at and near canadian border ports of entry appear to have forced smuggling activities to more remote locations , such as the properties managed by interior . land management officials in washington with whom we spoke expressed concern that as enforcement efforts increase in populated areas along the canadian border , illegal activity — particularly drug smuggling — will continue to shift onto the more remote federal lands . according to the interior official mentioned above , although only certain locations have experienced an increase in smuggling activity , it is only a matter of time before other interior lands are affected , too . a border patrol official in washington explained that as a result of concentrating resources around one port of entry , drug smugglers are searching for locations with the least resistance and moving their activities onto nearby federal lands . national park service and forest service law enforcement officials in washington were concerned that if enforcement resources continue to be deployed both at and near ports of entry , remote locations — like federal lands — will continue to see an increase in illegal activity . phase ii is not complete . border patrol officials told us that areas remain where they have not deployed significant levels of resources because of limited resources . the september 11 terrorist attacks and continued threats of future attacks have directed congressional attention to security - related issues on the canadian border and accelerated the implementation of the border patrol's strategy . the usa patriot act of 2001 , passed within weeks of the september 11 attacks , authorized appropriations to triple the number of inspectors at ports of entry and border patrol agents along the canadian border and to improve monitoring technology on that border . accordingly , the border patrol began increasing its presence on the canadian border . prior to september 11 , 368 border patrol agents were stationed along the nation's border with canada .