iii ) . in updating our 2005 catalog of federal insurance activities , our efforts are aimed at providing congress with an expanded list that helps convey the wide variety of activities that may not necessarily be considered federal insurance but share important aspects of insurance . we also intended to highlight laws that authorize the federal government to cover third - party liabilities from specific adverse events — such as terrorist attacks or nuclear accidents — and that have not yet resulted in liabilities to the federal government but could do if the events occurred . our catalog may not be appropriate for other purposes . in our previous work , we found challenges in relation to measuring and reporting fiscal exposures caused by certain federal activities , including federal insurance programs . we previously reported that the primarily cash - based budget may not accurately reflect the costs the government incurs and the payments the government may be expected to make for some activities that transfer risk or losses to the government . in addition , the amount of the exposure to the federal government can be hard to measure for some activities . these challenges still exist , and to illustrate them , we reviewed six activities from among those we identified that transfer risk or losses to the federal government . federal activities that transfer risk or losses to the federal government have a range of fiscal exposures in which the extent of the government's legal commitment varies ( see fig . in 2003 , we developed a conceptual framework for fiscal exposures that notes fiscal exposures may be explicit or implicit . therefore , claims up to the statutory limit are explicit exposures , and losses in excess of pbgc's available resources represent an implicit exposure for the federal government to the extent there is an expectation that the government would step in and cover losses beyond the program's reserves . in contrast , loan guarantees under the mmi fund represent an explicit exposure only , because the government has a legal commitment to pay claims if the borrower defaults on a loan . implicit exposures may not be evident in the budget , because the primarily cash - based budget records spending only when payments are made . for example , as part of the commercial space launch insurance program , the federal government is potentially liable for damages from commercial space launch accidents , subject to appropriation , up to $3.1 billion per licensed space launch in 2017 . this program represents an implicit exposure because a new appropriation — which would represent the federal government's legal commitment to pay for this program — is required to fund damages . because there has never been such an event or appropriation , this fiscal exposure has not been included in the budget . according to federal aviation administration officials , the agency has not designed internal processes or procedures to address these potential costs , such as estimating the costs , in part because the agency cannot presume the government will provide funds until such an appropriation were made .