interior generally agreed with our recommendations and has committed to implementing them . federal oil and gas resources generate billions of dollars annually in revenues that are shared among federal , state , and tribal governments ; however , in several reviews over the past 5 years we found interior may not be properly assessing and collecting these revenues . in september 2008 , we reported that interior collected lower levels of revenues for oil and gas production in the deepwater of the u.s. gulf of mexico than all but 11 of 104 oil and gas resource owners in other countries , as well as in some states whose revenue collection systems were evaluated in a comprehensive industry study.significant changes in the oil and gas industry over the past several decades , we found that interior had not systematically reexamined how the u.s. government is compensated for extraction of oil and gas in over 25 years . we recommended interior conduct a comprehensive review of in addition , despite the federal oil and gas fiscal system using an independent panel . after interior initially disagreed with our recommendations , we recommended that congress consider directing the secretary of the interior to convene an independent panel to perform a comprehensive review of the federal oil and gas fiscal system and establish procedures to periodically evaluate the state of the fiscal system . in response to that recommendation , interior commissioned a study that compared the u.s. government's fiscal system with that of other resource owners . we are currently conducting work to assess how interior plans to use the results of this study to inform decisions about its fiscal system . furthermore , we reported , in july 2009 , on numerous problems with interior's efforts to collect data on oil and gas produced on federal lands and waters , including missing data , errors in company - reported data on oil and gas production , and sales data that did not reflect prevailing market prices for oil and gas . as a result of its lack of consistent and reliable data on the production and sale of oil and gas from federal lands and waters , interior could not provide reasonable assurance that it was assessing and collecting the appropriate amount of royalties on this production . we made a number of recommendations to interior to improve controls on the accuracy and reliability of royalty data . the bureaus are also responsible for ensuring that companies comply with all applicable requirements . historically , interior's bureau of land management ( blm ) managed onshore federal oil and gas activities , while the minerals management service ( mms ) managed offshore activities and collected royalties on federal leases.incident , the secretary of the interior announced plans to reorganize mms and divide its responsibilities among separate bureaus . the secretary stated that this division of responsibilities would help ensure that each of the newly established bureaus would have a distinct and independent mission .