january 2003 . congressional requesters asked headquarters level since the release of the department's overall strategic plan and the publication of proposed regulations for its new human capital management system . strategic human capital planning efforts can enable dhs to remain aware of and be prepared for current and future needs as an organization . however , this will be more difficult employees to appeal adverse actions to an independent third party . gao - 04-790 . to view the full testimony statement , click on the link above . for more information , contact to view the full product , including the scope j. christopher mihm at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or and methodology , click on the link above . mihmj@gao.gov . for more information , contact j. christopher mihm at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or mihmj@gao.gov . the analysis of dhs's effort to develop a strategic human capital management system can be instructive as other agencies request and implement new strategic human capital management authorities . dhs was provided with significant flexibility to design a modern human capital management system . its proposed system has both precedent - setting implications for the executive branch and far - reaching implications on how the department is managed . gao reported in september 2003 that the effort to design the system was collaborative and consistent with positive elements of transformation . in february , march , and april 2004 we provided preliminary observations on the proposed human capital regulations . to date , dhs's actions in designing its human capital management system and its stated plans for future work on the system are helping to position the department for successful implementation . nonetheless , the department is in the early stages of developing the infrastructure needed for implementing its new human capital management system . dhs has begun strategic human capital planning efforts at the headquarters level since the release of the department's overall strategic plan and the publication of proposed regulations for its new human capital management system . strategic human capital planning efforts can enable dhs to remain aware of and be prepared for current and future needs as an organization . however , this will be more difficult because dhs has not yet been systematic or consistent in gathering relevant data on the successes or shortcomings of legacy component human capital approaches or current and future workforce challenges . efforts are now under way to collect detailed human capital information and design a centralized information system so that such data can be gathered and reported at the departmentwide level . congressional requesters asked gao to describe the infrastructure necessary for strategic human capital management and to assess the degree to which dhs has that infrastructure in place , which includes an analysis of the progress dhs has made in implementing the recommendations from our september 2003 report . dhs generally agreed with the findings of our report and provided more current information that we incorporated . however , dhs was concerned about our use of results from a governmentwide survey gathered prior to the formation of the department . we use this data because it is the most current information available on the perceptions of employees currently in dhs and helps to illustrate the challenges facing dhs .