we do not agree . under the far , an agency may use an indefinite delivery / indefinite quantity contract , such as that used for sbinet , when it is not possible to determine in advance the precise quantities of goods or services that may be required during performance of the contract . though these types of contracts are indefinite , they are not open - ended . the far requires that indefinite quantity contracts contain a limit on the supplies or services that may be ordered , stated in terms of either units or dollars . this limit serves a variety of purposes , including establishing the maximum financial obligation of the parties . in our view , the purported maximum used in the sbinet contract , “the full panoply of supplies and services to provide 6,000 miles of secure u.s. border,” does not allow anyone to calculate with any degree of certainty what the maximum financial obligation of the parties might turn out to be since the contract does not make clear the total amount of supplies or services that would be required to secure even 1 mile of u.s. border . in order to ensure that the sbinet contract is consistent with the far , we continue to believe that it should be modified to include a maximum quantity , either units or a dollar value , rather than the total amount of miles to be secured . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking minority members of other senate and house committees that have authorization and oversight responsibilities for homeland security . we are also sending copies to the secretary of homeland security , the commissioner of customs and border protection , and the director of the office of management and budget . copies of this report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any further questions about this report , please contact richard stana at ( 202 ) 512-8816 or stanar@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . pub . 109-295 , 120 stat . the appropriations act required an expenditure plan to establish a security barrier along the border of the united states of fencing and vehicle barriers and other forms of tactical infrastructure and technology . in response to this requirement , dhs submitted a plan on december 4 , 2006 , titled “sbinet expenditure plan,” that defines sbinet as “the component of sbi charged with developing and installing the technology and tactical infrastructure solution for border control.” the appropriations act also required gao to review the expenditure plan . 1. detect illegal entries into the united states ; 2. identify and classify these entries to determine the level of threat involved ; 3. efficiently and effectively respond to these entries ; and 4. bring events to a satisfactory law enforcement resolution .