gao - 10-206 . washington , d.c.: january 14 , 2010 . surface coal mining: characteristics of mining in mountainous areas of kentucky and west virginia . gao - 10-21 . washington , d.c.: december 9 , 2009 . federal land management: blm and the forest service have improved oversight of the land exchange process , but additional actions are needed . gao - 09-611 . washington , d.c.: june 12 , 2009 . we made a number of recommendations to address these issues . while interior's reorganization of mms includes plans to hire additional staff with expertise in oil and gas inspections and engineering , these plans have not been fully implemented and it remains unclear whether interior will be fully successful in hiring , training , and retaining these staff . moreover , the human capital issues we identified with blm's management of onshore oil and gas continue , and these issues have not yet been addressed in interior's reorganization plans . historically , blm managed onshore federal oil and gas activities while mms managed offshore activities and collected royalties for all leases . in may 2010 , the secretary of the interior announced plans to reorganize mms — its bureau responsible for overseeing offshore oil and gas activities and collecting royalties — into three separate bureaus . the secretary stated that dividing mms's responsibilities among three separate bureaus will help ensure that each of the three newly established bureaus have a distinct and independent mission . interior recently began implementing this restructuring effort ; transferring offshore oversight responsibilities to the newly created bureau of ocean energy management , regulation and enforcement ( boemre ) and revenue collection to a new office of natural resources revenue . interior plans to continue restructuring boemre to establish two separate bureaus — the bureau of ocean and energy management , which will focus on leasing and permitting , and the bureau of safety and environmental enforcement , which will focus on inspection and enforcement functions . while this reorganization may eventually lead to more effective operations , we have reported that organizational transformations are not simple endeavors and require the concentrated efforts of both leaders and employees to realize intended synergies and accomplish new organizational goals . one key practice that we have identified for effective organizational transformation is to balance continued delivery of services with transformational activities . we are concerned about interior's capacity to find the proper balance — particularly in today's fiscally constrained environment — given its history of management problems and challenges in the human capital area . specifically , we are concerned about interior's ability to undertake this reorganization while providing reasonable assurance that billions of dollars of revenues owed to the public are being properly assessed and collected and that oversight of oil and gas exploration and production on federal lands and waters maintains an appropriate balance between efficiency and timeliness on one hand , and protection of the environment and operational safety on the other . we have reported that interior has experienced several challenges with meeting its obligations to make federal oil and gas resources available for leasing and development while simultaneously meeting its responsibilities for managing public lands for other uses , including wildlife habitat , recreation , and wilderness , among other uses .