these data were site - specific . for example , during the month of december 2005 , the pmo - dts reported that at wright - patterson air force base , 2,880 travel vouchers were processed by dts , and the air force reported that another 2,307 vouchers were processed through the legacy system — the reserve travel system ( rts ) . of those processed through rts , air force dts program officials stated that 338 travel vouchers should have been processed through dts . dts air force program officials further stated that they submitted to the pmo - dts the number of travel vouchers processed through rts each month . properly validating the requirements would allow dod to obtain reasonable assurance that its requirements properly define the functionality needed and the business rules necessary to properly implement that functionality . as previously noted , requirements that are unambiguous and consistent are fundamental to providing reasonable assurance that a system will provide the desired functionality . until dod improves dts requirement management practices , it will not have this assurance . our recent report included four recommendations to improve the department's management and oversight of dts . we recommended that dod ( 1 ) evaluate the cost effectiveness of the navy continuing with the cto management fee structure versus adopting the revised cto fee structure , once the new contracts have been awarded , ( 2 ) develop a process by which the military services develop and use quantitative data from dts and their individual legacy systems to clearly identify the total universe of dts - eligible transactions on a monthly basis , ( 3 ) require the pmo - dts to provide periodic reports on the utilization of dts , once accurate data are available , and ( 4 ) resolve inconsistencies in dts requirements by properly defining the functionality needed and business rules necessary to properly implement the needed functionality . these data are used by the pmo - dts to update the dts voucher analysis model . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for this purpose . we did not review the accuracy and reliability of the specific dollar amounts shown in the september 2003 economic analysis . to address our objectives we also ( 1 ) reviewed the september 2003 economic analysis and met with cognizant officials , ( 2 ) analyzed dts utilization data and obtained an overview of the method and data used by dts program officials to report the rate of dts utilization for the various dod components , and ( 3 ) analyzed dts flight information . our work was performed from october 2005 through july 2006 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . requirements represent the blueprint that system developers and program managers use to design , develop , and acquire a system . requirements should be consistent with one another , verifiable , and directly traceable to higher - level business or functional requirements . it is critical that requirements be carefully defined and that they flow directly from the organization's concept of operations ( how the organization's day - to - day operations are or will be carried out to meet mission needs ) .