( ongoing litigation. ) national consumer council was charged with engaging in or causing others to engage in initiating telephone calls to consumers on the national registry and initiating or causing others to initiate telephone calls to consumers within a given area code without first paying the required access fee for the national registry data , among other violations of the telemarketing sales rule . ( preliminary injunction in place , litigation ongoing. ) braglia marketing group was charged with engaging in or causing others to engage in initiating telephone calls to consumers on the national registry , abandoning or causing others to abandon telephone calls , and initiating telephone calls to consumers within a given area code without first paying the required access fee for the national registry data . ( filed on behalf of ftc by the department of justice , on - going litigation. ) internet marketing group , inc. ; onesetprice , inc. ; first choice terminal , inc. , ( louisiana and arizona corporations ) ; b & c ventures , inc. ; rpm marketing group , inc. ; national event coordinators , inc. ; and several individual defendants were charged with engaging in or causing others to engage in initiating telephone calls to consumers on the national registry , among other violations of the telemarketing sales rule . ( preliminary injunction in place ; litigation ongoing. ) free do not call list.org and national do not call list . us was charged with falsely claiming that for a fee it would arrange for consumers' telephone numbers to be placed on the national registry . ( stipulated permanent injunction. ) vector direct marketing , llc was charged with unauthorized billing to consumers' for purported do - not - call protection services and for removal of personal information from telemarketers' files and falsely claiming to consumers that for a fee it would remove consumers' personal information from telemarketers' lists . ( stipulated permanent injunction entered june 2004. ) 4086465 canada , inc. , a corporation doing business as international protection center and consumers protection center was charged with falsely claiming to consumers inter alia , that for a fee it would arrange for consumers' telephone numbers to be placed on the national registry . ( ongoing litigation. ) debt management foundation services was charged with engaging in or causing others to engage in initiating telephone calls to consumers on the national registry and initiating telephone calls to consumers within a given area code without first paying the required access fee for the national registry data , among other violations of the telemarketing sales rule . ( preliminary injunction in place ; litigation ongoing. ) 3r bancorp was charged with engaging in or causing others to engage in initiating telephone calls to consumers on the national registry and initiating or causing others to initiate telephone calls to consumers within a given area code without first paying the required access fee for the national registry data , among other violations of the telemarketing sales rule . ( litigation ongoing. ) fgh international , inc. was charged with initiating or causing telephone calls to numbers on the national registry and calls to consumers within a given area code without first paying the required access fee . ( litigation ongoing. )