this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the committee may have . for information about this statement , please contact mccoy williams , director , financial management and assurance , at ( 202 ) 512-6906 , or alana stanfield , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-3197 . you may also reach them by e - mail at williamsm1@gao.gov or stanfielda@gao.gov . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include lisa crye , carla lewis , and gloria medina . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we also found questionable purchases . this reduces the risk of error or fraud . these two reports will be issued later this month . in my testimony today , i will discuss the inadequacy of internal controls over vha's purchase card program . the scope of our work , which was performed from april 2003 through april 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , is detailed in the report being released today . heads of agencies are required to establish systems of internal control consistent with our standards for internal control in the federal government . effective internal controls are the first line of defense in safeguarding assets and in preventing and detecting fraud . in addition , they help to ensure that actions are taken to address risks and are an integral part of an entity's accountability for the stewardship of government resources . as i will discuss in my testimony , we found that ( 1 ) existing controls at vha were not designed to provide reasonable assurance that improper purchases would be prevented or detected in the normal course of business , ( 2 ) lack of compliance with applicable laws and regulations in vha's purchase card and convenience check programs led to improper purchases , and ( 3 ) poor controls resulted in some wasteful and questionable purchases . we focused on the approximately $1.4 billion of disbursements that vha made during fiscal year 2002 , the most recent fiscal year for which complete data were available when we began our review . i will first address the inadequacy of vha's internal controls . our review found that vha's internal controls were not designed to provide reasonable assurance that improper purchase card and convenience check purchases would not occur or would be detected in the normal course of business . without an invoice , independent evidence of the description and quantity of what was purchased and the price charged is not available . in addition , the invoice is the basic document that should be forwarded to the approving official or supervisor so that he or she can perform an adequate review of the cardholder's purchases .