i for additional information. ) part d grantees can ( 1 ) operate a network of part d subgrantees that provide services , ( 2 ) directly provide the services , or , as most do , ( 3 ) both operate a network of subgrantee service providers as well as directly provide services . in addition to spending part d funds on medical and support services for clients , part d grantees may also use their part d grant funds to pay for certain administrative expenses and indirect costs . indirect costs differ from administrative expenses in that indirect cost rates for specific activities are typically negotiated with the federal agency from which the grantee receives the greatest amount of federal awards and that rate then applies to all relevant federal award programs that permit indirect costs , unless it conflicts with a legislative indirect cost cap . the office of management and budget ( omb ) cost principles provide guidance as to the expenses that can be included in indirect costs to the cognizant agencies and grantees according to entity type . within hhs , the division of cost allocation performs this role . hrsa , following omb cost principles , defines indirect costs as costs “incurred for common or joint objectives , which cannot be readily identified but are necessary to the operations of the organization.” hrsa defines administrative expenses as “funds that are to be used by grantees for grant management and monitoring activities , including costs related to any staff or activity unrelated to services or indirect costs.” some expenses can be considered to be either administrative or indirect . for example , rent and utilities could be considered either administrative expenses or indirect costs . however , for a grantee to claim any expenses as indirect costs , it must have an approved indirect cost rate . smaller organizations or ones that receive only one federal grant may not have approved indirect cost rates , but organizations that receive multiple federal grants would need to have approved rates . for example , a university that receives multiple federal grants would have an indirect cost rate to cover different grants' shares of costs such as rent , utilities , as well as library expenses . however , a small organization that receives only one federal grant might not have an indirect cost rate since it may be able to account for all of those expenses for the single federal grant it receives . if a grantee does not have an approved indirect cost rate agreement , the grantee must charge ( account for ) expenses such as rent and utilities as administrative expenses in order to pay for those expenses with grant funds . this means that grantees with approved indirect cost rates have greater latitude than those without such rates to pay for expenses that might otherwise be considered administrative expenses as they can spend more than 10 percent of their part d grant on expenses such as rent and utilities . the care act now caps at 10 percent the amount of the part d grant awards that grantees can spend on administrative expenses .