interior concurred with all of our recommendations . interior stated that the report's findings and recommendations will aid its efforts to move forward with improving the quality of education in indian country . for example , interior noted that it is obtaining advice from education and other subject - matter experts on how to improve bie's structure and systems . interior agreed with our recommendation about the need to develop and implement procedures for key decisions affecting bie to ensure it has effective management controls and makes decisions that comport with federal laws and regulations . interior said that as part of indian affairs' realignment , it will need to refine and redefine some of the roles and responsibilities of bie and bia and noted it is currently finalizing a plan driven by these changes . to reflect changes in the roles of bie and bia as a result of the realignment , interior acknowledged the importance of updating its policy documents , such as departmental manuals . in addition to these actions , we believe it is important for interior to review existing policies to understand what additional controls are needed to ensure bie activities comply with relevant laws and regulations . interior agreed with our recommendation to develop a communication strategy . interior said that bie should develop and follow set communications protocols within its schools and field offices to ensure that each entity understands its roles and responsibilities . in response to our recommendation to appoint permanent members to the bie - education committee , interior stated that it had appointed members to the committee in late july 2013 and that the first committee meeting was held in mid - august 2013 . bie officials cited arizona as an example . according to these officials , based on arizona's formula for calculating ayp , bie schools typically do not have enough students in each grade to be able to use the state's formula . additionally , bie officials said that the varied locations of bie schools make it difficult to compare academic achievement across states , address student achievement issues , and provide technical assistance . we used multiple data collection methods to address these issues . to determine how student performance at bie schools compares to that of public school students , we reviewed data on student performance for 4th and 8th grades at bie and public schools for 2005 to 2011 using data from the national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) , a project of education . in addition , we analyzed student performance data for 3rd and 7th grades from bie and selected state educational agencies in three of the four states we visited ( selection described below ) for school years 2009-10 , 2010-11 , and 2011-12 , the most recent 3 years for which data were available . we also used data from a 2011 study on indian education conducted through naep by the national center for education statistics . further , we analyzed education's provisional data on regulatory adjusted cohort graduation rates for school year 2010-11 , which was the most recent data available on cohort graduation rates at the time of our review .