gao - 15-366 . washington , d.c.: april 2 , 2015 . defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs . gao - 15-342sp . washington , d.c.: march 12 , 2015 . dod generally agreed with our recommendations . one way dod is assessing disaggregation is through various analyses of alternatives ( aoa ) , or reviews that compare the operational effectiveness , suitability , and life cycle cost of solutions to satisfy capability needs . dod has completed one aoa for the weather monitoring mission area and is working to complete others for protected satellite communications and overhead persistent infrared sensing . these aoas have the potential to dramatically shift dod's approach to providing capabilities , affecting not only satellite design , but also ground systems , networks , user equipment , and the industrial base . to allow enough time to institute potential changes in contracting and development approaches , and maintain continuity of service , dod is faced with making decisions over the next several years about the way forward . details about the aoas , including when acquisition decisions need to be made for follow - on systems , are depicted in table 2 . the longer dod takes to complete the aoas and come to a consensus on how to proceed , the more its range of choices will be constrained . completing an aoa is the first in a series of important steps to providing future capabilities . in addition , an approach must be selected — whether it is a disaggregated architecture , an evolved version of an existing system , or some other variation — funding must be programmed , and technology development and acquisition strategies must be developed . if decisions are not timely , dod may be forced to continue with existing approaches for its next systems , effectively continuing with legacy systems . additionally , the department has faced unexpected complications , such as challenges to its competitive process in the form of a private lawsuit that has been settled , according to dod officials ; a foreign conflict that brought attention to a russian engine used on one of the sole - source contractor's launch vehicles ; and engine development demands requiring new technological innovation . without addressing leadership shortcomings , dod space programs could continue to face challenges in implementing new approaches . dod's culture has generally been resistant to changes in acquisition approaches , as we have reported , and fragmented responsibilities in dod space programs have made it difficult to implement new processes and coordinate and deliver interdependent systems . such challenges could , for example , hinder dod's efforts to examine options for acquisition efficiencies in military and commercial satellite communications services . historically , dod has procured commercial satellite communications services to augment military capacity and became increasingly reliant on these services to support ongoing military operations . dod is looking for ways to better streamline procurements of these services , but according to dod officials , it has had difficulty adhering to past policies that required centralized procurement , especially during operations in iraq and afghanistan , when efficiency was not a priority .