purpose of this report . we believe the data are sufficiently reliable for the we conducted this performance audit from august 2013 to september 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . gao - 08-1036sp and gao - 13-519sp . use of performance information has not changed significantly over time government - wide . these survey results are consistent with trends identified in other federal employee surveys government - wide . for example , the office of personnel management ( opm ) surveys federal workers with the federal employee viewpoint survey ( fevs ) . fevs is a tool that measures employees' perceptions of whether , and to what extent , conditions characterizing successful organizations are present in their agencies . opm creates an index using a smaller subset selected from the fevs survey responses that are related to agencies' results - oriented performance culture . opm also creates additional indices using different subsets of fevs survey questions related to: ( 1 ) leadership and knowledge management ; ( 2 ) talent management ; and ( 3 ) job satisfaction . on the results - oriented performance culture index , 27 of the 37 agencies opm surveyed experienced a decline between 2008 and 2013 . only seven agencies improved during this time period — opm , the u.s . moreover , our stratified random sample of federal managers ensured that we had a representative sample of federal managers both government - wide and within each of the 24 agencies we surveyed . it was not our objective to design the survey and draw a sample of managers that would allow us to report in a generalizable way at the geographic location or organizational level within an agency . designing a sample to produce estimates at the geographic location and / or organizational level within an agency would result in a much larger sample than the approximately 107,326 managers selected in our 2007 survey and the approximately 148,300 managers selected in our 2013 survey . nevertheless , as previously discussed , our sample was sufficient for the purposes of this report . nasa and treasury also expressed concern that despite all the efforts their respective agencies have undertaken to implement the gpra modernization act of 2010 , our draft report did not provide information on the root causes for the lack of progress in the use of performance information in their agencies . for example , nasa cited some of its agency initiatives , including the development of an automated performance management data repository to assist in the agency's decision - making process . treasury cited its quarterly performance review process as an example of the agency's commitment to using performance information in decision making . we recognize the activities that the agencies have underway to improve staff engagement on the use of performance information for decision making , and have previously reported on some of these initiatives .