the following provides information on these cases . case 1: a gsa schedule contractor was competitively awarded a task order from the gsa schedule in the late 1990s to provide temporary personnel services over another gsa contractor that was compliant with its taxes . the task order award was based solely on the hourly cost of the temporary employee . the company's owner has been investigated for fraud . for details on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted our audit work from june 2005 through january 2006 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . however , we found that the company owner owns multiple properties worth over $1 million . the owner also owes irs approximately $200,000 for personal income taxes . federal law implemented in the far , and gsa internal policies do not require gsa contracting officers to examine tax debt when awarding contracts , nor do they provide guidance as to what role , if any , tax debt should play in determining whether prospective contractors meet the general criteria of responsible contractors . also , due to a statutory restriction on disclosure of taxpayer information , even if tax debts specifically were to be considered in the awarding of contracts , no coordinated or independent mechanism exists for contracting officers to obtain complete information on contractors that have unpaid tax debt . therefore , gsa does not screen contractors for tax debts prior to awarding contracts to gsa - paid contractors and gsa interagency contractors , and ultimately , contractors with unpaid federal taxes receive contracts from the federal government . federal law implemented in the far and gsa internal policies do not expressly prohibit a contractor with unpaid federal taxes from being awarded contracts from the federal government . although the far requires that federal agencies only do business with responsible contractors , it does not specifically require federal agencies to deny the award of contracts to businesses and individuals that have unpaid taxes , unless the contractor was specifically debarred or suspended by a debarring official for specific actions , such as conviction for tax evasion . as part of the contractor responsibility determination for prospective contractors , the far requires contracting officers to determine whether a prospective contractor meets several specified standards , including adequate financial resources and a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics . however , the far does not require contracting officers to consider tax debt in making this determination . similarly , gsa policies in implementing the far do not provide any additional guidance to gsa contracting officers on whether or how tax debts should be considered when making a determination of financial responsibility . according to gsa officials , contracting officers may consider delinquent tax debts as part of their overall determination of a prospective contractor's financial capability ; however , the focus of such evaluation is on determining whether the contractor has the financial capability to deliver the products and services . thus , there is no expectation that the contracting officer will consider tax compliance when evaluating whether companies have the integrity or ethics to perform the contract .