elliot . “analysis of baseline by treatment interactions in a drug prevention and health promotion program for high school male athletes.” addictive behaviors , vol . goldberg , l. , d. elliot , g.n . clarke , d.p . mackinnon , e. moe , l. zoref , e. greffrath , d.j . miller , and a. lapin . “effects of a multidimensional anabolic steroid prevention intervention: the adolescents training and learning to avoid steroids ( atlas ) program.” jama , vol . goldberg , l. , d. elliot , g.n . clarke , d.p . mackinnon , l. zoref , e. moe , c. green , and s.l . wolf . “the adolescent training and learning to avoid steroids ( atlas ) prevention program: background and results of a model intervention.” archives of pediatric & adolescent medicine , vol . goldberg , l. , d.l . elliot , d.p . mackinnon , e. moe , k.s . kuehl , l. nohre , and c.m . lockwood . “drug testing athletes to prevent substance abuse: background and pilot study results of the saturn ( student athlete testing using random notification ) study.” journal of adolescent health , vol . hoffman , g.m . barnes , d. sabo , m.j. melnick , and m.p . farrell . “adolescent anabolic steroid use , gender , physical activity , and other problem behaviors.” substance use & misuse , vol . naylor , a.h. , d. gardner , and l. zaichkowsky . “drug use patterns among high school athletes and nonathletes.” adolescence , vol . rich , j.d. foisie , c.w . towe , b.p . dickinson , m. mckenzie , and c.m . salas . “needle exchange program participation by anabolic steroid injectors.” drug and alcohol dependence , vol . laurie ekstrand , at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or ekstrandl@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were christine brudevold , assistant director ; ellen m. smith ; julie thomas ; rasanjali wickrema ; and krister friday . many of these efforts have been supported by nida . since 2000 , nida has provided nearly $500,000 in funding for a variety of education and outreach efforts in support of this goal . for example , in april 2000 , in response to an upward trend in steroid abuse among students , nida launched a multimedia educational initiative intended to prevent anabolic steroid abuse among teenagers . along with several national partners , including the national collegiate athletic association , the american college of sports medicine , and the american academy of pediatrics , the initiative produced a web site , a research report on steroid abuse , and postcard - sized messages about steroids for placement in gyms , movie theaters , shopping malls , bookstores , and restaurants in selected areas . by 2007 , nida funding for this particular initiative totaled about $124,000 . in addition to nida , other federal agencies and organizations have supported educational and outreach activities that focus on preventing anabolic steroid abuse among teenagers , as the following examples illustrate . ondcp has funded six informational briefings since 2001 to encourage journalists , entertainment writers , and producers to accurately cover anabolic steroids and drug abuse among teenage athletes .