navy . the department of the navy ( navy ) guidance states that the prospective mentor and protégé are required to schedule an informal introductory briefing with the navy's director of small business programs to discuss the proposed concept and objective of the mentor - protégé agreement . as part of the briefing , the mentor and protégé are required to discuss , among other things , the mentor's experience providing developmental assistance under other mentor - protégé agreements ; the proposed benefits to the mentor , protégé , and the navy under the proposed agreement ; and the rationale for why the proposed agreement should be sponsored . the navy is to then provide the mentor and protégé with feedback on whether to submit a proposed mentor - protégé agreement . the navy's guidance also states that the navy accepts mentor - protégé agreement proposals during three time frames each fiscal year ( december 1-31 , march 1-31 , and august 1-31 ) . as part of the proposal , mentors are required to submit a mentor - protégé agreement using the template found on osbp's website . the guidance further states that the navy is to consider the following factors in descending order of importance when evaluating proposed mentor - protégé agreements: ( 1 ) merit of the technology transfer to the protégé , ( 2 ) perceived benefit of the agreement to the navy , ( 3 ) perceived benefit of the agreement to the protégé , ( 4 ) percentage of hours associated with technology transfer , ( 5 ) subcontracting opportunities available to the protégé , ( 6 ) utilization of historically black colleges and universities and minority institutions , procurement technical assistance centers , and small business development centers , and ( 7 ) proposed cost . although dod components have flexibility in considering a range of factors when approving mentor - protégé agreements , the agreements themselves are required to include certain elements that are defined in dod's procedures , and these elements serve a variety of purposes . for example , an agreement must include the protégé's primary north american industry classification system ( naics ) code , which is used to determine the protégé's eligibility to participate in the program . in addition , the agreement must describe the developmental assistance planned for the protégé , how the assistance is to address the protégé's identified needs and enhance its ability to perform successfully under contracts or subcontracts within dod and other federal agencies , and factors to assess the protégé firm's developmental progress under the program , including specific milestones for providing assistance . the agreement must also specify a program participation term that does not exceed 3 years , which provides assurance that the mentor provides assistance to the protégé in a timely manner . further , the agreement also is required to be signed and dated by the mentor and protégé , which provides evidence of meeting the program requirement between the two parties . figure 3 presents a complete list of the elements that mentors and protégés are required to include in their agreements .