passenger traffic during that period . the trust fund is the primary source of funding for faa's capital programs and also provides funds for faa's operations account . the capital accounts include ( 1 ) the facilities and equipment ( f&e ) account , which funds technological improvements to the air traffic control system , including the modernization of the air traffic control system , called the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) ; ( 2 ) the research , engineering , and development ( re&d ) account , which funds research on issues related to aviation safety , mobility , and nextgen technologies ; and ( 3 ) the airport improvement program ( aip ) , which provides grants for airport planning and development . in addition , the trust fund has provided all or some portion of the funding for faa's operations account , which funds the operation of the air traffic control system and safety inspections , among other activities . finally , the trust fund is used to pay for the essential air service ( eas ) program . thank you , mr. chairman , that concludes my statement . i will be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee might have . for future questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this report were paul aussendorf , assistant director ; amy abramowitz ; jessica bryant - bertail ; lauren calhoun ; carol henn ; bess eisenstadt ; heather krause ; hannah laufe ; maureen luna - long ; and andrew von ah . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . in fiscal year 2010 , faa's expenditures totaled about $15.5 billion , with trust fund revenues covering about $10.2 billion , or 66 percent , of those expenditures . as figure 2 shows , while total faa expenditures grew about 60 percent from fiscal year 2000 through fiscal year 2010 , the trust fund's revenue contribution only increased 12 percent , while the contribution of general revenues from the u.s. treasury has increased to cover a larger share of faa's operations expenditures . we discuss this change in more detail in the next section of this statement . since the trust fund's creation in 1970 , revenues have in the aggregate generally exceeded spending commitments from faa's appropriations , resulting in a surplus . this surplus is referred to as the trust fund's uncommitted balance — the balance in the trust fund that remains after funds have been appropriated from the trust fund and contract authority has been authorized . as of the end of fiscal year 2010 , the trust fund's uncommitted balance was about $770 million ( see fig . as figure 3 shows , the trust fund's uncommitted balance has declined since reaching $7.35 billion in fiscal year 2001 . this decline is largely a result of how congress determines the amount of appropriations that should be made from the trust fund .