our sample is not generalizable to all activities . to examine challenges , if any , to implementing zika response activities and actions taken to address any challenges , we interviewed usaid officials , usaid implementing partners , and host government officials , and we analyzed progress reports from selected usaid - funded zika response activities . we analyzed the information collected in the interviews and document reviews to identify the themes , or key challenges and responses to those challenges . we assessed usaid's infectious disease response plan against relevant federal internal control standards . see appendix i for more information on our objectives , scope , and methodology . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . the zika response and preparedness appropriations act , 2016 , included a provision for us to review the status of u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and department of state ( state ) actions to respond to zika . in this report , we examine ( 1 ) the status of usaid and state funding for the u.s. zika response overseas , ( 2 ) activities supported by these funds , and ( 3 ) challenges , if any , to implementing zika response activities and actions taken to address any challenges . to examine the status of funding for u.s. zika response overseas , we reviewed usaid and state's reports to the senate and house committees on appropriations mandated by section 203 of the zika response and preparedness appropriations act , 2016 . we reviewed agency reporting submitted to congress and discussed the reports with agency officials . we also reviewed usaid and state's reports to the senate and house committees on appropriations mandated by the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 . we obtained additional funding and activity information from usaid covering a period beyond that included in the reports to congress . we reviewed the interagency agreement between usaid and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , outlining the cdc's zika response activities supported by $78 million in funds usaid obligated to cdc . we also obtained additional funding data from cdc and interviewed cdc officials to discuss the status of the agencies' obligations and disbursements for zika response activities . we analyzed usaid's and state's obligations and disbursements that the agencies reported as supporting the u.s. zika response overseas , as of september 30 , 2018 . we analyzed agency obligations and disbursements across agency bureaus , funding accounts , and activities for the zika response . additionally , we interviewed officials from usaid and state to discuss the agencies' obligations and disbursements for zika response activities . we then reviewed the funding data and related documentation and consulted with usaid and state officials on the accuracy and completeness of the data . in the small number of instances where we identified potential issues or inconsistencies in the data , we contacted relevant agency officials and obtained information from them necessary to resolve the discrepancies . we assessed usaid's tracking of funding data against federal internal control standards related to using quality information .