gao - 15-394 . we reviewed two sources of updated information from june 2015 that interior provided us: a federal register notice stating blm's proposal for the fiscal year 2016 helium auction and sale , and a letter from interior to us containing the department's response to the recommendations in our april 2015 report . the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . as detailed in our april 2015 report , in the summer of 2014 , refiners purchased all the helium offered in blm's first - ever competitive helium auction at higher than expected prices . two refiners purchased all 93 million cubic feet of helium that was auctioned at an average price of $161 per thousand cubic feet — significantly above the prices offered by most other bidders . blm set the minimum starting bid for each lot at $100 per thousand cubic feet . at one point during bidding , the auction price rose as high as $180 per thousand cubic feet . we observed that participants who did not win at the auction stopped bidding when prices most of reached from $105 to $130 per thousand cubic feet ( see fig . 1 ) .the representatives of refiners and nonrefiners we interviewed stated that the auction prices were too high for crude helium , especially during a time of global excess of helium supplies . blm and some representatives of nonrefiners and a refiner , however , said the auction was a success for the federal government since it generated about $15 million in revenue , an amount that a senior helium program official said exceeded the agency's expectations . in interviewing blm officials and representatives of refiners and nonrefiners and reviewing blm's planned implementation actions , we identified multiple , possible explanations for why refiners won all the auctioned helium for higher than expected prices . these explanations included: refiners may have been more willing to pay higher prices at the auction since their costs for refining crude helium are lower than those of nonrefiners . according to representatives of nonrefiners , the costs of purchasing auctioned helium and turning it into refined helium are lower for refiners than nonrefiners because refiners do not have to pay another company to refine their helium , a situation that gives refiners an advantage at the auction . nonrefiners may not have bid higher at the auction because they did not know the costs and delivery terms for tolling . representatives of nonrefiners we interviewed said that few tolling agreements were in place prior to the auction . those agreements would have specified the rates for tolling any helium they purchased and provided details on when , where , and how purchased helium would be delivered .