the remaining 41 properties are at locations we did not visit . the marine corps uses the same real property database as the navy and it does not identify properties that are eligible for listing on the register . our analysis of available cultural resource records at marine corps headquarters indicates there are 590 properties eligible for listing , including 239 at the marine corps combat development center , quantico , virginia , and 210 at marine corps base camp lejeune , north carolina . the air force's cultural resource records indicate that there are 1,831 properties listed on the national register . however , our analysis of the cultural resource data indicates that there are 1,691 properties on the national register . the difference occurs because the air force included ( 1 ) properties owned by the army , ( 2 ) nonhistoric properties at some installations , and ( 3 ) properties that had been demolished . the air force cultural resource records also identify 2,346 eligible properties ; however , the cultural resource office could not identify where 1,183 of these properties were located . an air force cultural resource official stated that the number of eligible properties was developed from a 1999 inquiry — telephone and e - mail responses — but no supporting documentation was retained . officials at most of the installations we visited noted that deciding which maintenance and repair projects to fund is based on mission and worse case conditions , and not on whether a property is historic or nonhistoric . also , officials at each of the services noted growing backlogs of maintenance and repair projects that limit the amount of preventive maintenance that is done on historic as well as nonhistoric properties . they stated that trade - offs are often required to address the most critical needs . while available information indicates that day - to - day maintenance and repair on historic properties is similar to such work on nonhistoric properties , prior dod and service property reports have shown that the size of historic properties , especially historic military family houses , can result in costs being larger when compared to nonhistoric properties . for example , a 1997 army family housing report to congress stated that the average historic house is 3,376 gross square feet while the average size of a nonhistoric house is 1,490 gross square feet . on a square foot basis , the report concludes routine maintenance and repair may be comparable between historic and nonhistoric properties , about $2.60 per square foot . however , the study stated that “the larger the dwelling unit ( more roof area , square feet of walls , and floors ) the more maintenance and utilities funding required.” the 1997 navy report to congress and a february 2001 dod report provide similar data and conclusions . at the same time , according to prior dod and service historic reports and service officials we interviewed , the unique features of some historic buildings result in higher maintenance and repair costs . some historic houses have slate or tile roofs , copper downspouts and gutters , or large wooden porches whereas most nonhistoric homes do not have these features .