pdcf . our analysis suggests that pdcf provided secured overnight funding on more favorable terms for some types of collateral ( such as corporate debt ) than market alternatives that some primary dealers might have relied upon in the absence of pdcf . because pdcf operated in a similar manner to repurchase agreement markets , we compared pdcf terms to available data for triparty and bilateral repurchase agreement transactions . one important term for repurchase agreement loans is the haircut , which is the amount of additional collateral the lender requires over the value of the loan . repurchase agreement lenders generally require higher haircuts on riskier and less liquid collateral types . pdcf offered loans at the same interest rate ( the discount rate charged on discount window loans ) for all collateral types and applied a haircut schedule that assigned progressively higher haircuts to riskier assets . in return for its investments , treasury received dividend or interest payments and warrants . on october 14 , 2008 , treasury allocated $250 billion of the original $700 billion in overall tarp funds for cpp . the allocation was subsequently reduced in march 2009 to reflect lower estimated funding needs , as evidenced by actual participation rates . the program was closed to new investments on december 31 , 2009 . smaller capital infusion programs included the targeted investment program ( tip ) and the community development capital initiative ( cdci ) . temporary liquidity guarantee program . in october 2008 , fdic created tlgp to complement the federal reserve and treasury programs in restoring confidence in financial institutions and repairing their capacity to meet the credit needs of american households and businesses . tlgp's debt guarantee program ( dgp ) was designed to improve liquidity in term - funding markets by guaranteeing certain newly issued senior unsecured debt of financial institutions and their holding companies . by guaranteeing payment of these debt obligations , dgp was intended to address the difficulty that creditworthy institutions were facing in replacing maturing debt because of risk aversion in the markets . tlgp's transaction account guarantee program ( tagp ) also was created to stabilize an important source of liquidity for many financial institutions . tagp temporarily extended an unlimited deposit guarantee to certain noninterest - bearing transaction accounts to assure holders of the safety of these deposits and limit further outflows . by facilitating access to borrowed funds at lower rates , treasury , fdic , and the federal reserve expected tlgp to free up funding for banks to make loans to creditworthy businesses and consumers . furthermore , by promoting stable funding sources for financial institutions , they intended tlgp to help avert bank and thrift failures that would impose costs on the insurance fund and taxpayers and potentially contribute to a worsening of the crisis . although imperfect , one indicator of the extent to which an institution benefited from participation in an emergency program is the relative price of estimated market alternatives to the program .