ssa . according to statistics provided by ssa , the agency accomplished its match on name , social security number , and date of birth in a large majority of cases for ppaca's first enrollment cycle , for 2014 coverage , as shown in table 1 . however , for about 4.4 million inquiries — or about 5 percent of the total — the applicant information did not match ssa records . in addition , after completion of the name , social security number , and date of birth match , when ssa attempted to verify additional information , the agency could not confirm citizenship in about 8.2 million inquiries where individuals claimed they were citizens . we also obtained updated figures for the second enrollment cycle — for 2015 coverage . ssa's total matching percentage was slightly higher ( 96.1 percent vs. 94.9 percent ) , and the number of unsuccessful citizenship queries was lower ( 3.6 million vs. 8.2 million ) , according to available data from ssa . irs . according to irs , household income and family size information was not available for inquiries representing about 30.7 million people , including the following: inquiries representing about 25 million people for whom tax - return information was unavailable , primarily because , according to irs , no tax returns were found in agency records or there was a mismatch between taxpayer identification number and name . inquiries representing about 3.2 million people where spouse information reported on an application does not match spouse information on file . a spouse mismatch may occur when one partner remarries , or ceases to be a spouse , irs officials told us . inquiries representing about 1.3 million people involved in identity theft — victims themselves , or those associated with people who are victims . for 2015 coverage , the total figure for which irs was unable to provide income and household size verification information was similar , at 29.2 million people versus 30.7 million people , according to irs data . dhs . among the major federal agencies involved in the data hub process , dhs handled the smallest number of inquiries during the first enrollment cycle — approximately 3.5 million , regarding applicant immigration status . of these , dhs provided applicant status information through its automated inquiry process in about 3 million inquiries . it could not initially provide information through the data hub process for approximately 510,000 inquiries , or about 15 percent , of the total . for 2015 coverage , the figure for unresolved queries was about the same: status information provided in about 3.5 million inquiries , but with about 634,000 , or about 15 percent , initially unresolved , according to dhs data . according to dhs , the reasons for failure to obtain an automated resolution are: a mismatch between reported name and date of birth ; inability to find the identifying number of immigration documentation supplied by the applicant ; expired documentation ; and missing information on the legal category used to admit an immigrant . as noted earlier , cms does not analyze outcomes of the data hub query process . a variety of standards , however , call for agencies to routinely examine performance and progress toward key goals .