results of performance testing and field validation . the results of performance tests that dndo presented to us were mixed , particularly in the asps' capability to detect certain shielded nuclear materials during primary screening . the results of performance testing at the nevada test site showed that the new portal monitors detected certain nuclear materials better than pvts when shielding approximated doe threat guidance , which is based on light shielding . in contrast , differences in system performance were less notable when shielding was slightly increased or decreased: both the pvts and asps were frequently able to detect certain nuclear materials when shielding was below threat guidance , and both systems had difficulty detecting such materials when shielding was somewhat greater than threat guidance . with regard to secondary screening , asps performed better than handheld devices in identification of threats when masked by naturally occurring radioactive material . however , the differences in the ability to identify certain shielded nuclear materials depended on the level of shielding , with increasing levels appearing to reduce any asp advantages over the handheld identification devices . other phases of testing uncovered multiple problems in meeting requirements for successfully integrating the new technology into operations at ports of entry . of the two asp contractors participating in the current round of testing , one has fallen behind due to severe problems encountered during testing of asps' readiness to be integrated into operations at ports of entry ( “integration testing” ) ; the problems may require that the vendor redo previous test phases to be considered for certification . the other vendor's system completed integration testing , but cbp suspended field validation testing in january 2009 after 2 weeks because of serious performance problems resulting in an overall increase in the number of referrals for secondary screening compared with existing equipment . dndo's plans for computer simulations . first , the asp monitors had an unacceptably high number of false positive alarms for the detection of certain high - risk nuclear materials . according to cbp officials , these false alarms are very disruptive in a port environment in that any alarm for this type of nuclear material would cause cbp to take enhanced security precautions because such materials ( 1 ) could be used in producing an improvised nuclear device and ( 2 ) are rarely part of legitimate or routine cargo . furthermore , once receiving an alarm for this type of nuclear material , cbp officers are required to conduct a thorough secondary inspection to assure themselves that no nuclear materials are present before permitting the cargo to enter the country . repeated false alarms for nuclear materials are also causes for concern because such alarms could eventually have the effect of causing cbp officers to doubt the reliability of the asp and be skeptical about the credibility of future alarms . secondly , during the july testing the asp experienced a “critical failure,” which stemmed from a problem with a key component of the asp and caused the asp to shut down . importantly , during this critical failure , the asp did not alert the cbp officer that it had shut down and was no longer scanning cargo .