washington , dc . gao - 07-310 . washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2007 . veterans' disability benefits: va can improve its procedures for obtaining military service records . gao - 07-98 . this can significantly increase the time it takes to decide a claim . in december 2006 , we recommended that vba assess whether it could systematically utilize an electronic library of historical military records rather than submitting all research requests to the jsrrc . vba agreed to determine the feasibility of regional offices using an alternative resource prior to sending some requests to the jsrrc . we also reported that while vba quality reviewers found few decision errors due to failure to obtain military service records , vba does not know the extent to which the information that is provided to regional offices is reliable and accurate . regional offices rely on a vba unit at the national personnel records center , where service records of many veterans are stored , to do thorough and reliable searches and analyses of records and provide accurate reports on the results . however , we noted that vba does not systematically evaluate the quality of these searches and analyses . incomplete and inaccurate reports could affect decisional accuracy . yet va's and ssa's disability programs remain mired in concepts from the past — particularly the concept that impairment equates to an inability to work — and as such , we found that these programs are poorly positioned to provide meaningful and timely support for americans with disabilities . in august 2002 , we recommended that va use its annual performance plan to delineate strategies for and progress in periodically updating labor market data used in its disability determination process . we also recommended that va study and report to the congress on the effects that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on its disability programs' eligibility criteria and benefits package . this study would include estimates of the effects on the size , cost , and management of va's disability programs and other relevant va programs and would identify any legislative actions needed to initiate and fund such changes . another area of program design that could be examined is the option of providing a lump sum payment in lieu of monthly disability compensation . in 1996 , the veterans' claims adjudication commission noted that most disability compensation claims are repeat claims — such as claims for increased disability percentage — and most repeat claims were from veterans with less severe disabilities . according to va , about 65 percent of veterans who began receiving disability compensation in fiscal year 2003 had disabilities rated 30 percent or less . the commission questioned whether concentrating claims processing resources on these claims , rather than on claims by more severely disabled veterans , was consistent with program intent . the commission asked congress to consider paying less severely disabled veterans compensation in a lump sum . according to the commission , the lump sum option could have a number of benefits for va as well as veterans . specifically , the lump sum option could reduce the number of claims submitted and allow va to process claims more quickly — especially those of more seriously disabled veterans .