saving resources . using financial rewards may save agency resources by enabling agents to get information sooner and at a lower cost than they could have through their own efforts . potential disadvantages of using financial rewards include the following: eliciting false or unproductive leads . financial rewards may generate false or unproductive leads . affecting witness credibility . financial rewards may lead to a source's credibility being challenged at trial by defense attorneys since sources receive compensation for the information they provide . consuming resources . the potential for a financial reward may create a flood of tips that take agency time and resources to follow up on or corroborate . outside of wildlife trafficking , multiple federal agencies and federal courts are authorized to pay financial rewards for information on illegal activities under certain circumstances . for example , u.s. customs and border protection — which controls , regulates , and facilitates the import and export of goods through u.s. ports of entry — is authorized , under certain circumstances , to pay rewards for original information about violations of any laws that it enforces . the department of state may also pay rewards under certain circumstances , including for information leading to the disruption of financial mechanisms of a transnational criminal group . similarly , the u.s. securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and internal revenue service ( irs ) may pay rewards for information about violations of federal securities laws and the underpayment of taxes , respectively , if certain conditions are met . federal judges may award money to persons who give information leading to convictions for violating treaties , laws , and regulations that prohibit certain pollution from ships , including oil and garbage discharges . fws and noaa officials identified multiple laws , such as the endangered species act and the lacey act , that authorize the payment of financial rewards to people who provide information on wildlife trafficking . fws and noaa reported paying few financial rewards under these laws from fiscal years 2007 through 2017 . however , agency officials could not provide sufficient assurance that the reward information they provided to us represented all of their reward payments for this period . fws and noaa officials identified over 10 laws prohibiting wildlife trafficking — including the endangered species act , lacey act , and bald and golden eagle protection act — that specifically authorize the payment of financial rewards in certain circumstances to people who provide information on violations of the law ( see app . ii for a complete list of the laws ) . these laws provide discretion to the agencies to choose whether to pay rewards but have varying requirements for who is eligible to receive a reward and the payment amounts . for example , the bald and golden eagle protection act caps rewards at $2,500 for information that leads to a conviction . in contrast , the endangered species act does not cap reward amounts and authorizes rewards for information that leads to a conviction as well as to an arrest , civil penalty , or forfeiture of property .