table 3 summarizes these challenges . health information exchange organizations bring together multiple and diverse health care providers , including physicians , pharmacies , hospitals , and clinics that may be subject to varying legal and policy requirements for protecting health information . however , an overall approach for integrating the department's various privacy - related initiatives has not been fully defined and implemented . we acknowledge in our report that hhs has established a strategic objective to protect consumer privacy along with two specific strategies for meeting this objective: ( 1 ) support the development and implementation of appropriate privacy and security policies , practices , and standards for electronic health information exchange , and ( 2 ) develop and support policies to protect against discrimination from health information . our report also acknowledges the key efforts that hhs has initiated to address this objective , and hhs's comments describe these and additional state and federal efforts . hhs stated that the department has made significant progress in integrating these efforts . while progress has been made initiating these efforts , much work remains before they are completed and the outcomes of the various efforts are integrated . thus , we recommended that hhs define and implement a comprehensive privacy approach that includes milestones for integration , identifies the entity responsible for integrating the outcomes of its privacy - related initiatives , addresses key privacy principles , and ensures that challenges are addressed in order to meet the department's objective to protect the privacy of health information exchanged within a nationwide health information network . hhs specifically disagreed with the need to identify milestones and stated that tightly scripted milestones would impede hhs's processes and preclude stakeholder dialogue on the direction of important policy matters . we disagree and believe that milestones are important for setting targets for implementation and informing stakeholders of hhs's plans and goals for protecting personal health information as part of its efforts to achieve nationwide implementation of health it . milestones are especially important considering the need for hhs to integrate and coordinate the many deliverables of its numerous ongoing and remaining activities . we agree that it is important for hhs to continue to actively involve both public and private sector health care stakeholders in its processes . hhs did not comment on the need to identify an entity responsible for the integration of the department's privacy - related initiatives , nor did it provide information regarding any effort to assign responsibility for this important activity . hhs neither agreed nor disagreed that its approach should address privacy principles and challenges , but stated that the department plans to continue to work toward addressing privacy principles in hipaa and that our report appropriately highlights efforts to address challenges encountered during electronic health information exchange . hhs stated that the department is committed to ensuring that health information is protected as part of its efforts to achieve nationwide health information exchange . hhs also disagreed with our conclusion that without a clearly defined privacy approach , it is likely that hhs's objective to protect personal health information will not be met .