further , the roles and responsibilities for each department have not been clearly articulated . the record will be updated as the service member receives medical care . when the individual separates from active duty and , if eligible , seeks medical care at a va facility , va will then create a medical record for the individual , which will be stored in its health data repository . upon viewing the medical record , the va clinician would be alerted and provided access to the individual's clinical information residing in dod's repository . in the same manner , when a veteran seeks medical care at a military treatment facility , the attending dod clinician would be alerted and provided with access to the health information in va's repository . according to the departments , this planned approach would make virtual medical records displaying all available patient health information from the two repositories accessible to both departments' clinicians . va officials have stated that they anticipate being able to exchange some degree of health information through an interface of their health data repository with dod's clinical data repository by the end of calendar year 2005 . while va and dod are making progress in agreeing to and adopting standards for clinical data , they continue to face significant challenges in providing a virtual medical record based on the two - way exchange of data as part of their healthepeople ( federal ) initiative . specifically , va and dod do not have an explicit architecture that provides details on what specific technologies they will use to achieve the exchange capability ; a fully established project management structure that will ensure the necessary day - to - day guidance of and accountability for the departments' investment in and implementation of the exchange ; and a project management plan describing the specific responsibilities of each department in developing , testing , and deploying the interface and addressing security requirements . va's and dod's ability to exchange data between their separate health information systems is crucial to achieving the goals of healthepeople ( federal ) . yet , successfully sharing health data between the departments via a secure electronic interface between each of their data repositories can be complex and challenging , and depends significantly on the departments' having a clearly articulated architecture , or blueprint , defining how specific technologies will be used to achieve the interface . developing , maintaining , and using an architecture is a best practice in engineering information systems and other technological solutions . an architecture would articulate , for example , the system requirements and design specifications , database descriptions , and software descriptions that define the manner in which the departments will electronically store , update , and transmit their data . va and dod lack an explicit architecture that provides details on what specific technologies they will use to achieve the exchange capability , or just what they will be able to exchange by the end of 2005 — their projected date for having this capability operational .