gao - 08-114t . washington , d.c.: october 3 , 2007 . nuclear energy: nrc's workforce and processes for new reactor licensing are generally in place , but uncertainties remain as industry begins to submit applications . nrc's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the commissioners of the nuclear regulatory commission , the nuclear regulatory commission's office of the inspector general , and interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others on request . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . to examine the number , causes , and reported safety significance of fire incidents at nuclear reactor units since 1995 , we analyzed nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) data on fires occurring at operating commercial nuclear reactor units from january , 1995 , to december , 2007 . nrc requires units to report fire events meeting certain criteria , including fires lasting longer than 15 minutes or those threatening safety . to assess the reliability of the data , we ( 1 ) interviewed nrc officials about the steps they take to ensure the accuracy of the data ; ( 2 ) confirmed details about selected fire events , nrc inspection findings , and local emergency responders with unit management officials and nrc resident inspectors during site visits to nuclear power units ; ( 3 ) reviewed nrc inspection reports related to fire protection ; and ( 4 ) checked the data for obvious errors . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to examine what is known about nuclear reactor units' compliance with nrc's deterministic fire protection regulations , we reviewed the relevant fire protection regulations and guidance from nrc and industry . we also met with and reviewed documents provided by officials from nrc , industry , academia , and public interest groups . in particular , we interviewed officials from nrc's fire protection branch , office of enforcement , four regional offices , office of the inspector general , and advisory committee on reactor safeguards . in addition , we interviewed officials from the nuclear energy institute , national fire protection association , nuclear industry consultants , and nuclear insurance companies . we conducted site visits to nuclear power units , where we met with unit management officials and nrc resident inspectors . during these site visits , we discussed and received documentation on the use of operator manual actions , interim compensatory measures , and fire wraps , and we obtained views on multiple spurious actuations and their impact on safe shutdown . we also reviewed and discussed each unit's corrective action plan . finally , we observed multiple nrc public meetings and various collaborations with industry concerning issues related to compliance with nrc's deterministic fire protection regulations .