other reforms . the act includes other reforms that could help reduce the likelihood or impacts of a sifi's failure . authorities related to sifi size and complexity . the dodd - frank act grants regulators new authorities to take certain actions if they determine that a sifi poses risks of serious adverse effects on the stability of the financial system . these include the authority for the federal reserve board to require a sifi to meet even stricter regulatory standards , the authority for the federal reserve board to limit ( with the approval of fsoc ) the ability of a sifi to merge with another company if it determines that the merger would pose a grave threat to u.s. financial stability , and , as noted above , the joint authority for the federal reserve board and fdic to require a firm to take steps to become more resolvable in bankruptcy . volcker rule . jacewitz , stefan and jonathan pogach . “deposit rate advantages at the largest banks.” social science research network working paper . “the value of implicit guarantees.” social science research network working paper . september 2012 . ueda , kenichi , and b. weder di mauro . march 2014 . tsesmelidakis , zoe and robert c. merton . september 2012 . “quantifying structural subsidy values for systemically important financial institutions,” journal of banking & finance , vol . october 2013: 3830 – 3842 . balasubramnian , bhanu and ken cyree . “has market discipline on banks improved after the dodd - frank act ? ” journal of banking & finance , vol . balasubramnian , bhanu and ken cyree . “the end of too - big - to - fail ? evidence from senior bank bond yield spreads around the dodd - frank act.” social science research network working paper . june 2012 . barth , andreas and isabel schnabel . “why banks are not too big to fail — evidence from the cds market.” economic policy , vol . april 2013: 335-369 . bertay , ata can , asli demirgüç - kunt , and harry huizinga . “do we need big banks ? evidence on performance , strategy and market discipline.” journal of financial intermediation , vol . 22 ( 2013 ) : 532-558. international monetary fund . “how big is the implicit subsidy for banks considered too important to fail ? ” global financial stability report , ch . 3 ( washington , d.c.: 2014 ) . keppo , jussi and jing yang . the value of too - big - to - fail subsidy . unpublished working paper . september 2013 . kumar , aditi and john lester . do deposit rates show evidence of too big to fail effects ? an updated look at the empirical evidence through 2012 among us banks ( oliver wyman , inc. , 2014 ) . kumar , aditi and john lester . do bond spreads show evidence of too big to fail effects ? evidence from 2009-2013 among us bank holding companies ( oliver wyman , inc. , 2014 ) . li , zan , shisheng qu and jing zhang . quantifying the value of implicit government guarantees for large financial institutions ( moody's analytics , 2011 ) . santos , joão .