ii. ) for example , while nnsa has identified the mission critical facilities and infrastructure at each of its sites , nnsa does not require m&o contractors to pay for them with rtbf operations of facilities funds . in fiscal year 2009 , pantex fully funded the rtbf operations of facilities work scope at all of its mission critical facilities with rtbf operations of facilities funds . in contrast , lanl partially funded the rtbf operations of facilities work scope at the majority , but not all , of its mission critical facilities with rtbf operations of facilities funds . six of the eight sites in the nuclear security enterprise reported to us that in fiscal year 2009 they allocated the costs of certain activities included in the rtbf operations of facilities work scope into indirect cost pools , including the costs of activities such as utilities purchasing and real property maintenance . these indirect cost pools are often funded through multiple funding sources . all sites used funding in addition to rtbf operations of facilities funds to pay for activities included in the rtbf operations of facilities work scope in fiscal year 2009 . in response to our data collection instrument , site officials identified 11 sources of funding congressionally directed for other weapons activities programs and subprograms that they expended , in part , on activities they considered to be included in nnsa's rtbf operations of facilities work breakdown structure . in addition , some sites have developed user fee or cost recovery models for multiprogram facilities . these models are generally based on charges to programmatic users based on rates applied to , for example , the square footage of a facility users occupy or the volume of waste they produce . user fees or cost recovery may be charged as direct costs to weapons activities programs as well as to other programs and projects , or they may be charged through an indirect cost pool . as a result of these differences , nnsa cannot reliably identify the total costs to operate and maintain these facilities and infrastructure across the nuclear security enterprise . rather , nnsa officials can only accurately identify the direct costs to the rtbf operations of facilities program , and in some instances , the direct costs to other weapons activities programs . senior nnsa officials in the rtbf program office acknowledged that nnsa does not know the sites' baseline costs to fully execute rtbf operations of facilities work scope , and nnsa does not require m&o contractors to track their sites' total operations and maintenance costs for weapons activities facilities and infrastructure . instead , nnsa officials told us they rely on individual contractors to know this information for their sites as a basis for formulating budget requests ; however , some contractors did not identify a total cost for their sites' weapons activities facilities and infrastructure . for example , when we asked , m&o contractors from two sites — y - 12 and lanl — did not provide the total cost to operate and maintain weapons activities facilities and infrastructure at their sites .