we are continuing to study the system's planned modernization . according to u.s. transportation command officials , the en - route system will continue to be evaluated in the context of the new defense strategy . they stated that they anticipate airlift requirements will be at least as demanding , and possibly more demanding in the new strategy . the services have both land - based and sea - based equipment and munitions prepositioned in europe . land - based prepositioned items consist of equipment and supply sets for three army brigades , one army artillery battalion , and one marine expeditionary unit , in addition to six air force air base support sets and other air force equipment . the army's three brigade sets , two in central europe and one in italy , include 348 abrams tanks and 240 bradley fighting vehicles . in norway , the army has equipment for an artillery battalion , which includes 18 self - propelled howitzers , and the marine corps stores equipment and 30-day supplies for a marine expeditionary brigade . air force air base support sets — temporary shelters for early - arriving air base personnel — are stored at a site in luxembourg , with the other equipment stored in sites around europe . there are also ships afloat in the mediterranean sea , which carry equipment and munitions for the marine corps and the air force ( see fig . we obtained briefings , reviewed documents , and interviewed officials at the office of the secretary of defense , the joint chiefs of staff , the military services , the central command , the european command , the u.s. transportation command , the special operations command , the joint forces command , and the air mobility command . we also obtained information and held discussions with officials at u.s. army , europe , and u.s. air forces , europe , headquarters . we conducted our review from may 2001 through august 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the honorable donald h. rumsfeld , secretary of defense , and the honorable mitchell e. daniels , jr. , director , office of management and budget . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 757 ) 552-8100 if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to those named above , lawrence e. dixon , patricia lentini , alan goldberg , and stefano petrucci made key contributions to this report . central command officials stated that combat and transport aircraft are important to have in europe and are critical to ensuring the command's ability to execute its operational plan for a major theater war in southwest asia . as stated above , the mobility requirements study 2005 modeled the forward - deployed forces in europe as they were planned for fiscal year 2005 .