usda agreed to act on most of our recommendations . however , it disagreed with our recommendation to ensure that fsa field offices conduct all inspections called for under agency guidance , stating that fsa did not have sufficient resources to complete all of these inspections . usda also disagreed with our recommendation to reduce the insurance guarantee or eliminate optional unit coverage for farmers who consistently have filed claims that are irregular in comparison with other farmers growing the same crop in the same location . we continue to believe that it is reasonable for usda to use all tools at its disposal and that our recommendations will reduce the federal crop insurance program's vulnerability to fraud , waste , and abuse . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . rma should be able to recover a portion of these payments . according to rma regulations , if the policyholder fails to disclose an ownership interest in the farming operation , the policyholder must repay the amount of the claims payment that is proportionate to the interest of the person who was not disclosed . the average ownership interest of the persons not disclosed for the 21,310 entities was 33 percent ; as a result , rma should be able to recover up to $74 million in claims payments . our analysis of rma's and fsa's databases for 2004 showed similar results . of the 21,310 entities failing to disclose ownership interest in 2003 , we found 210 entities with suspicious insurance claims totaling $11.1 million . in addition , we identified 24 crop insurance agents who sold policies to farming entities in which the agents held a substantial beneficial interest but failed to report their ownership interest to rma as required . these farming entities received $978,912 in claims payments in 2003 and 2004 . rma is not effectively overseeing insurance companies' quality assurance programs . rma guidance requires insurance companies to provide oversight to properly underwrite the federal crop insurance program , including implementing a quality control program , conducting quality control reviews , and submitting an annual report to fcic . under the federal crop insurance act , as amended , rma must offer prevented planting coverage . rma allows claims for prevented planting if farmers cannot plant due to an insured cause of loss that is general in the surrounding area and that prevents other farmers from planting acreage with similar characteristics . claims for prevented planting are paid at a reduced level , recognizing that farmers do not incur all production costs associated with planting and harvesting a crop . however , determining whether farmers can plant their crop may be difficult . annually , rma pays about $300 million in claims for prevented planting . twenty - five of the fsa county officials that provided us written comments on this issue reported that they believe some farmers in their county who claimed prevented planting losses never intended to plant or did not make a good faith attempt to plant their crop . additionally , in some cases , it appears that the insurance company's claims adjusters may not exercise due diligence in evaluating prevented planting claims .