this process is called papering . during calendar year 1999 , papering required the equivalent of 23 full - time officers devoted solely to these appearances , ultimately reducing the number of officers available for patrol duty by an equal amount . efforts in 1998 and 1999 to revise the papering process failed in part because the costs and benefits of the changes under consideration were perceived by one or more participating agencies to be unevenly distributed . we focused our review on offenses prosecuted by the usao because during 1999 they accounted for over 85 percent of mpdc officer hours expended on papering . usao's requirement that mpdc officers personally meet with prosecutors in order to make a charging decision appears to be unusual , particularly for misdemeanors . a 1997 booz - allen and hamilton survey found that in 30 of 38 responding jurisdictions ( 51 were surveyed ) , police officers were not required to meet with prosecutors until court ( i.e. , trial ) , and in 3 cities officers were not required to appear in person until the preliminary hearing . in addition , we reviewed the charging processes in philadelphia and boston . neither of these cities required face - to - face meetings with prosecutors for processing most cases . according to usao officials , the current papering process is critical for usao to make an initial charging decision correctly . both usao and mpdc officials said that the paperwork submitted to usao for charging decisions has been of uneven quality . in the past decade , several attempts have been made to change the initial stages of case processing in d.c . these efforts — which were made by mpdc , corporation counsel , and usao , in conjunction with consulting firms — involved projects in the areas of night papering , night court , and officerless papering . however , the involved agencies never reached agreement on all components of the projects , and each of the projects was ultimately suspended . the chief of mpdc has publicly advocated the establishment of some type of arrangement for making charging decisions during the evening and / or night police shifts . night papering and night court currently , both usao and corporation counsel are only open to paper cases during typical workday hours , that is , generally from about 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. , monday through saturday . night papering could permit officers on evening and night shifts to generally present their paperwork to prosecutors during their shifts . night court refers to conducting certain court proceedings , such as initial court appearance , during a late evening or night shift . night papering would require usao and corporation counsel charging attorneys to work evening hours , and night court would involve a much broader commitment of d.c. superior court resources as well as the participation of other agencies . officerless papering would not require an officer to appear in person before the prosecutor , and provisions could be made for the prosecutor to contact the officer to clarify issues , as needed . in march 2001 , mpdc and corporation counsel began an officerless papering pilot program for 17 minor offenses prosecuted by corporation counsel .