the extent of this reduction is unclear . additionally , any reduction in demand for u.s. exports due to the proposed requirements and resulting changes to the lng market may decrease jobs in other u.s. industries such as the liquefaction and the oil and gas industries . as we have noted , transportation costs for lng are a fairly significant portion of the overall cost of the product in import markets . based on information shared with us by representatives from u.s. liquefaction companies regarding current expected costs of the key phases for the lng export supply chain — gas supply , liquefaction , and transportation — shipping costs are expected to make up about 26-percent of total costs for u.s. lng delivered to an asian market . representatives from liquefaction companies , shipping companies , and an economic consulting company we spoke with currently expect u.s. lng exports from the united states over the coming years to be transported on carriers built in foreign countries — primarily korea and japan . if these exports were required to be transported on u.s. - built and u.s. - flagged carriers , the costs associated with transport would be higher , as described below . the requirement to ship u.s. lng on u.s. - built - and - flagged carriers would affect both the cost of carrier construction , as noted above , as well as carrier operation . our conversations with the 3 shipbuilders and 2 shipping companies have suggested that the purchase price of a u.s. - built lng carrier is likely to be at least double — and could be significantly more — the cost of an lng carrier constructed in south korea . in addition , operating costs for u.s. - flagged carriers would be higher than for internationally flagged carriers . according to a 2011 marad study , u.s. crews are generally more highly paid than international crews and certain other operating costs associated with u.s. flagging requirements , such as insurance costs , are also higher . the study found that operations costs of u.s. - flagged vessels of various types were , on average , about 2.7 times that of foreign - flagged carriers . however , based on our discussions with one mariner union , the differential for the costs of crewing u.s - flagged lng carriers compared to international carriers may be less than the cost differential for the types of vessels marad surveyed . this is because , according to three mariner unions we spoke with , lng carriers require more highly skilled mariners , so crew costs for international lng carriers are generally higher than crew costs on other types of ocean - going vessels . the higher costs of building and operating u.s. lng carriers may make it more challenging for shippers to obtain financing for construction of u.s. - built carriers than for carriers built in other countries . a critical question regarding any large capital project is whether potential investors believe that the asset will be profitable enough to warrant the investment , particularly if financial returns carry substantial risk .