we agree . this is why decisions to not obtain services through icass may not always be in the best interests of the government . the following are gao's comments on the department of justice's letter dated june 30 , 2004 . the agency also provided technical comments that were incorporated into the text , as appropriate . we agree that there may be legitimate reasons for agencies to opt out of icass services , and we reflect this throughout the report . we also stated that agencies cited affordability of services as a reason for not subscribing . our report focuses on the delivery and costs of support services , and we do not examine in detail the annual icass budget process . nonetheless , several agencies reported that this process is problematic because it requires that agencies predict costs and request funding well before they know what their actual costs are likely to be , and agencies have little flexibility in paying for cost increases resulting from unforeseen events that occur subsequent to their funding requests . although we do not address this issue on our report , we believe it is something the icass executive board could consider when implementing our recommendations . we agree that agencies should be notified in advance of changes in policy and staffing that would affect their contributions . however , implementation of the proposed capital security cost - sharing program would be separate from icass , and therefore we made no assessment of its merits or governance structures . we included discussion of the program only to show its potential impact on icass . promote local empowerment . we did not intend to suggest that duplication was the primary contributor to inefficient operations . this is why our recommendations address the elimination of unnecessary duplication and the reengineering of administrative processes . we believe that these actions together can improve the efficiency of icass services and help contain costs . we have made several modifications to the report to emphasize that improved business practices and reduction in duplication are equally important . we presented the dakar vehicle maintenance example to illustrate how decisions by one agency can affect all agencies at post . we faulted usaid neither for the reason nor for the action of opting out of the service . we did note , however , that usaid did not share detailed information ( i.e. , its business plan ) on the new means by which they would receive the service . we also noted that neither the council nor the service provider requested that usaid share this information . as a result , the dakar icass council missed an opportunity to review whether the post could adopt the usaid approach to the betterment of all agencies . we recommended that business cases be made not only to help agencies determine whether an alternative arrangement is better for themselves , but also to help local icass councils determine whether more cost - effective service arrangements could be applied postwide . we agree that agencies have different administrative support service requirements . this is why we generally support the voluntary participation principle of icass .