in addition , drs . donchin , iacono , and rosenfeld separately provided technical comments and clarifications , which we have included where appropriate . for example , he raised concerns regarding whether the developer omitted inconclusive results from the totals , which would affect the overall accuracy rate . further , dr. rosenfeld believes the accuracy rate would be lower in the field , where variables cannot be so well controlled . moreover , he believes that the developer's criterion for guilt is that 90 percent of the bootstrapping iterations of his analysis be positive . dr. rosenfeld stated that , in experimental psychology journals , the 95-percent criterion is generally used and that too lenient a criterion will ordinarily make more guilty decisions but will also produce more false positives ( i.e. , innocents judged guilty ) . furthermore , dr. rosenfeld believes that the p300 is a good index of recognition , but an indirect index of deception . the office also submitted the bureau's written comments , which we have included in appendix iii . specifically , fbi indicated that the report fairly reflected the fbi's position that the technique has limited applicability and usefulness to fbi investigative and personnel security matters . further , fbi indicated that — on the basis of its own research in forensic science and the scientific views expressed in this report — it strongly disagreed with one of its agents' assessments of the technique . as discussed earlier in the report , this agent had indicated that while the technique could benefit from continued research and development , it was nevertheless ready for forensic application . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees ; the attorney general ; secretary of dod ; directors of cia , fbi , secret service , and office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . copies of this report will also be available to others on request . if you or your staff have any questions , please call linda watson or me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 . key contributors to this report were christine davis , sam hinojosa , brenda rabinowitz , keith rhodes , and anne rhodes - kline . the purpose of this appendix is to provide additional information on the brain fingerprinting technique . specifically , we interviewed three scientists who were familiar with the technique: emanuel donchin , ph.d. ; william iacono , ph.d. ; and j. peter rosenfeld , ph.d. each scientist shared his view of the technique , raising questions and providing insights related to some of the methods that underlie brain fingerprinting . these scientists expressed a need for more research to demonstrate brain fingerprinting's application as an investigative tool . however , these views are not representative of scientists' views in general , nor do they represent a complete or systematic review of the technique . the following sections provide the views of the three scientists .