the food items included mres from five countries . because of the magnitude of the disaster , some normal operating procedures governing the import of goods were waived . according to usda and fda officials , under normal procedures , entry documents containing specific information , which are filed with u.s. customs and border protection , are transmitted to usda and fda for those agencies' use in determining if the commodities are appropriately admissible into the united states . without consultation or prior notification to usda or fda , the commissioner of u.s. customs and border protection authorized suspension of some normal operating procedures for the import of regulated items like food and medical supplies . consequently , usda and fda had no involvement in the decision making or process of agreeing to receive regulated product donations , including mres and medical supplies , and no opportunity to ensure that they would all be acceptable for distribution before the donated goods arrived . both usda and fda , based on regulations intended to protect public health , prevented distribution of some international donations , which resulted in the assistance being stored at a cost of about $80,000 . in the absence of policies and procedures , dos , fema , and dod created ad hoc policies and procedures to manage the receipt and distribution of foreign military goods and services . however , this guidance left open which agency — fema or dod — was to formally accept the foreign military assistance and therefore each agency apparently assumed the other had done so under their respective gift authorities . as a result , it is unclear whether fema or dod accepted or maintained oversight of the foreign military donations that were vetted through the dos task force . treasury lacks the statutory authority to credit those dos - held funds with interest . fema did not maintain oversight of the foreign military donations that it accepted through the dos task force . a fema official told us that they were unable to tell us how the foreign military donations were used because fema could not match the use of the donations with mission assignments it gave northern command . for the time the funds were not used , their purchasing power diminished due to inflation . if these funds had been placed in an account that could have been credited with interest to offset the erosion of purchasing power , the amount of funds available for relief and recovery efforts would have increased while decision makers determined how to use them . the u.s. government would be responsible for paying the interest if these funds were held in an account at the treasury that can pay interest . although the stafford act does not apply to the donated funds maintained in the dos account at treasury , the stafford act does provide that excess funds accepted under the act may be placed in treasury securities , and the related interest paid on such investments would be credited to the account . had the foreign monetary donations been placed in treasury securities , we estimate that by february 23 , 2006 , the remaining funds for relief efforts would have increased by nearly $1 million .