( see fig . 25% ( 393 ) 62% ( 289 ) 38% ( 176 ) 75% ( 1162 ) ( 66 ) ( 80 ) 60% ( 120 ) ( 25 ) ( 38 ) further analysis of arabic and chinese , two languages spoken in regions of strategic interest to the united states , showed that the percentage of staff that did not meet language requirements for their positions varied by career tracks . for example , 100 percent of the staff filling positions in the management career track requiring arabic and 88 percent of the staff filling positions in the management career track requiring chinese did not meet the language requirements of their positions . foreign service specialists — staff who perform security , technical , and other support functions — also had high percentages of staff that did not meet the chinese or arabic language requirements of their positions . in particular , 72 and 75 percent of specialist positions requiring chinese and arabic , respectively , were filled by staff who did not meet the language requirement . ( see table 5 ) . six of the specialists we met with in beijing said they did not receive sufficient language training before arriving at post . state officials have acknowledged that foreign service specialists have not received the required amount of training , and fsi officials attributed this situation to time constraints . most specialists only have enough time to participate in fsi's familiarization and short - term training language courses designed for beginners with 2 months or less time to devote to training . state's director general , in a cable issued in january 2006 , stated that the department has been shortsighted in not providing training to specialists , especially office management specialists , and stated that required training would be available for specialists in the future . some officers whom we met with who attained the proficiency requirements for their assignments stated that they were not sufficiently fluent to effectively perform their jobs . for example , the 50 language - designated , junior officer consular positions at posts requiring chinese require proficiency at a speaking level of 2 and reading level of 0 . consular officers we met with in china who tested at that level said they could ask appropriate questions during consular interviews , but could not always understand the answers . they pointed out that spanish or french language - designated consular positions require a level - 3 speaking and reading language proficiency . moreover , a survey of junior officers currently serving in china revealed that most of the officers not interested in serving in china again cited language issues as the primary reason . according to the deputy chief of mission in sana'a , the level - 3 arabic speaking and reading proficiency requirements for senior officers do not provide staff with the proficiency needed to participate in debates about u.s. foreign policy . he described an instance when he was asked to appear as an embassy spokesperson on an arabic language media program . the program , which involved a debate format and addressed u.s. politics , lasted 1 hour and was conducted entirely in arabic .