capabilities . these focus areas are designed to link geographic combatant command security cooperation activities to achieve theater campaign plan end states . in order to execute the activities in their theater campaign plans , geographic combatant commands request the required force capabilities through the global force management system . the global force management system is a dod system that provides insight into the global availability of u.s. military forces to meet rotational and emergent force requirements from geographic combatant commands as they arise . dod has taken steps to establish its concept for conducting security force assistance , including broadly defining the term and identifying actions needed to plan for and prepare forces to execute security force assistance activities . for example , dod issued an instruction that broadly defines security force assistance and outlines responsibilities for key stakeholders . the department also conducted an assessment to identify gaps in key areas such as doctrine , organization , and training related to the implementation of security force assistance across the department . this effort identified tasks to address these gaps and called on dod to develop a document , referred to as the lexicon framework , to clarify the term security force assistance and its relationship to other key terms . in october 2010 , dod issued an instruction — dod instruction 5000.68 — that broadly defines security force assistance and outlines responsibilities for key stakeholders to plan , prepare for , and execute security force assistance . the instruction defines security force assistance as “dod activities that contribute to unified action by the u.s. government to support the development of the capacity and capability of partner nation the instruction states that dod forces and their supporting institutions.”should develop and maintain forces , including general purpose forces and special operations forces , that can conduct security force assistance activities in a variety of conditions that include ( 1 ) politically sensitive environments where an overt u.s. presence is unacceptable to the host country government ; ( 2 ) environments where a limited , overt u.s. presence is acceptable to the host country government ; and ( 3 ) environments where a large - scale u.s. presence is considered necessary and acceptable by the host country government . according to office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) and u.s. special operations command officials , special operations forces would be favored to lead missions in the first environment , and the other environments could either use general purpose forces or an appropriate combination of forces . in addition , responsibilities of key stakeholders , including the geographic combatant commands and the military services , to plan for and conduct security force assistance are outlined in the instruction .