( see figure 7. ) over 55 percent ( 24 of 43 ) indicating that it deserved the highest priority . to a lesser extent , experts supported general training for other utility personnel to increase their awareness of security issues . ( 2 ) what types of utilities should receive funding priority ? and ( 3 ) what are the most effective mechanisms for directing these funds to recipients ? regarding the first of these questions , about 90 percent of the experts ( 39 of 43 ) agreed “strongly” or “somewhat” that funds should be allocated on the basis of vulnerability assessment information , with some citing the vulnerability assessments ( vas ) required by the bioterrorism act as the best available source of this information . several experts , however , pointed to a number of complicating factors . perhaps the most significant constraint is the bioterrorism act's provision precluding the disclosure of any information that is “derived” from vulnerability assessments submitted to epa . the provision protects sensitive information about each utility's vulnerabilities from individuals who may then use the information to harm the utility . hence , the law specifies that only individuals designated by the epa administrator may have access to the assessments and related information . yet , according to many of the experts , even those individuals may face constraints in using the information . they may have difficulty , for example , in citing vulnerability assessments to support decisions on allocating security - related funds among utilities , as well as decisions concerning research priorities and guidance documents . others cited an inherent dilemma affecting any effort to set priorities for funding decisions based on the greatest risk — whatever does not receive attention becomes a more likely target . regarding the second question concerning the types of utilities that should receive funding priority , 93 percent of the experts ( 40 of 43 ) indicated that utilities serving high - density population areas should receive a high or the highest priority in funding ( see figure 4. ) fifty - five percent deemed this criterion as the highest priority . most shared the view of one expert who noted that directing limited resources to protect the greatest number of people is a common factor when setting funding priorities . at the other end of the spectrum , only about 5 percent of the experts ( 2 of 43 ) stated that utilities serving rural or isolated populations should receive a high or highest priority for federal funding . these two panelists commented that such facilities are least able to afford security enhancements and are therefore in greatest need of federal support . importantly , the relatively small percentage of experts advocating priority for smaller systems may not fully reflect the concern among many of the experts for the safety of these utilities . for example , several who supported higher priority for utilities serving high - density populations cautioned that while problems at a large utility will put more people at risk , utilities serving small population areas may be more vulnerable because of weaker treatment capabilities , fewer highly trained operators , and more limited resources .