this has substantial implications for the budget and the economy . this issue must be dealt with from the standpoint of starting to take incremental steps to close the trustees' projected $4.6 trillion hospital insurance ( medicare part a ) 75-year funding gap , which is only part of an overall medicare challenge . also , congressional deliberations on modernizing the medicare benefits package to include prescription drug coverage must focus attention on incremental solutions , concentrating on targeted and legitimate needs rather than unlimited wants . in addition , any potential benefit expansion should be coupled with program reforms that will assure that we do not make the considerable long - range financial imbalance worse . the government today is moving from balancing the budget to balancing fiscal risk . surpluses challenge our nation to move beyond a focus on reducing annual deficits to a broader agenda . they offer us an opportunity to look more closely at what government does and how government does business . that is why it is so essential that efforts continue to build the necessary fundamental foundation through lasting financial management reform . only by generating timely , accurate , and useful information can the government maximize its economy , efficiency and effectiveness ; assure adequate accountability to taxpayers ; manage for results ; and help decisionmakers make timely and well - informed judgments . as was the case for fiscal years 1997 through 1999,our report on the u.s. government's consolidated financial statements for fiscal year 2000 states that certain significant financial systems weaknesses , problems with fundamental recordkeeping and financial reporting , incomplete documentation , and weak internal controls continued to hamper the government's ability to accurately report a significant portion of its assets , liabilities , and costs . major challenges include the federal government's inability to: properly account for and report ( 1 ) material amounts of property , equipment , inventories , materials , and supplies , and ( 2 ) certain stewardship assets , primarily at dod ; properly estimate the cost of certain major federal credit programs and the related loans receivable and loan guarantee liabilities , primarily at usda ; estimate and reliably report material amounts of environmental and disposal liabilities and related costs at dod , and determine the proper amount of various reported liabilities , including postretirement health benefits for military employees and accounts payable and other liabilities for certain agencies ; accurately report major portions of the net cost of government operations ; ensure that all disbursements are properly recorded ; and properly prepare the u.s. government's consolidated financial statements , including balancing the statements , accounting for substantial amounts of transactions between governmental entities , fully ensuring that the information in the consolidated financial statements was consistent with the underlying agency financial statements , and reconciling operating results with budget results .