we had discussions with representatives of 19 of these organizations . a more detailed explanation of our methodology is available in our full report . our audit work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . our investigative work was conducted in accordance with quality standards for inspection and evaluation published by the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency . in summary , we identified over 200 organizations that market financial and estate planning services to help pension claimants with excess assets qualify for pension benefits . these organizations consist primarily of financial planners and attorneys who offer products such as annuities and trusts . all 19 organizations our investigative staff contacted said a claimant can qualify for pension benefits by transferring assets before applying , which is permitted under the program . two organization representatives said they helped pension claimants with substantial assets , including millionaires , obtain va's approval for benefits . some products and services provided , such as deferred annuities , may not be suitable for the elderly because they may not have access to their funds within their expected lifetime without facing high withdrawal fees . also , such asset transfers may result in ineligibility for medicaid coverage for long - term care for a period of time . , as a result , when an individual applies for medicaid coverage for long - term care , states conduct a look - back — a review to determine if the applicant transferred assets for less than fair market value prior to applying . individuals who have transferred assets for less than fair market value during the 60 months prior to applying may be denied eligibility for long - term care coverage for a period of time , known as the penalty period . for example , gifting assets would generally be considered a transfer of assets for less than fair market value and result in a penalty period . also , under the ssi program , claimants who transfer assets for less than fair market value prior to applying may become ineligible for these benefits for up to 36 months . during our investigative calls , all 19 organizations correctly noted that pension claimants can legally transfer assets prior to applying . they indicated it is possible to qualify for va pension benefits despite having excess assets , and almost all provided information on how to transfer these assets . ( see figure 1 for transcript excerpts of calls with organizations on services they provide to qualify for va pension benefits. ) a number of different strategies may be used to transfer pension claimants' excess assets so that they meet financial eligibility thresholds . among the 19 organizations our investigative staff contacted , about half advised transferring excess assets into an irrevocable trust with a family member as the trustee to direct funds to pay for the veteran's expenses . a similar number also advised placing excess assets into some type of annuity . among these , several advised placing excess assets into an immediate annuity that generates income for the client . in employing this strategy , assets that va would count when determining financial eligibility for pension benefits are converted into monthly income .