conrail . the new mexico department of transportation is the owner . unt . roperty , regardless of fault , but liability d on the basis of fault . illful or wanton misconduct explicitly men ed in contract . ot indemnifies bility above $300,000 . lorida on which tri - rail and amtrak operate . amtrak is responsible for all liability above $75 million to $200 million . mbta assumes liability for its employeessengers , except when an incident is the pment , and paresult of as , euis sole mtrak' ence or omission . eglig f track around chicago union station e amtrak - owned and has a fault - based contract for track , excluded conduct is ut . are specific types of conduct excluded or explicitly included ? no fault: each covers own ( third parties shared ) no fault: each covers own ( third parties fault - based ) no fault: commuter covers all liability no fault: each covers own ( third parties and passengers are fault - based ) no fault: commuter covers all liability no fault: each covers own ( third parties shared ) w provisions for freight - commuter collision ? is contract fault - based or no - fault ? 1988 ) , vacated on other grounds , 892 f.2d 1066 ( d.c cir . onclusion: a u.s. district court ruled that the indemnification provisions c in an operating agreement between amtrak and conrail could not be enforced where there were allegations and a showing of gross negligence , recklessness , willful and wanton misconduct , intentiona conduct so serious as to warrant the imposition of punitive damages . ed the segment of the northeast corridor that runs etween washington , d.c. , and new york . conrail used the northeast facts: amtrak own b corridor pursuant to a freight operating agreement . in january 1987 , an amtrak train collided with thre locomotives that had entered the path of the high - speed amtrak passenger train . the accident resulted in 16 deaths and more than 350 injuries . just before crossing over onto the track being used by the amtrak train , the conrail engineer and brakeman in control of the conrail locomotives had failed to heed a series of slow and stop signals at or before a track juncture near chase , maryland . are specific types of conduct excluded or explicitly included ? no fault: each covers own ( third parties and passengers are fault - based ) no fault: each covers own ( thi parties and passengers are fault - based ) no fault: each covers own ( th parties shared ) fault - based ( third parties shared ) fault - bas parties shared ) no fault: each covers own ( third parties shared ) commuter ( continge legislative approval ) no fault: each covers own ( thi parties shared ) of commuter and freight rail lia s. h row of this table represents this relationship . if the liability a relationship , althoug and indemn h there may be more than one contract ity provisions are the same , the contracts are not r liability levels up to $25 mi llion and fault - based for liability negligent . .5 miles . on the rest o tracks .