prosecutions . agencies were also unable to provide complete data on prosecutions of cases involving arms trafficking to mexico . officials from doj's executive office for u.s . gun shows . according to atf officials , individuals can use straw purchasers as they would at gun shops to acquire guns from gun shops with booths at gun shows . in addition , individuals can also purchase guns at gun shows from other individuals making sales from their private collections . these private sales require no background checks of the purchaser and require no record be made or kept of the sale . atf officials told us this prevents their knowing what percentage of the problem of arms trafficking to mexico comes from these private sales at gun shows . u.s. and mexican government officials stated most guns trafficked into mexico are facilitated by and support operations of mexican dtos . according to atf officials , once the gun is acquired in the united states , typically a middleman or someone representing the drug cartel will transport or pay another individual to transport the firearm or firearms into mexico . firearms are generally trafficked along major u.s. highways and interstates and through border crossings into mexico . the firearms are normally transported across the border by personal or commercial vehicle because , according to u.s. and mexican government officials , the drug cartels have found these methods to have a high likelihood of success . ( we will discuss the challenges to seizing illicit southbound firearms at the border in the second objective of this report. ) once in mexico , the firearms are generally deposited in border towns or trafficked along major highways to their destinations . the transporter drops off the firearm or firearms at a set location for pick up and use by members of a drug cartel . figure 6 displays the primary trafficking routes from the united states into mexico . atf and mexican government officials told us they have found in mexican arms trafficking investigations that a small number of firearms illicitly trafficked into mexico from the united states are for hunters , off - duty police officers , and citizens seeking personal protection . officials from atf , ice , and the government of mexico told us most of the guns seized and traced come from seizures mexican military or law enforcement make in their war with the drug cartels . government of mexico data showed almost 30,000 firearms were seized in mexico in 2008 . government of mexico officials told us almost all of them were seized in operations against the drug cartels . u.s. efforts to combat illicit sales of firearms in the united states and to prevent the trafficking of these arms across the southwest border into mexico confront several key challenges . first , relevant law enforcement officials we met with noted certain provisions of some federal firearms laws present challenges to their efforts to address arms trafficking . second , we found poor coordination and a lack of information sharing have hampered the effectiveness of the two key agencies — atf and ice — that implement various efforts to address arms trafficking to mexico .