swfs are not privately owned . this investment bank researcher does offer a list of swfs . ii ) . for these funds , we attempted to identify any reported or published asset amounts from their official swf or other government web sites . those that propose definitions of swfs have not come up with one commonly accepted definition . varying characteristics — ownership , governance , funding sources , and investment strategies , among others — are used to characterize swfs and include or exclude funds from swf lists . treasury defines swfs as government investment vehicles funded by foreign exchange assets that are managed separately from official reserves . they seek higher rates of return and may be invested in a wider range of asset classes than traditional reserves . treasury says that swfs generally fall into two categories based on the source of their foreign exchange assets: commodity and noncommodity funds . treasury has not released a list of swfs . imf defines swfs as government - owned investment funds set up for a variety of macroeconomic purposes . they are commonly funded by the transfer of foreign exchange assets that are invested long term and overseas . swfs are a heterogeneous group and may serve multiple , overlapping , and changing objectives over time: as stabilization funds to insulate the budget and economy against commodity price swings ; as savings funds for future generations ; as reserve investment corporations established to increase the return on reserves ; as development funds to help fund socioeconomic projects or promote industrial policies ; or as contingent pension reserve funds to provide for unspecified pension liabilities on the government's balance sheet . imf researchers have published a list of swfs . this relatively broad definition allows for inclusion of a saudi arabian investment fund managed from the central bank . some investment bank reports have offered definitions of swfs . one states that swfs are broadly defined as special government asset management vehicles that invest public funds in a wide range of financial instruments . unlike central banks , which focus more on liquidity and safekeeping of foreign reserves , most swfs have the mandate to enhance returns and are allowed to invest in riskier asset classes , including equity and alternative assets , such as private equity , property , hedge funds , and commodities . this bank does publish a list of swfs . it says that it is not always easy to differentiate between pure swfs and other forms of public funds , such as conventional public sector pension funds or state - owned enterprises . another investment bank defines swfs as having five characteristics: ( 1 ) sovereign , ( 2 ) high foreign currency exposure , ( 3 ) no explicit liabilities , ( 4 ) high - risk tolerance , and ( 5 ) long investment horizon . similar to swfs are official reserves and sovereign pension funds . another investment bank says that swfs are vehicles owned by states that hold , manage , or administer public funds and invest them in a wider range of assets of various kinds . swfs are mainly derived from excess liquidity in the public sector stemming from government fiscal surpluses or from official reserves at central banks .