the clinician then orders the necessary medication . for each order , the clinician performs checks to identify any excessive dosage , or any possible interactions for the medication ; for example , the patient may be allergic to that medication . medication orders are then reviewed by a pharmacist , who dispenses the drug and updates the patient's medical record to reflect the medication that was dispensed . the general process for prescribing and dispensing prescription medications to va patients is depicted in figure 1 . vha relies on the department's health information system — the veterans health information systems and technology architecture ( vista ) — to deliver health care . va added that , in the interim , both departments are planning enhancements to the joint dod / va clinical health data repository to improve the exchange of pharmacy data between va and dod , and plan to complete this effort in fiscal year 2018 . vista consists of approximately 200 separate computer applications and modules that provide health care delivery capabilities . this includes multiple computer applications which have pharmacy capabilities . a key application within vista — the computerized patient record system ( cprs ) — enables the department to create and update an individual electronic health record for each va patient . specifically , cprs enables clinicians to enter , review , and continuously update information connected with a patient . among other things , clinicians can order lab tests , medications , diets , radiology tests , and procedures ; record a patient's allergies or adverse reactions to medications ; request and track consults ; enter progress notes , diagnoses , and treatments for each encounter ; and enter discharge summaries . over the last three decades , local vha medical sites have made numerous modifications to vista , resulting in about 130 different instances , or variations , of the system . since 2001 , va has recognized the need to modernize vista and several of its efforts also were aimed at improving the department's pharmacy capabilities . specifically , in that year , vha began the healthevet initiative to standardize patient data and modernize health information software applications . under healthevet , va began the pharmacy re - engineering project in 2002 , with the intent of replacing all of the legacy applications that supported pharmacy services in order to meet current and future patient needs . the department had initially planned the pharmacy re - engineering project to be completed for deployment in 2009 . we also assessed system capabilities of the pharmacy outpatient application with a focus on outpatient care because about 70 percent of prescriptions are for outpatient use . we validated our initial assessments through observing demonstrations of the pharmacy system at va medical centers in baltimore , maryland ; butler , pennsylvania ; and san antonio , texas ; and at a joint va and dod health center in north chicago , illinois . during these site visits , we reviewed how the system enables the viewing , sharing , and transferring of pharmacy data between vha locations .