should be reported . only compensated employment . the estimate of the number of jobs . should be expressed as ‘full - time equivalents ( fte ) ,' which is calculated as total hours worked in jobs created or retained divided by the number of hours in a full - time schedule , as defined by the recipient.” consequently , the recipients are expected to report the amount of labor hired or not fired as result of having received recovery act funds . it should be noted that one fte does not necessarily equate to the job of one person . firms may choose to increase the hours of existing employees , for example , which can certainly be said to increase employment but not necessarily be an additional job in the sense of adding a person to the payroll . to implement the recipient reporting data requirements , omb has worked with the recovery accountability and transparency board ( recovery board ) to deploy a nationwide data collection system at www.federalreporting.gov ( federalreporting.gov ) , while the data reported by recipients are available to the public for viewing and downloading on www.recovery.gov ( recovery.gov ) . recovery.gov , a site designed to provide transparency of information related to spending on recovery act programs , is the official source of information related to the recovery act . the recovery board's goals for the recovery act web site include promoting accountability by providing a platform to analyze recovery act data and serving as a means of tracking fraud , waste , and abuse allegations by providing the public with accurate , user - friendly information . in addition , the site promotes official data in public debate , assists in providing fair and open access to recovery act opportunities , and promotes an understanding of the local impact of recovery act funding . in an effort to address the level of risk in recipient reporting , omb's june 22 , 2009 , guidance on recipient reporting includes a requirement for data quality reviews . omb's data quality guidance is intended to address two key data problems — material omissions and significant reporting errors . material omissions and significant reporting errors are risks that the information is incomplete and inaccurate . as shown in figure 2 , omb gave specific time frames for reporting that allow prime recipients and delegated subrecipients to prepare and enter their information on days 1 through 10 following the end of the quarter . the original submitter must complete data corrections no later than the 29th day following the end of the quarter . second , hud developed the recovery act management and performance system ( ramps ) in response to reporting requirements outlined in section 1609 of the recovery act . hud officials said approximately 96 percent of housing agencies had successfully reported into federalreporting.gov . initial reports suggested a lower reporting rate , but this was due to a substantial number of housing agencies incorrectly entering values into certain identification fields , such as the award id number , the awarding agency , or the type of funding received . hud officials said that the system did not have validation measures in place to ensure the correct award id numbers were entered .