these aircraft have been in service for decades . the events following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states highlighted the need for improved transportation , communication , and security capabilities for the presidential helicopter fleet . as a result , a program ( subsequently designated the vh - 71 program ) was initiated in april 2002 to develop aircraft to replace the helicopters currently in service . initial plans to field the vh - 71 by 2011 were accelerated in response to a november 2002 white house memorandum directing that a replacement helicopter be fielded by the end of 2008 . by 2009 significant cost growth , plus schedule delays and performance issues resulted in the decision to terminate the vh - 71 program . at the time of termination , in june 2009 , the estimated vh - 71 program cost had doubled from about $6.5 billion at development start in 2005 to $13 billion . because there remained a need to replace the current in - service presidential helicopters , the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition technology and logistics ( ousd ( at&l ) ) directed the navy by late june 2009 to present a plan to develop options for a new program to acquire replacement aircraft , now designated vxx . the navy's vxx efforts began immediately with the initiation of an aoa to assess options on how to proceed toward developing and fielding the replacement presidential helicopter . it was focused , at least in part , on one of the primary lessons learned from the vh - 71 program experience — the need to establish and maintain a sound business case . a sound business case is one in which a balance is established between requirements , costs , and schedule that reflects an executable program with acceptable risk . according to program officials , the program would be aligned to pursue a best practices knowledge - based acquisition approach with the intent of establishing and maintaining an affordable business case . last year , we reported that vxx program's entry into development had been delayed as the program worked to provide a sound initial business case for development , which is a best practice that was not followed by the terminated vh - 71 program . the navy had produced an initial aoa report under june 2010 study guidance from dod's office of cost assessment and program evaluation ( cape ) . this initial work presumed an acquisition strategy under which the program would start in the technology development phase of dod's acquisition process . the navy released this initial aoa report to dod . while cape found this initial work sufficient , ousd ( at&l ) did not accept its results . rather , it identified the need for a 2012 update to address using a streamlined acquisition strategy focused on mitigating cost drivers identified in the 2010 aoa study . additional guidance was provided by the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) in december 2011 . that guidance reflected insights on requirements gained in the 2010 study and expectations of using a streamlined acquisition approach proposed by the navy .