autonomy . the eight cross - functional team pilots' charters show , and interviews with members confirm , that teams are granted substantial autonomy by senior army leadership . the cross - functional team charters give teams the authority to solve internal problems through market research , prototyping , technical demonstrations , and user assessments . for example , the synthetic training environment cross - functional team and senior army leadership stressed to us the importance of experimentation as an opportunity to “fail early and fail cheap.” according to cross - functional team members , this allows cross - functional teams to move on and avoid expensive and time - consuming failures later in the acquisition process , as has happened with army in the past . furthermore , cross - functional teams can reach out to subject matter experts needed to develop requirements without having to obtain permission from senior army leadership . committed team members . all eight cross - functional team pilots include members with expertise in diverse fields who are committed to achieving team goals . for example , the network cross - functional team charter states that the team should consist of experienced and committed subject matter experts executing disciplined initiatives and willing to take prudent risks . in addition , the directive establishing the cross - functional teams states that they should leverage industry and academia where appropriate to increase knowledge and expertise . staffing information provided by multiple cross - functional teams demonstrates the diversity of expertise the army has applied to these efforts . cross - functional team members also provided us with multiple examples of how their teams have leveraged outreach with industry and academia to improve their understanding of requirements and technology . additionally , we found that the eight cross - functional team pilots have at least partially applied the following four leading practices . senior management support . senior army leaders , including the secretary and the chief of staff , have championed the cross - functional team pilots in public statements . although an army official told us that he was aware of a member of a cross - functional team ( who left the team ) receiving a civilian achievement award , we did not find any documentary evidence of senior army leaders providing incentives or recognition to members of the eight cross - functional team pilots . because many members of cross - functional teams , including some leaders of these teams , work in a number of different roles , they do not have a consistent chain of command that can provide incentives or recognition across all of their activities . the “dual - hatted” nature of team members — in which they work for their parent organization as well as the cross - functional team pilot — may further complicate full application of this leading practice . empowered team leaders . the team leaders of all eight cross - functional team pilots are empowered to make decisions and regularly interact with senior army leaders . while an army official stated that team leaders and army leadership provide guidance to cross - functional team members , we did not find any documentary evidence of these leaders providing feedback to members of those teams .