( recommendation 5 ) . once rates are developed they are adjusted based on budget exhibits . the transcom operations and plans directorate is responsible for channel cargo forecasts to inform rate - setting for this category of service . channel passenger rates apply when military and civilian passengers are flying on established routes . the rates are benchmarked against commercial prices , recover about 85 percent of costs , and do not vary based on the type of aircraft used . channel passenger rate - setting guidance also uses a step - by - step process . ( recommendation 4 ) the secretary of defense should ensure that the commander , u.s. transportation command , develops a corrective action plan to improve the accuracy of its workload forecasting . general services administration city pairs are checked for comparable prices . if no general services administration rate is found , the defense travel system is checked . if the defense travel system does not have a rate , online travel websites are checked . if the online travel sites do not have a rate , then a prior standard rate per mile for that route is adjusted based on budget exhibits . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . for more detail regarding our scope and methodology see appendix i . dod uses working capital funds to focus management's attention on the total costs of carrying out critical business operations and encourage dod support organizations to provide quality goods and services at the lowest cost . the ability of working capital funds to operate on a break - even basis depends on accurately projecting workload , estimating costs , and setting rates to recover the full costs of producing goods and services . generally , customers use appropriated funds to finance orders placed with working capital funds . dod sets the rates charged for goods and services during the budget preparation process , which generally occurs approximately 18 months before the rates go into effect . to develop rates , working capital fund managers review projected costs such as labor and materials , as well as projected customer requirements . the rates are intended to remain fixed during the fiscal year in accordance with dod policy . dod's stabilized price policy serves to protect customers from unforeseen inflationary increases and other cost uncertainties and better assures customers that they will not have to reduce programs to pay for potentially higher - than - anticipated prices . because working capital fund managers base rates charged on assumptions formulated in advance of rates going into effect , some variance is expected between projected and actual costs and revenues . the twcf is dedicated to transcom's mission to provide air , land , and sea transportation for dod in times of peace and war , with a primary focus on wartime readiness . specifically , twcf is used to provide air transportation and services for passengers or cargo in support of dod operations or along established routes . the twcf is also used to finance air force and joint training requirements . examples of joint capabilities supported by the twcf are depicted in figure 2 .