this problem is longstanding . in 1993 , for example , we reported that limited staff resources in seps's security compliance review group affected its ability to conduct compliance reviews of all doj locations in overseeing the department's security program . in addition , during 1991 and 1992 , the group had 6 employees to conduct reviews of 1,300 doj locations compared to half as many staff to cover almost three times as many locations today . to what extent has doj implemented isoo's recommendations ? to what extent has fbi implemented isoo's recommendations ? what processes are in place at selected doj components to respond to intragovernmental requests to share national security and sensitive but unclassified information ? to determine the extent of changes that doj and the fbi have made to implement isoo's recommendations and other changes made to improve their classification management programs , we ( 1 ) reviewed the results of isoo's audits ; ( 2 ) obtained supporting documents that addressed these changes , when available ; and ( 3 ) discussed challenges that doj and fbi managers responsible for implementing and overseeing these programs faced in making these changes . while these results cannot be generalized to all classified documents , we determined the methodology isoo uses to conduct its reviews is adequate to support its recommendations . to determine the extent of policies , procedures , and internal controls that selected doj components have in place for designating information as sensitive but unclassified , we used our standards for internal control in the federal government to provide criteria to assess the components' sensitive but unclassified designation practices . we selected five doj components for our review: bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) ; criminal division ; drug enforcement administration ( dea ) ; the fbi ; and u.s . marshals service ( usms ) . we selected these components because , on the basis of data we collected as part of our prior governmentwide assessment of 26 agencies' sensitive but unclassified information programs , we determined that each of these components had adopted one or more sensitive but unclassified designations , in addition to the limited official use designation used across the department . specificll , rior to thi hift , the office of cassifictioerformed 34 inspections of classifictio ro t doe ite ce 2000 . thee inspections reviewed whether doe ite comlied with agclassifictio olicies anrocedre . after the october 2005 shift , however , the pace of thi overht wasterrupted as classifictiooverht ctivitieceased until februa 2006 . so fr i 2006 , oe classifictio overht reort has bee comleted for two offices at doe's pante site i texas , and work o ecod reort i under way t for offices at the saannariver site i sth carolina . more overht inspections evuating classifictio ctivity at eiht doe office re anned for the remder of 2006 . i dditio , ccording to the director of the office of secrit evuations , the rocedre for coctingre overht re till evolving — iclding the number of ite to be inspected and the deth of anays to be erformed .