ii. ) in developing our list , we included federal programs regardless of how the benefit , service , or assistance is ultimately delivered to the individual ( eg , directly by the federal agency or indirectly by another entity , such as a state agency ) . to obtain information on federal programs supporting people with disabilities and the challenges they face , we conducted a web - based survey , which collected basic information on each program , including the types of assistance provided , whether the assistance is provided directly to beneficiaries or indirectly through other entities , whether the program is partially or wholly targeted to people with disabilities , the number of beneficiaries served , program spending , and the challenges faced by these programs ( i.e. to encourage respondents to complete the survey , we sent e - mail messages to prompt each nonrespondent 1 and 2 weeks after the initial e - mail message . we closed the survey on august 16 , 2004 . we obtained survey responses from 258 programs , for an overall response rate of 86 percent . in addition , for 11 of the 41 programs that did not submit survey responses , we obtained descriptive information from the cfda to answer a limited number of survey questions to the extent that such information was available . based on responses to survey questions asking programs to identify the criteria they apply in serving people with disabilities and the primary type of assistance they provide , we identified 192 programs ( comprising 64 percent of all programs surveyed ) that met our criteria for defining programs as either wholly or partially targeted towards serving individuals with disabilities . although our survey asked programs to provide spending data , because of limitations or inconsistencies in the spending information reported by survey respondents , we obtained spending data from the consolidated federal funds report ( cffr ) — a database compiled by the bureau of the census — for all of the relevant programs listed in this database . for programs that did not have data reported in the cffr , we used spending information from the survey data . in a few cases where spending data was not available from either the cffr or survey data , we obtained this information from the cfda . to verify the spending data that we present in this report , we sent each program an e - mail message asking them to confirm the amounts we had identified . while many programs confirmed the spending amounts that we listed in our message , others identified different amounts . the spending data we present in this report are based on the final verified spending amounts identified by programs in their response to our e - mail . these data are not entirely consistent across programs . the following table presents an overview of the 192 federal programs that we identified as targeted to people with disabilities . the information presented in this table is based mostly on the programs' survey responses , although it also presents data obtained from other sources . in particular , the spending information is derived from multiple sources , including programs' survey responses and federal government reports on program spending .