training . epa has offered training for npdes permit writers to help them better understand how to write npdes permits that incorporate provisions for nutrient credit trading , according to epa officials . epa and usda also sponsored a 3-day water quality trading workshop in september 2015 in lincoln , nebraska , on a range of different subjects related to water quality trading . according to the workshop's summary document , over 200 attendees participated , including water resource professionals ; third - party environmental market makers ; academics ; representatives of federal , state , and local governments ; representatives of non - governmental organizations ; and agricultural and environmental stakeholders . data collection . according to epa officials , there is no requirement for permittees to report data about trading programs at a national level and epa has no systematic way to collect this information . however , epa manually collects some trading data , such as the names of programs with permits that allow for trading , which provides the agency with a general understanding of the extent to which trading is being used nationally . officials told us that they plan to update national trading data at least every 2 years and make them available online in the fall of 2017 . stakeholders cited two key factors that have affected participation in nutrient credit trading — the presence of discharge limits for nutrients and the challenges of measuring nutrient reductions resulting from nonpoint sources' implementation of bmps . first , officials from the three states we reviewed , and other stakeholders we interviewed , cited the importance of discharge limits for nutrients as a driver to create demand for nutrient credit trading . without such a driver , point sources have little incentive to purchase nutrient credits . according to epa guidance , discharge limits — most commonly established in a tmdl — are the leading driver for nutrient credit trading markets . for the pennsylvania and virginia programs , the nutrient discharge limits are established in the chesapeake bay tmdl . for the connecticut program , nutrient discharge limits are established in the long island sound tmdl . the tmdl nutrient discharge limits are ultimately translated into discharge limits in the npdes permits for point sources . pennsylvania officials explained how discharge limits serve as a driver for trading . officials stated that although the state established its nutrient trading program in 2005 , the tmdl for chesapeake bay was not established until 2010 . officials noted that in the first years of the program , little trading took place because point sources did not have to meet nutrient discharge limits . once epa established the tmdl for the chesapeake bay — and pennsylvania established discharge limits for point sources in the npdes permits — demand for nutrient credit trading increased , according to pennsylvania officials . officials explained that if point sources had not yet upgraded their nutrient removal technology , and could not meet the npdes permit discharge limits , they could buy nutrient credits to comply with discharge limits . epa officials added that demand for trading could increase over the long term because of economic or population growth .