doj agreed with our recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to the attorney general , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or goodwing@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . to describe the extent to which states identify domestic violence records for use during national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) checks , we analyzed federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) data on the number of domestic violence records that states identified and made available to nics , including those protection orders flagged with the brady indicator , provided by states and territories from 2006 through 2015 . we selected this time frame in order to have a sufficient length of time to identify trends in the number of records available to nics . to assess the reliability of these data , we questioned knowledgeable officials about the data and the systems that produced the data , reviewed relevant documentation , and examined the data for obvious errors . we determined that some of the data were not sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . specifically , we did not report the identification for firearms sales ( iffs ) flag data from 2006 through 2014 due to inaccurate flag settings and the lack of controls on who could modify the flag settings . these issues were corrected for 2015 , so we determined that the 2015 iffs flag data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we were not able to identify all of the domestic violence records that states have made available to the fbi because of challenges in disaggregating some of these records from other criminal history records , but to the extent possible we took steps to identify trends in the data . we analyzed , on a more limited basis , the number of records that each state had made available regarding other prohibiting categories , such as mental health records , to provide context for trends we identified related to domestic violence records . we also analyzed the last 3 years of fbi state audit findings to report on general challenges states face with respect to the accuracy , validity , and completeness of domestic violence records . additionally , we analyzed u.s. department of justice's ( doj ) national criminal history improvement program and nics act record improvement program grant solicitations and award amounts to identify prioritization and trends in the grant award decisions . these are consistent with challenges we have previously reported . fingerprints not collected and cite - and - release practices: as we previously reported , incomplete or missing criminal history records can result from law enforcement officials citing and releasing individuals without formally arresting and fingerprinting them . appendix i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology .