antidumping duty . ad duty law provides relief to a domestic industry that is materially injured , threatened with material injury , or whose establishment is materially retarded by reason of imports sold in the united states at less than fair value . the law provides relief by authorizing the imposition of an additional import duty on the dumped imports . u.s. trade law permits the imposition of ad duties if ( 1 ) commerce determines that the imported goods are or are likely to be sold in the united states at less than fair value ; and if ( 2 ) itc determines that a u.s. industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury , or that the establishment of an industry in the united states is materially retarded , by reason of imports of that merchandise . countervailing duty . cv duty law provides a similar kind of relief to a domestic industry that is materially injured , threatened with material injury , or whose establishment is materially retarded by reason of imported goods that have received certain foreign government subsidies . the law provides relief by authorizing the imposition of an additional import duty on the subsidized imports . u.s. trade law provides that cv duties will be imposed if ( 1 ) commerce determines that the foreign government or any public entity within the foreign country is providing , directly or indirectly , a countervailable subsidy with regard to the manufacture , production , or export of the subject merchandise that is imported or sold ( or likely to be sold ) for importation into the united states ; and ( 2 ) if in the case of merchandise imported from a subsidies agreement country , itc determines that a domestic industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury , or that the establishment of a domestic industry is materially retarded , by reason of imports or sales for imports of those goods . the process for obtaining the imposition of an ad / cv duty generally involves petitioners and interested parties who support and oppose the petition , trade law firms , commerce , and itc . petitioners and interested parties in support of the petition may include domestic manufacturers , producers or wholesalers , and certain unions and trade associations . parties in opposition to the petition for the imposition of duties may include foreign exporters and producers , u.s. importers of the articles under investigation , and governments of the exporting countries . law firms that specialize in international trade frequently represent petitioners and the opposing parties before commerce and / or itc , the two agencies responsible for conducting ad / cv duty investigations . commerce determines whether to initiate an ad or cv duty investigation after examining a petition filed on behalf of a domestic industry . commerce conducts an investigation of dumping and / or subsidies while itc simultaneously conducts a separate investigation of material injury to a domestic industry . both commerce and itc make preliminary and final determinations before commerce imposes an ad or cv duty . according to commerce , the process for determining whether to impose an ad or cv duty consists of two key phases: ( 1 ) petition and ( 2 ) investigation .