figure 1 illustrates the committee structure . our 2002 survey of trade advisory committee members found high levels of satisfaction with many aspects of committee operations and effectiveness , yet more than a quarter of respondents indicated that the system had not realized its potential to contribute to u.s. trade policy . in particular , we received comments about the timeliness , quality , and accountability of consultations . for example , the law requires the executive branch to inform committees of “significant departures” from committee advice . for example , although the atac charters were renewed in may 2007 and members appointed in january 2008 , the faca database shows that no atac has held a meeting since fiscal year 2006 . however , many committee members reported that agency officials informed committees less than half of the time when their agencies pursued strategies that differed from committee input . as a result , we made a series of recommendations to ustr and the other agencies to improve those aspects of the consultation process . in response , ustr and the other agencies more closely aligned the system's structure and composition with the current economy and increased the system's ability to meet negotiator needs more reliably . for example , the department of agriculture created a new atac for processed foods because exports of high - value products have increased . ustr and commerce also split the service industry into several committees to better meet negotiator needs . furthermore , ustr and the department of agriculture now list which interest members represent on the public faca database , as the department of commerce has been doing for years . ustr's 2009 trade policy agenda and 2008 annual report also includes descriptions of the committees and their composition . it does not , however , explain how ustr and the agencies determined that the particular membership appointed to each committee represents a fair balance of interests in terms of the points of view represented and the committee's functions . mr. chairman , we appreciate the opportunity to summarize our work related to the trade advisory system . based on the recommendations we have made in the areas of quality and timeliness of consultations , logistical issues , and representation of key stakeholders , we believe that ustr and other managing agencies have strengthened the trade advisory system . however , we support the committee's oversight and the ongoing policy review of the system to ensure that it works smoothly and the input received from business and non - business stakeholders is sufficient , fairly considered , and representative . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .