during lrip . producibility issues / risks discovered in lrip have been mitigated and pose no signiﬁ cant risk for frp . produc - ibility im - provements ongoing . all modiﬁ ca - tions , upgrades , diminishing manufactur - ing sources and material shortages ( dmsms ) , and other changes assessed for produc - ibility . system al - located baseline established . ” and now asked “can it be made with sufficient yield and quality to be manufactured in the desired amounts ? ” this early engagement with manufacturing enabled the firm to develop the process and reduce errors and inefficiencies with the purpose of reducing manufacturing risks . ge healthcare then built a second pilot production plant that further increased the amount produced above that of the first pilot plant . the firm continued its focus on gaining knowledge early , but on a larger scale: building the pilot plants was important to perfecting the process and gaining knowledge about the material's producibility . at this stage , which coincides with mrl 8 , it eliminated most of the technical risks involved in manufacturing the material . the firm then began to build its full - scale facility , which was ready 18 months before product launch . when the full - scale production facility was completed , further scale - up of the material's manufacturing became the focus . changes to the design were made as needed to facilitate this . any remaining manufacturing risks were eliminated prior to entry into the next stage , the product - validation stage . the food and drug administration requires validation of finished medical devices . ge healthcare told us that this means that all the equipment , processes , procedures , and factory workers are the same as will be used in actual production . through use of the pilot plants to perfect the manufacturing of the scintillator material , ge healthcare was able to produce production - representative material to satisfy this requirement . commercial firms focus on developing strong relationships with their suppliers to ensure quality parts are provided in a timely manner . this begins with rigorous supplier - selection criteria to create a strong supplier base to provide quality parts . similarly , dod's mrl supply - chain thread focuses on supplier capability throughout the acquisition life cycle , from as early as pre – milestone a ( mrl 3 ) , where initial assessment of the supply chain begins , through mrl 5 , where supply - chain sources have been identified , and continuing to mrl 8 , where the supply - chain should be stable and adequate to support low - rate production . commercial firms generally have long - term relationships with these suppliers and can identify the supplier that is the best source of material or parts early , well before production begins . leading commercial firms apply the same standards to these suppliers as they apply to their own manufacturing processes , such as iso 9000 or other quality standards . throughout product development and production , they establish effective communications with their suppliers so they can continually assess their performance .