( see app . ii for information on the technical features of the oregon model. ) indiana's dot sought out a modified version of the hers model in an attempt to improve its planning process and , more specifically , to strengthen its technical planning tools . indiana officials wanted a model that would analyze benefits and costs for all of the state's highway projects , and they decided that a modified version of the hers model would meet their needs . these officials used their hers model to analyze highway investment needs over a 25-year period , including a comparison of the status of the highway system at different levels of funding . in addition , indiana officials used their model to analyze highway investment needs at the district level within the state . the indiana model has a unique feature that links specific model results with a geographic information system ( gis ) that visually displays results on state highway maps . this feature allows the staff to compare district offices' and metropolitan planning organizations' priorities with the ones the model identifies . ( see app . ii for information on the technical features of the indiana model. ) after fhwa officials reviewed their positive experience with hers , along with the positive experiences of oregon and indiana with their customized hers models , they decided to consider developing a hers model that all states could use . fhwa's office of asset management commissioned two studies to identify the potential role of a hers model in helping states assess their highway investment needs and develop state highway plans . the studies demonstrated a potential state interest in a state - level hers model . therefore , fhwa developed a prototype state model , hers - st , from the national - level hers model that any state could use for planning and programming activities . fhwa officials believe that states could use the hers - st model to perform benefit - cost analysis on highway improvements and to forecast the future condition and performance of state highway systems . in addition , the office of asset management's asset management primer explains that hers - st has the potential to help state - level policy makers address resource allocation questions because the model can analyze “what if” questions using specific funding levels . for example , the model can show the long - term effects that different levels of spending or different emphases in investment could have on the condition and performance of highways . the primer also states that the model may even help some states meet new government accounting standards board provisions requiring states to report the cost of maintaining their transportation infrastructure assets . the hers - st model that fhwa developed is based on and operates in much the same way as the national - level hers model , with a few noteworthy differences . like the hers model , hers - st ( 1 ) projects the future condition and performance of a state's highway system , ( 2 ) assesses whether any highway improvements are warranted , and ( 3 ) selects appropriate improvements using benefit - cost analysis .