training . the army is also updating its training across a broad range of efforts . army training officials stated that there is a need to train units collectively under multi - domain operations conditions against great - power competitors like russia and china , per guidance from the chief of staff of the army . the commander of army forces command also issued guidance for fiscal year 2019 to help train and prepare soldiers to conduct multi - domain operations . this guidance included increasing the realism and rigor of every unit rotation to one of the army's combat training centers , as well as designing warfighter exercises that focus on units conducting operations in contested electronic warfare , cyber , and space environments . additionally , the training officials stated that in recent years the army has updated its decisive - action training scenarios to include regional versions for europe , the pacific , and africa that comply with the multi - domain operations concept . the officials added that , in future years , several army organizations will be collaborating to modernize the army's home - station training and combat training centers in support of fielding a force capable of conducting multi - domain operations . all of this builds upon the army's earlier efforts to shift its training focus to large - scale combat after a decade of training for counterinsurgency operations , as we testified to congress in february 2019 . the army is also taking steps to revise the training for cyber and electronic warfare personnel . these steps include revising the u.s. army cyberspace operations training strategy so that it accounts for new equipment and doctrine , but also for the new organizations being created and the tasks those units will be expected to perform , according to army cyber officials . additionally , the army cyber school is revising its cyber and electronic warfare training so that personnel will be able to conduct multi - domain operations . furthermore , the army is working on a joint solution for training cyber personnel on behalf of u.s. cyber command , according to army cyber command officials . the army's goal is to provide the total cyber force with the ability to conduct joint cyber training , including exercises and mission rehearsals by developing a virtual training environment that simulates realistic cyber threats . this cyber training solution , called the persistent cyber training environment , will allow for experimentation , unit certification , and assessment and development of the cyber mission force in a virtual training environment . the army's goal is that the environment will decrease training time , increase throughput of personnel , and improve training quality . one of the stated operational imperatives of the persistent cyber training environment is to become integrated with multi - domain exercises . the army is seeking to quickly create or design several new cyber and electronic warfare units in order to execute multi - domain operations ; however , army leadership is activating some units at an accelerated pace due to the sense of urgency imposed by the growing capabilities of potential great - power competitors .