, and estimating the cost of its loan programs . however , the potential benefits of the service , for olo and other offices , cannot be realized without comprehensive policies that reflect best practices appropriate to sba's responsibilities to guide the use of the loan monitoring service . sba's time line for developing such policies stretches into 2005 , more than a year and a half after the contractor delivered the capability to sba . second , the administrator should expedite the development of policies for taking enforcement actions against all lending partners to address noncompliance issues identified through the loan monitoring service and to address safety and soundness issues among sblcs and cdcs , for whom sba is the only regulator . we have made recommendations calling on sba to clarify its supervisory and enforcement powers since november 2000 . although sba has taken some incremental planning steps to address the issue , its current time line estimates finalizing enforcement regulations in april 2005 . third , ensure that resources within sba are devoted to developing policies for the use of the loan monitoring service , so that the overall time line for completion — april 2005 — is met . fourth , establish an agencywide task force to explore the potential for applying the capabilities of the dun & bradstreet service to sba business processes and responsibilities other than lender oversight , such as overall portfolio risk management or budget projections . programmatic offices and the office of the chief financial officer should be included . fifth , develop contingency plans that would enable sba's continued risk management of the 7 ( a ) and 504 portfolio overall , individual lenders , and their portfolios in the event that the dun & bradstreet contract is discontinued . figure 1 illustrates this concept . the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , the federal regulator of national banks , requires regulated lenders to practice basic loan portfolio monitoring / risk management . however , occ notes that the sophistication of an institution's risk management policies and processes will depend on the size of the institution , the complexity of its portfolio , and the types of credit risks it has assumed . accordingly , no single credit risk rating system is ideal for every bank . in practice , a bank's risk rating system should reflect the complexity of its lending activities and the overall level of risk involved . despite customization of risk management systems , financial regulators and practitioners we spoke with are in general agreement about the characteristics associated with effective credit risk management . similar to private lenders that focus on individual loans and their overall portfolio , sba must monitor its overall portfolio , its individual lenders , and their portfolios . as such , it is important for sba to have an effective monitoring capability based on best - practice infrastructure , methodologies , and policies . the infrastructure comprises the elements within an effective monitoring system that makes the methodologies and policies work .