facilities . the un budgeted $100 million for facilities - related costs , while we estimate that the cost to the united states would be $208 million . the un budget includes acquisition and construction of troop and civilian housing and equipment and supplies . u.s. facilities must meet state department security standards , which include posting civilian staff within secure u.s. embassy or consulate compounds . also , u.s. agencies with staff in these compounds would be required to contribute to state's capital security cost - sharing program . according to u.s. experts , changes in the underlying planning factors significantly affect the estimated cost of a u.s. operation . based on consultations with the joint staff officials and other experts , we analyzed how the cost of a u.s. operation would vary if we ( 1 ) changed the mix of active duty to reserve soldiers from 85 percent active to an entirely reserve force , ( 2 ) assumed u.s. forces would fully deploy within 60 rather than 180 days , and ( 3 ) increased the intensity of the operation . as figure 4 shows , each of these changes increased the estimated costs for a u.s. operation . specifically , the changes resulted in these increases in each category: by deploying an all reserve force , the estimated u.s. cost would increase by $477 million . the increase is because dod must begin to pay full active duty military salaries to reservists when they are activated for an operation . officials from the joint chiefs of staff confirmed that this is one of a number of possible scenarios of a u.s. operation . by fully deploying u.s. troops in 60 days , u.s. costs would increase by about $60 million due to additional military pay and support for all troops deployed during the operation's initial months . joint staff noted this as a possible u.s. option for haiti . dod measures the intensity of a military operation , or operational tempo , on a scale from 1 to 3 . the higher the number , the more heavily the forces use equipment and the higher the operations and maintenance costs . by increasing the operational tempo from 1.5 , which is typical for peacekeeping , to 2 , u.s. military costs would increase by $23 million due to increased expenses such as fuel . cost is not the only factor in deciding whether the united states or the un should lead a peace operation . the united states and the un each have strengths and limitations that could affect the success of an operation . the traditional strengths of a u.s. - led operation stem from the well - established u.s. military infrastructure , which provides rapid deployment capabilities , unified command and control , and well trained and equipped personnel . however , operations in iraq and afghanistan have led to shortages in key personnel and strained troop and equipment readiness . also , in some locations a u.s. - led force may not be perceived as being impartial .