gsa did not have any comments . we are sending copies of this report to the director of omb , secretary of hhs , administrator of gsa , and appropriate congressional addressees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at https: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-6806 or by email at sagerm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this review ( 1 ) describes the administration's approach to the section 5 pilot ; ( 2 ) assesses whether current activities and plans will likely allow the office of management and budget ( omb ) and its partners to meet requirements and time frames established under the section 5 pilot ; and ( 3 ) evaluates the extent to which the design for the pilot is consistent with leading practices . to describe the administration's approach to the pilot , we assessed documents related to pilot activities and interviewed omb , department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and general services administration ( gsa ) officials and staff responsible for implementing the section 5 pilot . specifically , we reviewed documentation from hhs and omb's office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) . our reviews were based on the latest design plans available at the time . we also interviewed officials from organizations representing key non - federal stakeholders including state and local governments , private - sector contractors , and other federal fund recipients . to assess whether the section 5 pilot design would be likely to meet the statutory design requirements , we reviewed section 5 of the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 , as added by the digital accountability and transparency act of 2014 ( data act ) to understand the deadlines and design requirements . we reviewed the draft design documents to assess omb and its partners' plans for meeting these requirements . to supplement our review of those plans , we also spoke with cognizant staff implementing these pilots at omb , hhs , and gsa . to identify and analyze leading practices for pilot design , we reviewed our past work evaluating and assessing pilots . additionally , we also relied on our technical guidance on designing evaluations . further , we reviewed relevant studies from academia as well as other entities , such as the brookings institution and the federal demonstration partnership . we reviewed reports from organizations that have expertise on conducting pilot programs and experience in scaling pilot results that could be applied government - wide . we also shared these leading practices with the agencies in this review during our audit work . to assess the extent to which the section 5 pilot design adhered to these leading practices , we reviewed documented designs and plans for both the grants and procurement portions of the pilot . to evaluate the grants portion of the pilot , we focused on a draft design document from november 2015 .