most states use their own employees to conduct inspections . therefore , an increase in the number of inspectors may be dependent on whether their state legislatures consent to granting them additional hiring authority and funding . a few states supplement their programs by delegating inspection responsibilities to local government employees , such as local fire department personnel . three states allow tank owners and operators to hire licensed or state - certified private inspectors who report the results of their inspections back to the state . epa has issued a guidebook to states on the use of such third party inspectors . however , program managers caution that this approach raises the potential for a conflict of interest on the part of the inspectors . for example , the managers said that inspectors may not readily identify tank violations for fear that tank owners or operators may not rehire them for future inspections . these states have implemented requirements similar to the federal requirements . the agency also maintains responsibility for implementing the program for approximately 2,650 tanks located on lands owned by indian tribes and 3,480 tanks in idaho because that state does not have the necessary laws in place . concerned that the tank program is not effectively preventing leaks and that tanks continue to pose risks , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) whether the tanks regulated by epa and the states have the required equipment and are being properly operated and maintained , ( 2 ) the breadth of epa's and the states' tank inspections and the types of enforcement actions taken , and ( 3 ) whether upgraded tanks were still leaking . the congress has an opportunity to help alleviate the states' resource shortages by providing additional funding for inspections and enforcement or more flexibility to use existing funds to improve these activities . to better ensure that underground storage tanks meet federal equipment , operations , and maintenance requirements to prevent leaks and contamination that pose threats to public health , we are making four recommendations to the administrator , epa . first , we recommend that epa address the remaining non - upgraded tanks by working with the states to ( 1 ) review available information and determine those empty or inactive tanks that pose the greatest potential health and environmental risks , 2 ) set up time tables for the owners , states , or epa to remove or close these tanks in accordance with federal procedures , and ( 3 ) take enforcement actions against owners and operators who continue to operate tanks without the required equipment . second , we recommend that epa supplement the agency's more general training support , such as providing manuals and materials , by having each region work with each of the states in its jurisdiction to determine specific training needs and tailored ways to meet them . third , we recommend that epa negotiate with each state to reach a minimum frequency for physical inspections of all its tanks . however , 47 states reported the need for additional training for their staff , and 41 requested additional technical assistance from the federal government to provide such training .