sec . comprehensive plan and biennial exercises on responding to cyber attacks . ( a ) comprehensive plan of department of defense to support civil authorities in response to cyber attacks by foreign powers. — ( 1 ) plan required. — ( a ) in general. — not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall develop a comprehensive plan for the united states cyber command to support civil authorities in responding to cyber attacks by foreign powers ( as defined in section 101 of the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 ( 50 u.s.c . 1801 ) ) against the united states or a united states person . ( b ) elements. — the plan required by subparagraph ( a ) shall include the following: ( i ) a plan for internal department of defense collective training activities that are integrated with exercises conducted with other agencies and state and local governments . ( ii ) plans for coordination with the heads of other federal agencies and state and local governments pursuant to the exercises required under clause ( i ) . ( iii ) a list of any other exercises previously conducted that are used in the formulation of the plan required by subparagraph ( a ) , such as operation noble eagle . ( iv ) descriptions of the roles , responsibilities , and expectations of federal , state , and local authorities as the secretary understands them . ( v ) descriptions of the roles , responsibilities , and expectations of the active components and reserve components of the armed forces . ( vi ) a description of such legislative and administrative action as may be necessary to carry out the plan required by subparagraph ( a ) . ( 2 ) comptroller general of the united states review of plan. — the comptroller general of the united states shall review the plan developed under paragraph ( 1 ) ( a ) . our objective was to determine the extent to which the department of defense's ( dod ) section 1648 report submission addressed the statutorily required elements . to determine the extent to which dod's section 1648 report addressed the statutorily required elements , we analyzed the text of dod's section 1648 report . to conduct our analysis of dod's section 1648 report , two of our analysts analyzed the text of the section 1648 report and assessed the extent to which the report addressed the six elements required by the statute . the analysts assessed each element in the report as “fully addressed,” “partially addressed,” or “not addressed.” if the section 1648 report addressed all aspects of the required element , the analysts determined that dod had “fully addressed” the element . if the report addressed some aspects of a required element , but not all , the analysts determined that dod had “partially addressed” the element . if the report did not address any aspects of a required element , the analysts determined that dod “did not address” the element . a third independent analyst reviewed the initial determinations and assessed whether they were accurate .