our finding is accurate . the accident investigation database to which msha refers in its comments does not track all accidents , it only tracks those that were investigated ; therefore , the database cannot be used to monitor trends in all mine accidents . in addition , as noted in our report , the information in the database is incomplete , and the database is not widely used throughout the agency because it is not user friendly . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of labor , the assistant secretary for mine safety and health , and other interested parties . copies will be made available to others upon request . this report is also available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or revae moran at ( 202 ) 512-3863 . other major contributors are listed in appendix iv . technology center specialist conducts review of plan for compliance with regulations , policies , and procedures specialist / supervisor suggests approval / disapproval to chief of the mine waste and if the plan is disapproved , msha forwards the review comments and requests for additional technical information to the mine operator via the same process indicated for plan approval . the briefing to which msha refers is the exit conference held on august 5 , 2003 , in which we described the findings , conclusions , and recommendations contained in this report to msha in detail . at this conference , as well as briefings held with top msha officials in june , msha generally concurred with our findings , conclusions , and recommendations . the information presented at the exit conference and the other briefings is consistent with the information contained in this report . we believe the title of the report presents a fair , balanced , and accurate representation of the information in our report . moreover , msha's own suggested title acknowledges a need for improvement . our finding that msha does not provide adequate oversight of the districts' completion of 6-month technical inspections is accurate . as msha acknowledges in its comments , the information reported by the district offices to msha headquarters on technical inspections is not accurate or complete . therefore , msha headquarters cannot use this information to monitor the completion of inspections by the districts . our draft report noted problems with the accuracy of the data reported by district offices to msha headquarters on technical inspections . however , because of the concerns msha expressed in its comments about the accuracy of the data , we clarified the discussion of this issue in the report and deleted detailed information included in an appendix to the draft derived from the data . we commend msha on its efforts to improve the accuracy of the data collected by its district offices , thereby enhancing the agency's ability to monitor the status of these inspections .