financial management . dhs has made progress in addressing its financial management and internal controls weaknesses , but has been unable to obtain an unqualified audit opinion on its financial statements since the department's creation and faces challenges in modernizing its financial management systems . dhs has , among other things , reduced the number of material weaknesses in internal controls from 18 in 2003 to 5 in fiscal year 2011 ; achieved its goal of receiving a qualified audit opinion on its fiscal year 2011 consolidated balance sheet and statement of custodial activity for the first time since the department's creation ; established a goal of obtaining an audit opinion on all of its fiscal year 2012 financial statements ; and expanded the scope of the annual financial audit to the complete set of fiscal year 2012 financial statements , which dhs believes will help it to obtain an unqualified opinion for fiscal year 2013 . however , dhs continues to face challenges in financial management . for example , dhs anticipates difficulties in providing its auditors transaction - level detail to support balances reported in its fiscal year 2012 financial statements in order to obtain an opinion on its financial statements . this is due to , among other things , components not retaining original acquisition documentation or enforcing policies related to recording purchases and making payments . dhs also anticipates its auditors issuing a disclaimer in their fiscal year 2012 report on internal controls over financial reporting due to material weaknesses in internal controls , such as lack of effective controls over the recording of financial transactions related to property , plant , and equipment . in addition , in december 2011 , dhs reported that the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) have an essential business need to replace their financial management systems , but dhs has not fully developed its plans for upgrading existing or implementing new financial systems at these agencies . according to dhs's june 2012 version of its integrated strategy for high risk management , the department plans to extend the useful life of fema's current system by about 3 years , while fema proceeds with a new financial management system solution , and is in the process of identifying the specific approach , necessary resources , and time frames for upgrading existing or implementing new financial systems at uscg and ice . for example , in april 2012 , the under secretary for management appointed an executive steering committee and tasked this committee with creating a “data mart” to integrate data from disparate sources and allow the dissemination of timely and reliable information by march 2013 . further , consistent with our prior recommendations , dhs has implemented mechanisms to promote accountability for management integration among department and component management chiefs by , among other things , having the department chiefs develop written objectives that explicitly reflect priorities and milestones for that management function . although these actions are important , dhs needs to continue to demonstrate sustainable progress in integrating its management functions within and across the department and its components and take additional actions to further and more effectively integrate the department .