each module is being planned as a separate project . we reported in february 2000 that , according to blm's cio , planning for nils would continue but development would not begin until after the bureau architecture was sufficiently complete and its business needs documented . since that time , blm has completed the initial bureau architecture and issued an interim architectural policy for bureauwide it projects which is intended to guide and constrain new project development until development and implementation of the bureau architecture is sufficiently complete . in addition , blm has begun work on the first of the four nils modules — geocommunicator — estimated to cost about $1.9 million . blm plans to use geocommunicator to establish an internet web site using its current information systems to facilitate data sharing and collaborative work among blm staff . although the geocommunicator project is a small part of the nils effort , we determined whether sufficient controls are in place to properly guide and manage the project . blm's initial bureau architecture and interim policy provide adequate architectural guidance for the nils geocommunicator module . however , the bureau's investment management processes are not yet sufficient to properly track and assess the progress of the geocommunicator project . for example , the bureau is only now beginning to identify and implement the investment processes and criteria necessary to control approved projects . by moving forward with development of the geocommunicator module before strengthening its investment management processes and practices , the bureau is increasing the risk that the project may not adequately meet its needs or be delivered as planned . in addition , blm has not assessed the potential risk and impact of the workload that geocommunicator may have on blm's current computing environment . geocommunicator users will be able to view , download , and store land data in graphic formats , which would necessitate blm having adequate computing capacity to support new hardware and communications requirements resulting from new uses of blm land data . in addition , geocommunicator will facilitate the downloading of land record data from external sources into blm's databases . blm users could then combine external data with blm's own data , with few controls over the use or quality of external data , and without timeliness standards for the external data . without an understanding of the impact of geocommunicator on blm's systems and data , blm has no assurance that the project will produce expected results and meet the bureau's needs . blm continues taking corrective actions to implement the recommendations we made in 1999 and 2000 . while these actions are not yet complete , the changes made thus far should help to improve the acquisition and management of it investments . the bureau has begun to improve the selection and management of its it investments and develop more mature systems development and acquisition capabilities . the bureau is also developing a plan and schedule to integrate its improvement actions , developing plans and actions to properly control ongoing and evaluate completed it projects , and establishing an enterprise architecture . however , more needs to be done to fully address our recommendations . blm recognizes this and said it will continue to work diligently on these areas .