dpc provided no timeframes for doing so . dod officials issued the proposed rule in april 2019 to implement section 831's statutory preference for performance - based payments for public comment . the proposed rule notes that performance - based payments are the preferred method of contract financing at dod whenever practicable . the period for public comments ends on july 1 , 2019 . dod officials indicated that they hope to issue a final rule in early 2020 . dod has not conducted a comprehensive assessment of the impact of its contract financing and profit policies on the defense industry since the dfair study was completed in 1985 . in the intervening time , there have been significant changes in the composition of the defense industry , business practices , and economic conditions . we discuss this study in more detail below . dod officials acknowledged that the department has not done a comprehensive assessment of how its contract financing policies affect the defense industry since the dfair study was issued in 1985 . since the dfair commission issued its report in 1985 , congress and dod have made a number of changes to the statutory and regulatory framework intended to ( 1 ) reduce the administrative burden associated with contract financing and ( 2 ) encourage the use of performance - based payments ( see figure 2 ) . our review found that dod paid less in performance - based payments after making some changes to contract financing policies , but started increasing these payments again in 2016 . according to dpc officials , the most comprehensive study of contract financing and profit policies was conducted by the dfair commission in 1985 . the dfair commission assessed , among other issues , whether dod contract financing policies were equitable in maintaining the defense industrial base and cost - effective for dod , the effectiveness of dod contract financing policies as a means of encouraging contractor cost efficiencies , the profitability of defense work and its reasonableness in comparison with the profitability of the non - defense sector , and the interrelationship of dod's contract finance and profit policies . in evaluating contractor financing costs , dfair developed a model of a typical contract to use in calculating contractors' contract financing costs , the amount of interest a contractor would have to pay if it were required to bear all those costs , and the effect of payment delays on contractor financing costs . we also found that the amount dod paid out in performance - based payments on those contracts fell between 2010 and 2016 before increasing in 2017 . in december 2016 , congress enacted section 831 of the fiscal year 2017 ndaa to establish performance - based payments as the preferred type of contract financing for dod in statute . section 831 also directed the secretary of defense to ensure that nontraditional defense contractors and other private sector companies are eligible for performance - based payments , in line with best commercial practices . figure 3 shows the differences in dod's progress and performance - based payments between fiscal years 2010 and 2018 for contracts administered by dcma .