gao - 03-662 . washington , d.c.: july 24 , 2003 . ( see fig . increases in waivers and write - offs during this period have also contributed , in part , to the di program's growing overpayment debt . ssa must waive collection of an overpayment if ssa determines that the beneficiary was not at fault in causing the overpayment and either the beneficiary would be financially unable to repay the overpayment or recovery would be against equity and good conscience . the agency may also write - off overpayments for various reasons , including when the agency is unable to locate an individual for a prolonged period of time . waivers and write - offs increased from about $222 million in 1999 to about $325 million in 2003 . the increase in waivers and write - offs is attributable , in part , to increases in total program outlays during this period . ultimately , our review suggests that overpayments not only contribute to increasing overpayment debt , but also may be a disincentive for individuals with disabilities to return to work . in particular , the potential of having to repay a large overpayment may discourage some beneficiaries from continuing to work , thus running contrary to ssa's goal of helping such individuals become self - sufficient . ssa's ability to detect and prevent earnings - related overpayments is hindered by a lack of timely wage data , inefficient processes for conducting work cdrs , and potentially inaccurate management information . first , the earnings data produced by the enforcement operation are typically 12-18 months old when ssa first receives it , thus making some overpayments inevitable . second , ssa lacks the means to systematically screen and identify beneficiaries most likely to incur large overpayments . moreover , even if such a screen existed , ssa currently lacks an automated alert mechanism for notifying its field office and program service center staff about such cases . third , ssa relies on management information data that may not accurately reflect the age of work cdr cases — the time it actually takes to review and complete them . inaccurate management data can impede the agency's ability to effectively monitor program activities and make corrections , when necessary . these weaknesses may contribute to some cases becoming old and resulting in large overpayments . we identified several cases in which as much as 7 years had passed between the point at which the case was initially selected for development and the time it was completed . ssa currently relies on outdated information to verify di beneficiaries' eligibility for benefits . the agency conducts periodic matches between its earnings records and irs wage data to determine if beneficiaries have earnings above the sga level . the continuing disability review enforcement operation ( enforcement operation ) is generally conducted three times annually — a principal match in may , and two supplemental matches in august , and february of the following year . according to some ssa officials , earnings data from the enforcement operation are generally about 12-18 months old by the time the cases are selected for review and arrive in the program service center .