gao - 16-346 . washington , d.c.: april 8 , 2016 . we are not making recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . dod did not provide any written comments , but the kc - 46 program office provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the air force ; and the director of the office of management and budget . the report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . the program office has 14 key performance parameters and system attributes that are critical to the kc - 46 aircraft's military capability and 7 technical performance capabilities that track progress to meeting contract specifications . table 3 provides a description of each key performance parameter and system attribute . table 4 provides the status of each technical performance capability . in addition to the contact named above , cheryl andrew , assistant director ; kurt gurka ; stephanie gustafson ; katheryn hubbell ; nate vaught ; and robin wilson made key contributions to this report . kc - 46 tanker aircraft: challenging testing and delivery schedules lie ahead . kc - 46 tanker aircraft: key aerial refueling capabilities should be demonstrated prior to the production decision . the government is not responsible for the additional cost . the kc - 46 program is meeting total acquisition cost and performance targets , but has experienced some recent schedule delays . the government's cost estimate has declined for a fourth consecutive year and is now about $7.3 billion less than the original estimate . in addition , the aircraft is projected to meet all performance capabilities . however , boeing experienced some problems developing the aircraft . as a result , it now expects to deliver the first 18 fully capable aircraft in october 2018 instead of august 2017 , 14 months later than expected . the air force is continuing to work within its total program acquisition cost estimate for the kc - 46 , which includes development , procurement , and military construction costs . the total program acquisition cost now stands at $44.4 billion . this is about $7.3 billion less than the original estimate of $51.7 billion or about 14 percent less . average program acquisition unit costs have decreased by the same percent because quantities have remained the same . table 1 provides a comparison of the initial and current quantity and cost estimates . the air force has been able to decrease its cost estimate over the past 4 years primarily because it has not added or changed requirements and therefore there were fewer engineering changes than expected .