( fig . 6 highlights these expected benefits. ) the more accurate and updated flood hazard information produced through map modernization is expected to help improve flood mitigation in participating communities . the nfip requires participating communities to adopt and enforce building standards based on the floodplain boundaries and base flood elevations when maps are updated . for example , the lowest floor of structures in new construction must be elevated to at least the base flood elevations identified on the maps . fema's policy is to monitor communities to ensure that they have adopted building standards that meet the minimum nfip criteria and to ensure that they are effectively enforcing these standards . if communities fail to establish and enforce minimum nfip flood plain building standards , fema can suspend availability of federal flood insurance . communities also may use updated flood hazard data to take actions to mitigate flooding that go beyond adopting the building standards required by the nfip . for example , communities may use the data from the maps to identify where to conduct capital improvement projects designed to mitigate flooding of structures in the floodplain . in addition , fema has established a community rating system that provides discounts on flood insurance premiums for those communities that take mitigation actions beyond those required by the nfip . sarasota county , florida , is in the process of modernizing its flood maps and has been using the maps and the models behind them to implement stormwater capital improvement projects whose purpose is to mitigate the flood risk for structures now located in the floodplain . these efforts have also resulted in lower insurance premiums for property owners . in the late 1990s , because sarasota county officials believed that current maps did not accurately reflect changes to the floodplain that had occurred due to development and other factors , they began an effort to aggressively remap the county's watersheds using gis and new flood modeling technologies . at the time , the county had experienced several significant flooding events where hundreds of properties not depicted in the floodplain on its 11-year old maps were damaged . figure 7 shows both the increase and decrease in the floodplain based on the county's remapping efforts . ( 3 ) to what extent does fema's strategy for managing the map modernization program support the achievement of these benefits and what , if any , limitations could affect the implementation of the strategy ? to answer these questions , we analyzed available information from fema on the program's purpose , objectives , and status and met with agency officials in headquarters and in the regional offices to discuss the program's progress . we also conducted site visits to states and communities that have already begun to modernize their flood maps and interviewed industry organizations such as the association of state flood plain managers , the national association of flood and stormwater management agencies , and the national emergency management association . we conducted our work from april 2003 to march 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for more details on our scope and methodology .