construction . state dots award construction contracts , oversee construction , and accept the completed project . in the preliminary design and environmental review phase , many activities are carried out pursuant to the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) and other federal laws . under nepa , federal agencies must assess the effects of major federal actions — those they propose to fund , carry out or permit — that significantly affect the environment . nepa has two principal purposes: ( 1 ) to ensure that an agency carefully considers detailed information concerning significant environmental impacts and ( 2 ) to ensure that this information will be made available to the public . nepa generally requires federal agencies to prepare documentation showing the extent of the project's environmental impacts . in each state , we interviewed the fhwa division office and the state dot . to obtain more detailed information on processes to complete highway projects — but to minimize the burden on interviewees and in the interest of time — we interviewed regional offices of key resource agencies in two of the six states we selected: california and north carolina . we chose these states based on geographic diversity , as well as previously conducted fieldwork . we selected six resource agencies to interview , as they were often cited in our preliminary review of reports , publications , and other documents , as well as in early interviews with state dots . the resource agencies we interviewed were: u.s. army corps of engineers , u.s. environmental protection agency , u.s . fish and wildlife service , u.s. forest service , national marine fisheries service , and state historic preservation offices . there are potentially other federal — as well as state , local , and tribal — agencies that could have been interviewed , but we chose to limit our scope to these six federal agencies . these interviews are not generalizable to all states . furthermore , for this report , we focused only on federal - aid highways and not other types of highways . to identify state dot perspectives on the benefits and challenges associated with implementing provisions meant to help expedite highway projects established in safetea - lu , we ( 1 ) reviewed information obtained in the above mentioned interviews and ( 2 ) conducted a survey of state dots . to conduct this survey , we identified key provisions within safetea - lu that we felt were meant to expedite highway projects based on our review of the legislation , analysis of relevant reports , and interviews with highway project stakeholders . we then developed a draft survey to gather state dots' perspectives on the benefits and challenges associated with these safetea - lu provisions . we selected five states in which to conduct pretests: california , iowa , pennsylvania , utah , and washington . in each pretest , we provided a state dot official with a copy of our draft survey , asked them to complete it , and then contacted them after 1 hour to discuss the clarity of each question . through this method , we were able to refine the questions and closed - ended responses in our survey .