marshals district except three . treasury uses a similar model for managing real property and also uses one national contract for the management of real property , which includes maintaining and eventually disposing of the property . marshals and treasury use different national contractors , and have not evaluated the feasibility of consolidating the contracting for real property management . they therefore do not know if there could be improved effectiveness , efficiency gains , or cost savings realized because of economies of scale . in fiscal year 2011 , marshals had contracts for the management , storage , and disposal of all assets at a cost of about $19 million . treasury's two nationwide contracts — one for the management of personal property and one for the management of real property — cost about $49 million for fiscal year 2011 . given the resources needed to maintain separate asset tracking systems , asset storage facilities , and contracts for the management of property ; consolidating these systems , storage facilities , and contracts could result in increased efficiency , effectiveness , and cost savings . however , gathering additional information would be important to help effectively evaluate consolidation proposals and activities , as well as any expected benefits . given the proximity of many marshals and treasury asset storage facilities as detailed above , we asked officials from the two agencies if they had studied the feasibility of consolidating their separate contracting activities for the storage of similar assets . both marshals and treasury responded that , while they have attempted to consolidate storage facilities where practical , they had not considered such an analysis because of factors such as ( 1 ) the unique security requirements for their stored assets ; ( 2 ) variations in the types of assets maintained by each agency that may create unique storage needs ; ( 3 ) different contracting rules and requirements for each agency ; ( 4 ) the inability to accurately predict the combined storage needs of both agencies , which affects their ability to contract for these services ; and ( 5 ) overall lack of assurance that combining storage contracts will result in cost savings . however , according to these same officials , the departments have not analyzed the similarities or differences in each department's security requirements , storage needs , or contracting rules . thus , the extent to which variations in these factors hinder consolidation efforts is not known . conducting a study that assesses the feasibility of consolidation , including the costs , benefits , and key questions to consider when evaluating consolidation , would better position justice and treasury to determine if consolidation would result in increases in efficiency , effectiveness , or cost savings . justice and treasury separately manage over $9 billion in seized assets . the departments use different information systems and separate contracts , and maintain separate storage facilities that are frequently within 20 miles of a similar facility . while the agencies have taken some steps to coordinate forfeiture program efforts , the current fiscal environment and the billions of dollars of assets involved underscore the need for agencies to examine how consolidating operations might contribute to cost savings or effectiveness gains .