4 , ch . these adjustments would increase the minimum and maximum cash requirements . first , a working capital fund may increase the minimum and maximum cash requirements for the amount of accumulated operating results planned for return to customer accounts . the working capital fund returns accumulated profits back to its customers by reducing future prices so it can operate on a break - even basis over time . the second adjustment allowed by the revised dod financial management regulation is an allowance for funds appropriated directly to a working capital fund that are obligated in the year received but not fully spent until future years . over the last several years , the twcf has received hundreds of millions of dollars that has helped it maintain cash solvency . according to the twcf budget request , ustranscom estimates the fiscal year 2014 ara funding requirement to be $150 million plus $691 million for the contingency airlift requirement , for a total of $841 million . however , in the fiscal year 2015 twcf budget , ustranscom estimates the fiscal year 2015 ara funding requirement to be $1,077 million , while the fiscal year 2015 air force operation and maintenance budget provides for $150 million for the ara . a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is contained in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2013 to july 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the afwcf relies on sales revenue rather than regular appropriations to finance its continuing operations . the afwcf is intended to ( 1 ) generate sufficient resources to cover the full cost of its operations and ( 2 ) operate on a break - even basis over time — that is , neither make a gain nor incur a loss . customers primarily use appropriated funds to finance orders placed with the afwcf . cash generated from the sale of goods and services is the afwcf's primary means of maintaining an adequate level of cash to sustain its operations . the ability to generate cash consistent with dod's regulations depends on ( 1 ) accurately projecting workload , such as the number of aircraft , engines , missiles , and components needed to be repaired during the year or annual transportation requirements needed to move united states forces , equipment , and supplies around the globe , and ( 2 ) accurately setting prices to recover the full costs of producing goods and services . dod policy requires the afwcf to establish its sales prices prior to the start of each fiscal year and to apply these predetermined or “stabilized” prices to most orders received during the year — regardless of when the work is accomplished or what costs are incurred . stabilized prices provide customers with protection during the year of execution from prices greater than those assumed in the budget and permits customers to execute their programs as approved by congress .