progress was made during fiscal year 2005 . because comparative financial statements are intended to furnish useful data about the differences in activity and balances between the 2 years shown , consistency in how amounts are reported for the 2 years is a major factor in creating comparability . we found that treasury lacked a process to ensure that consolidated financial statements and notes for fiscal years 2005 and 2004 were consistently reported and therefore comparable . during fiscal year 2005 , treasury requested that agencies resubmit fiscal year 2004 financial information along with their fiscal year 2005 financial information . some agencies resubmitted fiscal year 2004 amounts in fiscal year 2005 that differed from what treasury published in fiscal year 2004 . also , certain information reported for fiscal 2004 may have required reclassification to be comparable to the fiscal year 2005 amounts . treasury did not analyze the fiscal year 2004 information submitted in fiscal year 2005 or reclassify amounts within various financial statement line items and notes to achieve comparability and chose to continue to report what was published for fiscal year 2004 . for example , the reconciliations of net operating cost and unified budget deficit showed $47.8 billion and $.2 billion for property , plant , and equipment disposals and revaluations for fiscal years 2005 and 2004 , respectively . however , based on the audited financial information provided by agencies to treasury in gfrs in fiscal year 2005 , the fiscal year 2004 amount should be $25.4 billion , rather than $.2 billion . treasury has been continuing to design and further implement its new process for compiling the cfs with the development of gfrs . we continue , though , to be concerned that the disciplined processes necessary to reduce risks to acceptable levels have not yet been effectively implemented . treasury has submitted a proposal to the federal accounting standards advisory board ( fasab ) seeking to amend previously issued standards and eliminate or lessen the disclosure requirements for the consolidated financial statements so that gaap would no longer require certain of the information treasury has not been reporting . comments on the exposure draft of a proposed fasab standard , based on the treasury proposal , are due march 1 , 2006 . treasury stated that it is waiting for fasab approval and issuance of this proposed standard to determine the disclosures that will be required in future consolidated financial statements . see “agency comments and our evaluation” section . we continue to believe that our recommendations relating to the statement of changes in cash balance from unified budget and other activities , reconciliations of net operating cost and unified budget deficit , and the adjustment process are sound . our recommendations are intended to allow flexibility in developing viable solutions to address the issues . we will consider any alternative action that treasury may take to satisfactorily address the recommendations with which it has disagreed . see appendix i for the status of related recommendations . in addition to the above contact , the following individuals made key contributions to this report: lynda downing , assistant director ; keith kronin ; katherine schirano ; and taya tasse .