gao - 06-389 . washington , d.c.: march 22 , 2006 . this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or at aloisee@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . r. stockton butler , nancy crothers , jim shafer , and eugene wisnoski made key contributions to this statement . combating nuclear smuggling: dhs has made progress in deploying radiation detection equipment at u.s . ports of entry , but concerns remain . combating nuclear smuggling: corruption , maintenance , and coordination problems challenge u.s. efforts to provide radiation detection equipment to other countries . gao - 06-311 . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2006 . combating nuclear smuggling: efforts to deploy radiation detection equipment in the united states and in other countries . gao - 05-840t . washington , d.c.: june 21 , 2005 . preventing nuclear smuggling: doe has made limited progress in installing radiation detection equipment at highest priority foreign seaports . gao - 05-375 . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2005 . container security: current efforts to detect nuclear materials , new initiatives , and challenges . gao - 03-297t . washington , d.c.: november 18 , 2002 . customs service: acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment . gao - 03-235t . washington , d.c.: october 17 , 2002 . nuclear nonproliferation: u.s. efforts to combat nuclear smuggling . gao - 02-989t washington , d.c.: july 30 , 2002 . nuclear nonproliferation: u.s. efforts to help other countries combat nuclear smuggling need strengthened coordination and planning . gao - 02-426 . washington , d.c.: may 16 , 2002 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the second potential issue with cbp's procedures involves nrc documentation . individuals and organizations shipping radiological materials to the united states must generally acquire a nrc license , but according to nrc officials , the license does not have to accompany the shipment . this plan broadly defines a set of interagency goals and outlines the roles and responsibilities of participating agencies . however , the plan lacks key components , including overall program cost estimates , projected time frames for program completion , and specific performance measures . without these elements in the plan , state will be limited in its ability to effectively measure u.s. programs' progress toward achieving the interagency goals . additionally , in its role as lead interagency coordinator , state has not maintained accurate information on the operational status and location of all radiation detection equipment provided by u.s. programs .