increased cost to policyholders . insurers commented that if a prefunding mechanism were established , it likely would result in increased costs , such as administrative costs and increased costs to policyholders . for example , one insurer told us that as users of such a mechanism , its costs for such a mechanism would be passed to policyholders . this insurer also noted that additional costs may cause policyholders to forgo terrorism coverage ; therefore , in their view a prefunding mechanism could contravene the purpose of tria — to encourage the availability and affordability of terrorism coverage for policyholders that want to insure against terrorism exposure . some uncertainty exists in the market about whether tria covers cyber terrorism risks . according to industry participants , cyber attacks could involve a wide spectrum of potential threats that could impact property , critical communications , and utility and transportation infrastructure , among other unconventional threats . industry participants also pointed out that cyber events have the ability to impact numerous lines of insurance coverage . while tria does not explicitly exclude coverage of cyber risks ( or other specific perils ) it also does not explicitly cover it . program guidance and other official communications have been silent on this point — thus , allowing for confusion or uncertainties about coverage . according to our questionnaire , 8 of 15 insurers considered losses resulting from cyber terrorism as covered by tria as long as the insurer underwrote cyber terrorism coverage as part of the underlying policy . however , our questionnaire also revealed uncertainty about such tria coverage . for example , 7 other insurers said that , based on their understanding of tria , they did not know if losses resulting from cyber terrorism would be covered by tria . insurers commented that more clarity about the treatment of cyber terrorism under the program would be helpful to eliminate any uncertainty in the insurance industry about coverage of this type of risk . insurers also commented that because cyber terrorism is an emerging risk there was some uncertainty about what the term encompassed . for example , one insurer noted that there is no statutory definition for cyber terrorism and that depending on the definition of cyber terrorism the program may or may not be triggered ; therefore , the insurer said that a consistent definition would be needed . other options for nbcr coverage exist . for instance , nbcr coverage can be obtained through the use of captive insurers accessing the tria program and we previously reported that some large businesses elected this coverage route . there also is a limited stand - alone terrorism insurance market for nbcr , but high prices have prevented most businesses from purchasing coverage . and , although reinsurance companies traditionally excluded nbcr , about two - thirds of reinsurance companies offered some coverage for nbcr events , according to a 2010 survey . some insurers told us that expanding tria to require insurers to make nbcr coverage available would result in significant disruptions to the market . some insurers said that an nbcr event could render the insurance industry insolvent . another insurer told us that underwriting nbcr risks would decrease its capacity to underwrite other types of insurance .