a cds is this type of transaction . congress largely adopted the pwg recommendations when it passed the commodity futures modernization act of 2000 ( cfma ) . as a result , the commodity exchange act ( cea ) was amended to exclude the otc cds market from the regulatory and enforcement jurisdiction of cftc . federal securities laws also exclude cds from sec oversight , although sec retains antifraud enforcement authority . sec's authority over cds activity conducted outside of a registered broker - dealer is generally limited to enforcing antifraud provisions , including prohibitions against insider trading . these provisions apply because cds generally are considered security - based swap agreements under cfma . however , because sec is generally statutorily prohibited under current law from promulgating record - keeping or reporting rules regarding cds trading in the otc market outside of a registered broker - dealer , its ability to enforce its authority is difficult . however , in the past 3 years sec has initiated a number of cds - related enforcement cases for alleged violations of its antifraud prohibitions , including cases involving market manipulation , insider trading , fraudulent valuation , and financial reporting . more recently , in september 2008 sec initiated an investigation into possible market manipulation involving cds . in connection with the investigation , sec announced that it would require certain hedge fund managers and other entities with cds positions to disclose those positions to sec and provide other information under oath . according to sec , depending on the results the investigation may lead to more specific policy recommendations regarding cds . sec officials indicated that investigations of otc cds transactions have been far more difficult and time - consuming than those involving exchange - traded equities and options because of the prohibition on requiring recording keeping and reporting for cds . other risks and challenges from cds identified by market participants , observers , and regulators include a lack of transparency in the cds market , the potential for manipulation related to the use of cds as a price discovery mechanism , and the use of cds for speculative purposes . according to some regulators , market participants , and observers , limited transparency or disclosure of cds market activity may have resulted in the overestimation of risk in the market . while the types of risk may be similar , the degree of risk can vary . however , equity derivatives specifically were identified as the otc derivatives that are most similar to cds in terms of the risks and challenges that they presented . otc equity derivatives , such as equity swaps and options , were said to be similar to cds because of the potential for abrupt shifts in exposure , a lack of transparency , and the ability to customize the product . nevertheless , according to regulators and industry observers , the cds market differs from other otc derivatives markets because it poses greater risks due to the potential for greater increases in payment obligations and larger impacts from life - cycle events such as those associated with jump - to - default risk .