not applicable . dod's report does not include range of options for force - structureplans and categorical infrastructure inventory . are the study results presented in the report in a clear manner ? are recommendations supported by analyses ? the mandate language does not require dod to include recommendations and dod did not include recommendations . is a realistic range of options provided ? are study participants / stakeholders ( i.e. , services and combatant commands ) informed of the study results and recommendations ? in addition to the contact named above , gina hoffman ( assistant director ) , tracy barnes , ronald bergman , patricia donahue , kerstin hudon , terrance lam , amie lesser , carol petersen , clarice nassif ransom , matt spiers , tristan to , and john wren made key contributions to this report . high - risk series: progress on many high - risk areas , while substantial efforts needed on others . gao - 17-317 . washington , d.c.: february 15 , 2017 . was the study plan followed ? team is not aware of any study plan that guided the development of this report . were deviations from the study plan explained and documented ? team is not aware of any study plan that guided the development of this report . was the study plan updated over the course of the study and the updates explicitly identified in the study and updated study plan ? assumptions and limitations are reasonable and , where appropriate , consistent are assumptions and limitations explicitly identified ? team is not aware of any study plan that guided the development of this report . given the judgment required to execute the analyses the assumptions and constraints are key to team's determination of the accuracy and analytical sufficiency of the report . are the assumptions reasonable in that they are realistic , credible , and accompanied by a statement of their rationale ? rationale for inclusion in or exclusion from gao's review given the judgment required to execute the analyses , the assumptions and constraints are key to the team's determination of the accuracy and analytical sufficiency of the report . team felt that ‘reasonable' was sufficient and ‘necessary' was not readily apparent . do the assumptions support a sound analysis ? given the judgment required to execute the analyses the assumptions and constraints are key to team's determination of the accuracy and analytical sufficiency of the report . are the assumptions used in analyses common throughout the study and models ? this standard is not needed to answer the objectives of our report . other standards for study assumptions are more relevant and sufficient for our purposes . do the assumptions contribute to an objective and balanced research effort ? scenarios and threats are reasonable did they synthesize the supporting analyses such that it is traceable back to formal guidance ? washington , d.c.: march 15 , 2016 . underutilized facilities: dod and gsa information sharing may enhance opportunities to use space at military installations . gao - 15-346 . washington , d.c.: june 18 , 2015 . military base realignments and closures: more guidance and information needed to take advantage of opportunities to consolidate training . gao - 16-45 . washington , d.c.: february 18 , 2016 .