these transactions had to be manually processed into delphi . what is important here is that the information developed to prepare auditable annual financial statements is not available on an ongoing basis for day - to - day management of dot's programs and operations . as we have reported , cultural resistance to change , military service parochialism , and stovepiped operations have played a significant role in impeding previous attempts to implement broad - based reforms at the department of defense ( dod ) . the department's stovepiped approach is most evident in its current financial management systems environment , which dod recently estimated to include approximately 2,300 systems and systems development projects — many of which were developed in piecemeal fashion and evolved to accommodate different organizations , each with its own policies and procedures . as dod management has acknowledged , the department's current financial environment is comprised of many discrete systems characterized by poor integration and minimal data standardization and prevents managers from making more timely and cost - effective decisions . a reconciliation process , even if performed manually , is a valuable part of a sound financial management system . in fact , the less integrated the financial management system , the greater the need for adequate reconciliations because data are accumulated from various sources . for example , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ig reported that the department's lack of an integrated financial management system continues to impair the ability of certain operating divisions to prepare timely information . moreover , certain reconciliation processes were not adequately performed to ensure that differences were properly identified , researched , and resolved in a timely manner and that account balances were complete and accurate . reconciliations are needed to ensure that data have been recorded properly between the various systems and manual records . the comptroller general's standards for internal control in the federal government highlights reconciliation as a key control activity . as shown in figure 1 , auditors for 11 of the 19 agencies with noncompliant systems reported that the agencies had reconciliation problems , including difficulty reconciling their fund balance with treasury accounts with treasury's records . treasury policy requires agencies to reconcile their accounting records with treasury records monthly , which is comparable to individuals reconciling their checkbooks to their monthly bank statements . as we recently testified , dod had at least $7.5 billion in unexplained differences between treasury and dod fund activity records . many of these differences represent disbursements made and reported to treasury that had not yet been properly matched to obligations and recorded in dod accounting records . in addition to these unreconciled amounts , dod identified and reported an additional $3.6 billion in payment recording errors . these include disbursements that dod has specifically identified as containing erroneous or missing information and that cannot be properly recorded and charged against the correct , valid fund account . dod records many of these payment problems in suspense accounts . while dod made $1.6 billion in unsupported adjustments to its fund balances at the end of fiscal year 2002 to account for a portion of these payment recording errors , these adjustments did not resolve the related errors .