sba also agreed with this recommendation . sba informed us this month that it has undertaken a long - term review of the strategic plan with the aim of revising the performance goals and measures and linking performance to the new plans and goals . we will monitor sba's progress in implementing this initiative . we identified several problems with these measures . for example , several are output measures that did not reflect the actual progress being made . some are proxies that did not accurately represent what was being measured . there is a lack of measures for intermediate or end outcomes , and features in sba's description of the disaster loan program in its performance plans made assessing the program difficult . several of the limitations we found had been identified in previous gao or sba inspector general reports and had not been corrected . officials from sba's disaster area offices ( dao ) questioned whether the three output measures — establishing a field presence within 3 days of a disaster declaration , processing loan applications within 21 days , and disbursing initial loan amounts within 5 days of receiving the closing documents — were appropriate indicators of timely service to disaster victims since they did not , for example , capture recent program improvements . sba has had a 98 percent success rate in meeting the target for establishing a field presence each fiscal year since 1998 . officials from the area offices said that improvements in planning , interagency coordination , and technology enabled them to have staff on site within 1 day of a disaster declaration . according to dao staff , delays in establishing a field presence generally occurred because sba was waiting for decisions from state officials . sba data and comments from dao officials suggested that the second output measure — processing loan applications within 21 days of receipt — did not reflect improvements in past performance . for example , sba aimed for an 80 percent success rate for fiscal year 2001 , but the actual time required for processing averaged 13 days in fiscal year 2001 and fell to 12 days in fiscal year 2002 . the average time required to process the september 11 business loans was also about 13 days . dao officials attributed their faster processing times to several agencywide improvements . dao staff also suggested that another measure — the 5-day target for making initial disbursements once closing documents are received — did not reflect past performance and was a low threshold . before 2002 , sba had an internal goal of ordering disbursements within 3 days of receiving closing documents . when sba included this measure in the performance plan , the disbursement target was increased to 5 days to accommodate weekends and holidays , because sba's system for tracking disaster loan processing could not distinguish between workdays and other days . accustomed to the stricter 3-day standard , staff were able to meet the 5- day standard with ease . in commenting on a draft of our report , sba indicated that the output measures were established based on what was determined to be a reasonable level of service in an average year , taking into account the amount of resources required .