iii ) . for example , the estimate substantially meets the best practices for a comprehensive cost estimate . the estimate covers most life - cycle costs , is supported by a document that defines the work needed to accomplish the program's objectives and relates cost and schedule to deliverables , and provides technical descriptions for each project phase . however , although it defines assumptions and estimating standards , also referred to as ground rules , the cost estimate does not cite a rationale for the assumptions and only considers the impact of risks on a portion of the estimate . the estimate partially meets best practices for a well documented cost estimate . it provides technical descriptions for each project phase and documents a management briefing , but it does not contain many details about the underlying data used to develop the estimate . mits used a computer model to calculate the cost estimate , but the formulas built into this model and the resulting calculations are not shown . thus , it would not be possible for another cost analyst outside irs to use available documentation to recreate the estimate without access to this computer model . moreover , although irs provided documentation of its general cost estimation methodology , the methodology used to develop this cost estimate was not provided at a meaningful level of detail . the estimate partially meets best practices for an accurate cost estimate . the model used to calculate the estimate was developed using data from other comparable projects , which provides insight into actual costs on similar programs . however , inflation was not included . according to irs officials , inflation is not applied to cost estimates because it is factored in automatically during the budget process . if inflation were included in the cost estimate , it would be double - counted in the budget . applying inflation is an important s creating a cost estimate and it is a best practice for inflation to be included and documented when creating cost estimates . cost data must be expressed in like terms , which requires the transformation of historical or actual cost data into constant dollars . it is unclear from this description what data irs will be assessing and how the data will be interpreted . irdm plans should clearly state the name and include a description of each measure that is consistent with the methodology that will be used to calculate it . irdm planning documents do not explain how the preliminary measures were developed . well - designed evaluation plans should be properly documented and consider the kind of information to be acquired , the sources of information , the methods to be used for sampling from data sources and for collecting information , the timing and frequency of information collection , and the basis for comparing outcomes . irdm has a framework and process for how performance measures should be defined , how to describe scope , data sources , methodology , and data reliability . irdm has implemented some elements of their plan for some of the preliminary measures . for example , six of the performance measures have documentation that includes methodology .