the other agencies did not have such databases . during the course of our review , epa officials said that , without such tools , they had difficulty identifying the agreements they have entered into . officials also said they are planning to develop an electronic system to identify and track these agreements . epa said that , if developed , this system could offer one means of tracking and managing information related to , and contained in , interagency agreements . the weaknesses in tracking agreements may also affect the agencies' ability to determine whether these agreements are still needed and whether specific provisions are still in effect . iv. ) of the federal agencies involved in food safety activities , usda and fda have most of the regulatory responsibility for overseeing industry's compliance with federal regulations to ensure food safety and also account for most federal spending in this area . usda is responsible for ensuring the safety of meat , poultry , and certain egg products under the federal meat inspection act , the poultry products inspection act , and the egg products inspection act . fda is responsible for ensuring the safety of all other food — including whole shell eggs , seafood , milk , grain products , and fruits and vegetables — under the federal food , drug and cosmetic act and the public health service act . in addition , the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( the bioterrorism act ) gave fda the authority to commission other federal officials to inspect fda - regulated foods . usda and fda enforce their respective hazard analysis and critical control point ( haccp ) regulations . these regulations require that food processors maintain a plan identifying critical points in the production line where contamination is more likely to occur and adopt control techniques to prevent or reduce contamination . epa and nmfs also have related food safety and quality responsibilities . epa sets pesticide tolerances for food under the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act and the federal food , drug and cosmetic act and issues fish consumption advisories under the clean water act . nmfs conducts voluntary , fee - for - service inspections of seafood - processing facilities and seafood products under the federal agricultural marketing act of 1946 , the fish and wildlife act of 1956 , and reorganization plan no . to coordinate activities across jurisdictional boundaries , these federal agencies have entered into dozens of interagency agreements that address a wide range of food safety - related activities . the agreements concern numerous functions and activities , including how the agencies carry out inspections , public education and outreach , and research projects . because of your continuing interest in the efficient and effective use of government resources , you asked us to ( 1 ) identify overlaps that may exist in federal food safety functions and activities , ( 2 ) examine the extent to which federal food safety agencies are using interagency agreements to leverage existing resources and reduce any such overlaps , and ( 3 ) obtain the views of regulated industry and other stakeholders regarding opportunities to reduce overlap by consolidating federal food safety functions .