this is a promising development . according to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , “biomonitoring measurements are the most health - relevant assessments of exposure because they measure the amount of the chemical that actually gets into people from all environmental sources ( eg , air , soil , water , dust , or food ) combined.” the cdc conducts the most comprehensive biomonitoring program in the country and has recently published the first , second , and third national report on human exposure to environmental chemicals in 2001 , 2003 , and 2005 , respectively , which reported the concentrations of certain chemicals or their by - products in the blood or urine of a representative sample of the u.s. population . for example , the cdc reported in 2005 that 93 percent of the people tested had detectable levels of bisphenol a , a chemical used to make plastics , in their urine . for each of these reports , the cdc has increased the number of chemicals studied — from 27 in the first report , to 116 in the second , to 148 in the third . the cdc expects to report the concentrations of about 250 chemicals in a fourth report , to be released sometime in 2009 . in this context , in response to your request , we reviewed the ( 1 ) extent to which epa incorporates information from human biomonitoring studies into its assessments of risks of commercial chemicals , ( 2 ) steps that epa has taken to improve the usefulness of biomonitoring data for risk assessment , and ( 3 ) extent to which epa has the authority under tsca to require chemical companies to develop and submit biomonitoring data to epa . we focused on whether tsca impacts epa's ability to collect chemical data because our prior reports have noted challenges the agency faces in using tsca to collect chemical information . specifically , tsca places most of the burden of obtaining chemical data on epa , rather than on the chemical industry . to determine the extent to which epa incorporates data from human biomonitoring studies into its assessments of risks from chemicals , we reviewed relevant laws , agency policies , and guidance ; prior gao reports ; and academic publications . we also interviewed epa officials and subject matter experts on the current state of biomonitoring research . to determine the steps that epa has taken to improve the usefulness of biomonitoring data for risk assessment and management activities , we reviewed and analyzed documentation on epa's biomonitoring - related research efforts and interviewed relevant stakeholders , including special interest groups and members of epa's children's health protection advisory committee . to determine the extent to which epa has the authority to obtain biomonitoring data from the chemical industry , we interviewed epa officials and reviewed tsca and its implementing regulations , epa's human health research strategy , and other relevant documents . appendix i contains a detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from october 2007 to april 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .