 materiel distribution . this focus area is the process for synchronizing all elements of the logistics system to deliver needed supplies to support the deployed warfighter . dod has faced difficult distribution challenges in afghanistan due to limited cargo - processing and cargo - receiving capabilities , a lack of full visibility over supply and equipment movements into and around afghanistan , and a lack of coordination and competing logistics priorities in a coalition environment , along with several other challenges . during operations in iraq , dod faced challenges in coordinating and consolidating distribution and supply support , such as establishing an effective mechanism that would enable a joint force commander to exercise appropriate command and control over transportation and other logistics assets in the theater . such distribution and supply support challenges impeded the timely delivery of supplies and contributed to shortages of items critical to the warfighter . under our criteria for removing a high - risk designation , agencies with such programs must , among other things , develop and implement detailed corrective action plans and have an effective approach for managing performance , which includes a program to monitor and validate the effectiveness and sustainability of corrective actions and the ability to demonstrate progress . as we have discussed in prior reports and testimonies , dod has taken steps toward addressing supply chain management weaknesses over the last several years and has made some progress . in 2010 , dod issued its logistics strategic plan , which represents the department's most recent high - level strategy for continuing to address supply chain management , as well as other logistics issues . this report addresses dod's efforts to improve supply chain management under its 2010 logistics strategic plan . it was prepared under the authority of the comptroller general to conduct evaluations at his own initiative and is being addressed to the committees of jurisdiction and to others who have expressed interest in tracking dod's efforts to improve supply chain management . specifically , this report addresses the extent to which dod has developed and implemented ( 1 ) corrective action plans that address challenges in the three focus areas we identified for improvement , ( 2 ) an effective program for monitoring and validating the effectiveness and sustainability of supply chain management corrective actions , and ( 3 ) an ability to demonstrate supply chain management progress . the related gao products section at the end of this report provides additional information on our prior relevant work . to assess the extent to which dod has developed and implemented corrective action plans that address high - risk challenges in the three focus areas , we identified existing plans for logistics , supply chain management , and the three focus areas . we assessed the extent to which such plans provided a comprehensive , integrated strategy for improving one or more of the focus areas and included the key elements of a corrective action plan that we have previously identified . we also met with officials from the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for supply chain integration to determine the status of dod's planning efforts .