in addition , not all tribes are eligible for the regulatory process . for example , tribes whose political relationship with the united states has been terminated by congress , or tribes whose members are officially part of an already recognized tribe , are ineligible to be recognized through the regulatory process and must seek recognition through other avenues . the regulations lay out seven criteria that a group must meet before it can become a federally recognized tribe . essentially , these criteria require the petitioner to show that it is descended from a historic tribe and is a distinct community that has continuously existed as a political entity since a time when the federal government broadly acknowledged a political relationship with all indian tribes . the bia is completing a strategic plan to implement this recommendation . historically , the u.s. government has granted federal recognition through treaties , congressional acts , or administrative decisions within the executive branch — principally by the department of the interior . in a 1977 report to the congress , the american indian policy review commission criticized the department's tribal recognition policy . specifically , the report stated that the department's criteria to assess whether a group should be recognized as a tribe were not clear and concluded that a large part of the department's policy depended on which official responded to the group's inquiries . nevertheless , until the 1960s , the limited number of requests for federal recognition gave the department the flexibility to assess a group's status on a case - by - case basis without formal guidelines . there are currently 562 recognized tribes with a total membership of about 1.7 million . in addition , several hundred groups are currently seeking recognition . federally recognized tribes are eligible to participate in federal assistance programs . in fiscal year 2002 , the congress appropriated about $5 billion for programs and funding almost exclusively for recognized tribes . recognition also establishes a formal government - to - government relationship between the united states and a tribe . the quasi - sovereign status created by this relationship exempts certain tribal lands from most state and local laws and regulations . such exemptions generally apply to lands that the federal government has taken in trust for a tribe or its members . currently , about 54 million acres of land are held in trust . the exemptions also include , where applicable , laws regulating gaming . the indian gaming regulatory act of 1988 , which regulates indian gaming operations , permits a tribe to operate casinos on land in trust if the state in which it lies allows casino - like gaming and the tribe has entered into a compact with the state regulating its gaming businesses . in 1999 , federally recognized tribes reported an estimated $10 billion in gaming revenue , surpassing the amounts that the nevada casinos collected that year . in fiscal year 2001 , indian gaming revenues increased to $12.7 billion . owing to the rights and benefits that accrue with recognition and the controversy surrounding indian gaming , bia's regulatory process has been subject to intense scrutiny by groups seeking recognition and other interested parties — including already recognized tribes and affected state and local governments .