congress appropriates funds . odp issues grant guidance to states . state submits application , including spending plans , to odp . odp makes award to states noting any special conditions that must be cleared before the funds can be used . state meets and odp lifts special conditions , if applicable . state subgrants at least 80 percent of its funds to local governments . local governments submit receipts to the state for reimbursement . both the dhs oig report and house select committee report noted that state and local procurements have , in some cases , been affected by delays resulting from specific procurement requirements . some states purchase equipment centrally for all jurisdictions , while others sub - grant funds to local jurisdictions that make their own purchases . in these latter instances , local procurement regulations can affect the issuance of equipment purchase orders . the house select committee report discussed how state and local procurement processes and regulations could slow the expenditure of grant funds . for example , in kentucky , an effort was taken to organize bidding processes for localities and to provide them with pre - approved equipment and services lists . however , state and local laws require competitive bidding for any purchases above $20,000 , a requirement that can delay actual procurements . they include the following: 1 . local governments purchase equipment directly or through the state . state draws down grant funds to reimburse local governments . the total time required to complete these steps is dependent upon odp requirements and state and local laws , requirements , regulations , and procedures . generally , the dhs oig report and the report of the house select committee on homeland security found similar causes of delays in getting funds to local governments and first responder agencies . these included delays in completing state and local planning requirements and budgets ; legal requirements for the procedures to be used by local governments in accepting state grant allocations ; the need to establish procedures for the use of the funds , such as authority to buy equipment and receive reimbursement later ; and procurement requirements , such as bidding procedures . generally , neither the ig report nor the house select committee report found that the delays were principally due to odp's grant management procedures and processes . both the dhs oig report and the house select committee report found that odp's grant applicant process was not a major factor in delaying the distribution of funds to states . the dhs oig found that in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 , odp reduced the time it took to make on - line grant application guidance and applications available to states , process grant applications , and award the grants to states after applications were submitted . the dhs oig found that the total number of days from grant legislation enacted to award of grants to states declined from on average 292 days for fiscal year 2002 grants to on average 77 days for fiscal year 2003 grants .