we have clarified this in the report . cms's written comments are reprinted in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the administrator of cms . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or kohnl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff that made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which the costs of home dialysis differ from the costs of dialysis provided in a facility , and ( 2 ) the centers for medicare & medicaid services' ( cms ) plans to account for home dialysis costs in the expanded bundled payment for end - stage renal disease ( esrd ) services . to meet our objectives , we conducted interviews with representatives from 12 dialysis providers — including large chain providers , small nonprofit providers , and a hospital - based provider . based on the officials' self - reported estimates , these dialysis providers offered dialysis services to approximately 68 percent of all dialysis patients — including an estimated 77 percent of peritoneal dialysis patients and roughly all home hemodialysis patients . to examine the extent to which the costs of home dialysis differ from the costs of dialysis provided in a facility , we obtained cost information from six dialysis providers that we interviewed — including average costs per treatment reported in cms's renal facility cost reports for home dialysis and dialysis provided in a facility . additionally , we requested that the dialysis providers include annual cost information for specific categories of costs associated with providing dialysis . we made changes as appropriate . additionally , cms stated that medicare claims submitted by dialysis facilities do distinguish home hemodialysis from facility hemodialysis . however , we confirmed with usrds officials that the claims information does not always reliably make this distinction for separately billable items and services and we clarified this in the report . finally , cms noted that when dialysis providers have presented information to cms regarding the percentage of patients who would be good candidates for home dialysis , these percentages are usually closer to 10 to 15 percent of all dialysis patients . however , medical experts and dialysis providers we interviewed indicated a range of less than 10 percent to up to 50 percent of all dialysis patients could be good candidates for home dialysis , although many of the experts and providers we interviewed estimated that from 15 to 35 percent of all dialysis patients would be good candidates for home dialysis . the cost categories that we requested were supplies , overhead , equipment and maintenance , drugs , laboratory tests , staff , and administrative costs . we included descriptions of what services should be included in each cost category , basing the descriptions on cms definitions from the renal facility cost reports .