gao - 11-89 . washington , d.c.: december 7 , 2010 . inspector general and the d.c . auditor may also conduct investigations or audits of pcsb . to improve oversight of charter schools , pcsb launched a new accountability system — called the performance management framework ( pmf ) — to capture school performance information for the 2009-2010 school year ( see figure 3 for the current version of the pmf ) . however , in october 2010 , about 2 weeks before the pmf results were to be released , the board voted to withhold the results from the public , citing concerns about the accuracy of the school - level data collected . for example , some elementary , middle , and high schools had data accuracy issues with the re - enrollment and demographic numbers , and high schools were inconsistently reporting graduation rates . in addition to withholding the results to resolve data accuracy issues , pcsb later communicated that it also wanted to thoroughly review components of the pmf to ensure their analyses were accurate and fair . pcsb decided to use the data collected for the 2009-2010 school year to further develop and test the new system , while it continues implementing the system . results from the current 2010- 2011 school year are expected to be released in fall 2011 . as it revises the new system , pcsb is working collaboratively with charter school leaders . for more information on the pmf measures and components that are under development or review , see appendix ii . according to pcsb officials , the pmf is designed to allow pcsb to assess and compare all schools using common academic measures , target more intense reviews to schools that are not performing well relative to other schools , and use technology to streamline document submission and review . the pmf is based on a common set of five academic indicators , as well as nonacademic measures to evaluate school performance , as shown in figure 3 . weights are assigned to each academic measure and these academic measures are then combined to yield a final pmf score for each school . this final score determines the level of additional support or oversight a school receives from pcsb . the pmf is also designed to assess schools' nonacademic performance in finance , governance , and compliance with esea and other applicable laws . nonacademic reviews are to be conducted annually . according to pcsb officials , although a school's pmf score does not include nonacademic indicators , charter schools may face consequences , including charter revocation , for poor financial performance or violations of law discovered during governance and compliance reviews . to conduct various academic and nonacademic reviews , pcsb uses internal staff , consultants , and a recently established audit management unit that will analyze and monitor schools' financial statements and audits . in addition , the pmf will be supported by a new electronic system to streamline the review process and enable pcsb and charter schools to exchange and share documents more efficiently . for example , under the pmf , schools will submit academic performance data , annual reports , and financial statements electronically for review .