respond to bioterrorist attacks . the department released the first 20 percent of these funds to states and the municipalities within weeks of the january announcement . hhs identified 17 “critical benchmarks” ( 14 for the cdc funding and 3 for the hrsa funding ) that officials were required to address in their application plans . hhs used the critical benchmarks to screen application plans for approval before it released the remaining 80 percent of the cdc and hrsa funding . the benchmarks for the cdc program included such activities as designating an executive director of the state bioterrorism preparedness and response program , developing an interim plan to receive and manage items from the strategic national stockpile , and preparing a time line for the development of regional plans to respond to bioterrorism . in addition , cdc is allowing states to use this funding to address preparedness efforts between states and in regions that border a foreign country . the benchmarks for the hrsa program included development of a timeline for developing and implementing a regional hospital plan for dealing with a potential epidemic involving at least 500 patients . hhs requires progress reports from the states at approximately 6-month intervals to provide oversight of cdc and hrsa programs and to determine future funding . the remaining funds that were allocated for state and local preparedness in january 2002 supported oer's mmrs program . ( see app . i for an overview of each city we visited , including comparisons across several elements of preparedness. ) we do not identify these cities in this report because of the sensitive nature of this issue . during the site visits , we interviewed officials from state and local public health departments , local emergency medical services , state and local emergency management agencies , local fire and law enforcement agencies , and hospitals . for each city we visited , we also reviewed copies of the state's spring 2002 application for bioterrorism - related funding through cooperative agreements with hhs's centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) . in addition , we reviewed the progress reports on the cdc and hrsa cooperative agreements that were submitted to hhs in late 2002 from the relevant states , covering the period through october 31 , 2002 . because of the events of the fall of 2001 , and the subsequent federal preparedness funding , changes were occurring at the state and local levels with regard to bioterrorism preparedness during our site visits and subsequent data collection . changes have continued to occur since our visits , and this report may not reflect all these changes . in addition to making the state and local site visits and reviewing the pertinent documents , we interviewed officials from federal agencies and representatives from national public health associations , and we reviewed reports , including reports of the advisory panel to assess domestic response capabilities for terrorism involving weapons of mass destruction , concerning state and local preparedness for bioterrorism . because our focus was on the public health and medical consequences of a bioterrorist event , we do not report on preparedness activities funded by doj and fema in this study . ( see app .