as shown in fig . 2 , in total the bureau will recruit and test 3.8 million applicants for addressing canvassing and nrfu , hiring some 600,000 people for the 2010 census . for the 2010 census , the bureau plans to use a similar approach to recruit and hire workers as it used during census 2000 . these strategies made the bureau a more attractive employer to prospective candidates and helped provide a steady stream of applicants during census 2000 . despite a tight labor market , the bureau attracted about 3.7 million qualified applicants and hired about half a million enumerators at peak . some of the broad approaches from 2000 that the bureau plans on implementing for the 2010 census include recruiting five times more applicants than the needed number of field workers to ensure a considerable depth in the applicant pool from which to hire ; “frontloading” or hiring twice the number of people needed to do the work in anticipation of high levels of turnover ; exercising the flexibility to raise pay rates for local census offices that were encountering recruiting difficulties ; and launching a recruitment advertising campaign , which totaled over $2.3 million for census 2000 . as in 2000 , the bureau faces the daunting tasks of meeting its recruiting and hiring goals . however , it also faces additional challenges , such as demographic shifts whereby the population is increasingly diverse and difficult to locate , and newer challenges , like the bureau's use of handheld computers for data collection in the field . it does plan some improvements to how it recruits and hires its temporary workforce to carry out the 2010 census . for example , the bureau has conducted and incorporated information collected from employee debriefings that could improve its recruiting and hiring processes . bureau officials believe this feedback would be helpful in evaluating and refining its hiring and recruiting processes and intend to incorporate some of that information for the 2008 dress rehearsal . however , it can do more to target its recruitment of field staff . the bureau casts a wide net to recruit its temporary workforce to ensure it has a large enough applicant pool from which to hire . in commenting on a draft of this work , commerce noted that the bureau's priority is to reach out as broadly a possible to the diverse communities in the county to attract several million applicants . we recognize that when recruiting and hiring for hundreds of thousands of positions , the bureau faces a challenge in assessing applicants' potential success or willingness to work . however , opportunities exist for the bureau to hone its recruiting efforts to identify individuals who would be more likely to be effective at census work and willing to continue working throughout an operation . along those same lines , the bureau could also evaluate the factors associated with an applicant's success , willingness to work in an operation , and likelihood of attrition to refine its hiring . despite commerce's reservations about refining its current recruiting and hiring strategies , we believe that the bureau could do more to understand what makes for a successful recruit and , by hiring such applicants , reduce operating costs .