( recommendation 3 ) . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the department of transportation , the secretary of the department of commerce , the secretary of the department of homeland security , the managing director of the fcc , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . nhtsa and ntia expect to award the grants in 2018 . technology standards: the national 911 program issued an annual guide in 2017 that stressed the importance of using open technology standards for ng911 services . staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) progress states and localities are making to implement next generation 911 ( ng911 ) and the challenges they have faced and ( 2 ) how federal agencies have addressed state and local implementation challenges and planned next steps . we reviewed documents and interviewed state officials from all of these states except nevada about ng911 implementation progress , challenges , federal actions , and any additional assistance needed . we contacted 911 officials in nevada but did not receive responses . we also interviewed local officials in four of the selected states . while not generalizable to all states , the information obtained from our case studies provides examples of broader issues faced by states and localities in managing the ng911 transition . to determine how federal agencies have addressed state and local implementation challenges and planned next steps , we reviewed relevant statutes , regulations , and documentation of federal agency actions and plans , and our prior reports . we also interviewed officials from federal agencies , including nhtsa , the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) , fcc , and the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) , about federal actions taken and plans for next steps . to understand planning activities undertaken by nhtsa's national 911 program , and its planned project to develop a national ng911 roadmap , we reviewed the national 911 program's internal planning documents , the program's request for proposal to develop a national roadmap , the program's written responses to our questions , and interviewed national 911 program officials . a more detailed summary of our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . we conducted our work from january 2017 to january 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .