( see fig . the ontario sac's emergency management coordinator told us that when these safeguards fail to eliminate a duplicative spill report , subsequent corrections are made . to develop a process similar to ontario's for the u.s. side of the corridor , michigan state police officials told us that between 1986 and 1988 state officials explored the option of creating a spills center . at the time , they estimated that it would have cost $2 million to operate and it would have required 10 staff , including a chemical specialist and three shifts of phone operators . this was viewed as prohibitively expensive by michigan officials , and as an alternative , the state police and the michigan deq's pollution emergency alerting system ( peas ) began operating as a spill notification system . the peas system is used for reporting spills to the michigan deq during non - business hours , including holidays , weekends , and evenings . spill data from peas , however , are similar to nrc data in that they include multiple entries for single spills because each call is logged , rather than each unique spill event recorded . unlike the nrc , response agencies such as epa are required to assess each reported spill and therefore should have reliable spill information , but this is not the case . epa region 5 does not eliminate all duplicate spill reports because they do not respond on - site to the majority of spills for which they receive reports . epa region 5 officials told us that they rely on michigan deq to respond to the majority of spills since they are in closer proximity . region 5 officials respond to spills upon receiving a request for assistance from michigan deq officials , and when spills are over 1,000 gallons , epa officials respond to provide assistance even if they are not requested to do so . they told us that they investigate very few spills on - site — perhaps roughly one percent of spills — due to limited staff resources . instead , epa region 5 officials follow up with state spill responders by phone to obtain more detail on spills . though their operating protocols state that responders are to complete pollution reports and update spill data after investigation , epa region 5 officials told us that responders have not done so typically because they fail to make it a priority . for this reason , epa officials were unable to tell us which spills in the corridor in our time frame were investigated by their agency . they told us that epa imports spill data from the nrc and does not make modifications to the data ; therefore , epa's spill data set is of limited use . epa region 5 officials providing spill response in the corridor began using a new web - based spill data system , web emergency operations center ( web eoc ) , in the fall of 2004 . epa officials are hopeful that spill responders will update spill information in the system following their investigations ; however , they said that it is too soon to tell .