if the results are not similar , the methodologies should be reconciled . a number of agencies cited similar factors . for example , rrb attributed changes in usage to the age of its cba with the american federation of government employees labor union , which is almost 30 years old . thus , the agency has not had any nationwide negotiations during the time period which might have required a large number of official time hours . nsf reported a lower number of charged official time hours in mid - term negotiations ( 284 to 110 ) , dispute resolution ( 203 to 93 ) , and general labor - management relations ( 978 to 691 ) . nsf officials informed us that their official time tally of hours was incomplete for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 because the agency transitioned to a different time and attendance system , which we will explain more fully later in this report . other agencies cited factors such as increases in the amount of negotiations or general labor - management relations areas impacting changes in use of official time . for example , dot officials pointed out that the increase in official time charges per bu employee was spent improving labor management relations and internal business processes , and not litigating disputes . four of our 10 selected agencies reported that they collected data on non - payroll costs such as travel , office space , telephone service , or related costs . in addition , one of dot's cbas includes language that additional time may be requested and approved on a case - by - case basis . a majority of cbas at 8 of the 10 agencies contained provisions directing agencies to use the “reasonable time” approach — one that is not defined in terms of specific hours — to manage official time for representational duties . as shown in table 8 , 141 of 173 cbas , or 82 percent , we reviewed of the 141 contained provisions for using the reasonable time approach.cbas that specified the reasonable time approach , 64 used reasonable time exclusively while the remaining 77 used it in combination with another approach , such as a bank of hours , designated positions , or both . for example , commerce , dhs , dol , dot , hhs , treasury , and va have cbas that contained all three approaches to manage official time . some of them included reasonable time for union representatives to conduct representational activities , designated percentages or hours of official time for union officers , and a separate bank of hours for travel or training activities . the second most frequently used approach to manage official time was through a bank of hours . our review found that 93 of 173 cbas , or 54 percent , in nine agencies contained a provision for using a bank of hours to conduct representational activities . of the 93 cbas that utilized a bank of hours , 16 specified using a bank of hours exclusively while 77 created a bank of hours in combination with other approaches . depending on the size of the agency and bu , the number of hours allotted to the bank can vary .