monitoring grantees . epa has made progress in reviewing the results of its in - depth monitoring to identify systemic problems , but long - standing issues remain in documenting ongoing monitoring and closing out grants . epa and we found that staff do not always document ongoing monitoring , which is critical for determining if a grantee is on track in meeting its agreement . without documentation , questions arise about the adequacy of epa's monitoring of grantee performance . lack of documentation occurred , in part , because managers did not fulfill their commitment to improve monitoring documentation . grant closeouts are needed to ensure that grantees have met all financial requirements , provided their final reports , and returned any unexpended balances . for fiscal year 2005 , however , epa closed out only 37 percent of its grants within 180 days after the grant project ended , as required by its policy . epa also did not always close out grants properly in the regional files we reviewed . obtaining results from grants . holding managers and staff accountable . in 2005 , epa's inspector general reported that epa was not holding supervisors and project officers accountable for grants management . in response , epa issued a plan in january 2006 to ensure that the agency's new performance appraisal system addresses grants management responsibilities . for the 2007 performance appraisal process , epa plans to establish a workgroup to develop final performance measures to assess the grants management performance of project officers and supervisors and to incorporate these measures into 2007 performance agreements . our review is consistent with the inspector general's findings . as previously discussed , epa grants staff told us that their supervisors were not reviewing their grant files to determine compliance with grant monitoring policies . it is possible that the awarding , monitoring , and closeout problems we found would have been mitigated by effective supervisory review . mr. chairman , about 3 years into its grants management plan , 2003- 2008 , epa has made important strides in achieving its grant reforms , but it has not resolved its long - standing problems in documenting ongoing monitoring and closing out grants . as it revises its management plan , epa has an opportunity to tackle these continuing problems . in our report , we recommended that the administrator of epa take actions to strengthen ongoing monitoring , closing out grants , and obtaining results from grants , and the agency has agreed to implement our recommendations . at the same time , we believe that congressional oversight has contributed to epa's progress to date and that continuing oversight is important to ensuring that epa builds accountability into the agency's efforts to achieve results from its $4 billion annual investment in grants . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . in 1997 , epa began developing the integrated grants management system to better manage its grants ; epa now also uses this database to inform the public and the congress about its $4 billion investment in grants . data quality problems in this database could impair epa's ability to effectively manage grants and provide accurate information .