gao - 13-26 . washington , d.c.: november 2 , 2012 . ( see fig . dod paid an average of $0.11 per unit more than va across the entire sample of 83 drugs and an average of $0.04 per unit more than va for the generic drugs in our sample , while va paid an average of $1.01 per unit more than dod for the brand - name drugs in our sample . these results were consistent with each agency obtaining better prices on the type of drugs that made up the majority of its utilization: generic drugs accounted for the majority ( 83 percent ) of va's utilization of drugs in the sample for the first quarter of 2012 , and brand - name drugs accounted for the majority ( 54 percent ) of dod's utilization of the sample drugs during the same period . dod officials told us that in certain circumstances they are able to obtain competitive prices for brand - name drugs — even below the prices for generic equivalents — and therefore will often preferentially purchase brand - name drugs . when we examined the prices paid for the individual brand - name drugs in our sample , dod paid higher average unit prices than va for 23 of the 43 drugs ( see fig . 2 ) .remaining 20 brand - name drugs . dod also paid a higher average price than va for a majority of the generic drugs in our sample . specifically , dod paid a higher price for 32 of the 40 generic drugs in our sample , while va paid a higher average price for the remaining 8 generic drugs . ( see app . ii for details on the relative prices paid by dod and va for the 83 individual drugs in our sample. ) dod and va face continued challenges in controlling drug costs . our findings suggest that there may be opportunities for savings with directly purchased drugs . dod and va paid different prices for the drugs in our sample ; for 11 of the 83 drugs , one agency paid at least 100 percent more than the other agency . dod paid a lower average price for the brand - name drugs in our sample while va paid less , on average , for the generic drugs and across the entire sample . our past reports highlight the importance of dod and va controlling drug costs . while the prescription drug market is complex and there are many factors affecting the prices dod and va are able to obtain for directly purchased drugs , differences in prices paid for specific drugs may provide insights into opportunities for each agency to obtain additional savings on at least some of the drugs they purchase . dod and va reviewed a draft of this report and provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendixes iii and iv , respectively . dod generally agreed with our methodology and findings . in addition , dod noted that expressing differences between dod and va prices for the sample as percentages rather than actual dollar amounts may give the impression that significant dollar values are involved rather than a few cents or less per unit .