the pcts is now maintained by hab . pcts contains no interfaces to any external computer or communication systems . to determine the reliability of pcts data , we compared the data in pcts with the information contained in a sample of hard - copy humanitarian parole applications . this report addresses u.s . citizenship and immigration service's ( uscis ) humanitarian assistance branch's ( hab ) policies and procedures for adjudicating applications for humanitarian parole . specifically , we answered the following questions: ( 1 ) what are the characteristics of those who applied for and were either granted or denied humanitarian parole since fiscal year 2002 and did approval and denial rates differ according to these characteristics or the adjudicator assigned ? ( 2 ) what internal controls has hab designed to adjudicate humanitarian parole applications and to what extent did hab adhere to these internal controls when processing humanitarian parole applications ? we performed our work at hab's office in washington , d.c. to determine the characteristics of those who applied for and were either granted or denied humanitarian parole since fiscal year 2002 and what differences , if any , there were in grant or denial rates according to these characteristics or the adjudicator assigned , we obtained and analyzed data from dhs's parole case tracking system ( pcts ) , a database that contains computerized records of all individuals whose applications for humanitarian parole have been approved , denied , suspended , terminated , or are pending . this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) what are the characteristics of those who applied for and were either granted or denied humanitarian parole since fiscal year 2002 and did approval and denial rates differ according to these characteristics or the adjudicator assigned ? to determine the characteristics of those who applied for and were either granted or denied humanitarian parole , we analyzed data on 8,748 humanitarian parole applications adjudicated from october 1 , 2001 , through june 30 , 2007 , contained in dhs's automated parole case tracking system ( pcts ) . the system contains various applicant demographic characteristics such as age ; gender ; and country of residence ; the reason why the applicant requested humanitarian parole ( eg , medical emergency or family reunification ) ; the recommendations by individual adjudicators involved in adjudicating the application ; and the adjudication decision . to determine whether approval and denial rates differed according to applicants' demographic characteristics ( eg , gender , country of residence , age ) and whether these rates differed by adjudicator , we analyzed pcts data on the outcomes of adjudication decisions by these characteristics and by the recommendations made by adjudicators . we did not review the underlying merits of these decisions to identify possible reasons for any similarities or differences . hard copy application files ( for both granted and denied cases ) were only available for the march 1 , 2007 , through june 30 , 2007 , time period .