this practice could have increased rebates to states . as we reported , the rebates that manufacturers pay to states are based on a range of prices and financial concessions that manufacturers make available to entities that purchase their drugs , but they may not reflect certain financial concessions manufacturers offer to other entities in today's complex market . in particular , the rebate program does not clearly address certain concessions that are negotiated by pbms on behalf of third - party payers , such as employer - sponsored health plans and other health insurers . the rebate program did not initially address these types of concessions , which are relatively new to the market . cms's subsequent guidance to manufacturers has not clearly stated how manufacturers should treat these concessions in their determinations of best price and amp . within the current structure of the rebate formula , additional guidance on how to account for manufacturer payments to pbms could affect the rebates paid to states , although whether rebates would increase or decrease as a result , and by how much , is uncertain . certain manufacturer financial concessions that are negotiated by pbms on behalf of their third - party payer clients are not clearly reflected in best price or amp . pbms , in one of the roles they play in the market , may negotiate payments from manufacturers to help reduce their third - party payer clients' costs for prescription drugs . ( in these circumstances , the third - party payer does not purchase drugs directly from the manufacturer but instead covers a portion of the cost when its enrollees purchase drugs from pharmacies. ) in 1997 , cms issued program memoranda that noted new types of arrangements involving manufacturer payments to pbms and attempted to clarify whether those arrangements should be reflected in best price and amp . however , in a program memorandum issued shortly thereafter , cms stated that there had been confusion concerning the intent of the previous program memoranda and that the agency had “intended no change” to program requirements . at the time , cms said that staff were reexamining the issue and planned to shortly clarify the agency's position . as of january 2005 , cms had not issued such clarifying guidance on how pbm - negotiated manufacturer payments should be reflected in best price and amp when pbms have negotiated on behalf of third parties . cms officials with responsibility for issuing program memoranda advised us that they could comment only on specific situations . they stated that financial arrangements among entities in the market are complex and always changing ; in their view , the market is too complicated for them to issue general policy guidance that could cover all possible cases . rather , these officials told us that they make determinations about pbm payments on a case - by - case basis , but only when manufacturers contact them regarding this issue . within the current structure of the rebate formula , additional guidance on how to account for manufacturer payments to pbms could affect the rebates paid to states , although whether rebates would increase or decrease as a result , and by how much , is uncertain .