pub . 101-73 , 103 stat . 183 ( codified in scattered sections of 12 , 18 , and 31 u.s.c. ) more recently , the financial crisis of 2007- 2009 resulted in the failure , or the threat of failure , of hundreds of financial institutions , including the failure of more than 400 commercial banks and thrifts that will likely require an estimated $43 billion in losses to the fdic's deposit insurance fund ( dif ) . the results also included unprecedented taxpayer - funded assistance to financial companies to stabilize the financial system . the financial crisis revealed weaknesses in the existing regulatory framework for overseeing financial institutions , including banks . in an april 2012 speech , the then chairman of the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) said regulators and supervisors did not always use their authorities forcefully or effectively . for example , bank regulators did not do enough to force large financial institutions to strengthen their internal risk - management systems or to curtail risky practices . furthermore , he said that the crisis revealed gaps in the statutory framework of financial regulations . critically , he noted , shadow banking activities largely were not subject to consistent and effective regulatory oversight.address risks across the financial system . the crisis also highlighted the need to monitor and to address these shortcomings , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) was enacted in 2010.other things , the dodd - frank act mandates that the federal reserve impose enhanced prudential standards , including higher capital and liquidity requirements , for banks and nonbank financial institutions designated as systemically important , and dismantled the existing federal among thrift regulatory structure and transferred responsibility for thrift supervision to federal banking regulators . it also established the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) to provide , for the first time , an entity charged with monitoring and identifying risks to financial stability throughout the financial system . federal banking regulators — the federal reserve , fdic , and the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) — also responded with their own initiatives to strengthen oversight over their banks in the aftermath of the crisis . this report examines what lessons can be drawn from regulatory activity in the lead - up to past crises and how they can be used to inform ongoing and future regulatory efforts and the oversight of them . this report also describes some recent activities that regulators have taken in response to the recent financial crisis . although future banking or financial crises are unlikely to unfold in the same manner as past crises , understanding regulatory activity leading up to past crises can provide a useful context for monitoring regulatory responses to emerging risks .