testing . the ability for orion , sls , and egs to complete testing in the integrated test laboratory facility — where software and hardware or hardware simulators are tested together — remains an ongoing risk for both the first mission and then the timing of the second mission . the lab has limited time and test resources to complete the testing necessary for em - 1 , and nasa officials indicated that at times it has more demand than it can support . in addition , some testing is taking longer than planned , delaying later tests . the risk associated with these delays is that the later the program discovers an issue , the less time there is to address the issue prior to launch . at the same time that the orion program is completing em - 1 work in the integrated test lab , the program will also need to modify the lab's configuration in order to support em - 2 efforts because of hardware and software differences between missions . the schedule currently includes periods of time during em - 1 testing where em - 1 efforts will be shut down in order to work on lab modifications for em - 2 . although program officials indicated that test lab delays for em - 1 will not adversely affect lab efforts for em - 2 , resources directed to em - 2 will mean less resources will be available during those times to support em - 1 . the orion program has reported development cost growth but is not measuring that growth using a complete cost estimate . in summer 2018 , the orion program reported development cost growth of $379 million , or 5.6 percent above its $6.768 billion development cost estimate . the program explained that the major drivers of this cost growth were the slip of the em - 1 launch date , which reflected delays in the delivery of the service module ; orion contractor underperformance ; and nasa - directed scope increase . however , during our review , orion program officials stated that this cost estimate assumes an em - 2 launch date of september 2022 , which is 7 months earlier than the program's agency baseline commitment date of april 2023 that forms the basis for commitments between nasa , the congress , and omb . as a result , nasa's current cost estimate for the orion program is not complete because it does not account for costs that nasa would incur between september 2022 and april 2023 . subsequently , program officials told us that its cost projections fund one of those seven months . see figure 7 . these contracts' milestone fees , performance incentive fees , and cost incentive fees are generally determined against objective criteria , such as meeting a date and application of predetermined formulas . for example , nasa will pay a milestone fee to boeing under the sls contract when it meets a specific program milestone such as transferring the core stage to the government for the green run test . under this contract , boeing receives additional milestone fee when it beats a milestone date and reduced fee when it misses a milestone date .