b . at their own initiative , or at the request and good cause shown by another state , to take action to board and search any vessel flying their flag in their internal waters or territorial seas , or areas beyond the territorial seas of any other state , that is reasonably suspected of transporting such cargoes to or from states or nonstate actors of proliferation concern , and to seize such cargoes that are identified . c. to seriously consider providing consent under the appropriate circumstances to the boarding and searching of its own flag vessels by other states , and to the seizure of such wmd - related cargoes in such vessels that may be identified by such states . d. to take appropriate actions to ( 1 ) stop and / or search in their internal waters , territorial seas , or contiguous zones ( when declared ) vessels that are reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes to or from states or nonstate actors of proliferation concern and to seize such cargoes that are identified and ( 2 ) to enforce conditions on vessels entering or leaving their ports , internal waters , or territorial seas that are reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes , such as requiring that such vessels be subject to boarding , search , and seizure of such cargoes prior to entry . e. at their own initiative or upon the request and good cause shown by another state , to ( 1 ) require aircraft that are reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes to or from states or nonstate actors of proliferation concern and that are transiting their airspace to land for inspection and seize any such cargoes that are identified and / or ( 2 ) deny aircraft reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes transit rights through their airspace in advance of such flights . f. if their ports , airfields , or other facilities are used as transshipment points for shipment of such cargoes to or from states or nonstate actors of proliferation concern , to inspect vessels , aircraft , or other modes of transport reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes , and to seize such cargoes that are identified . the following multilateral psi planning meetings are also known as operational expert group ( oeg ) meetings: 1 . brisbane , australia ( july ) 2 . london , united kingdom ( july ) 3 . paris , france ( september ) 4 . london , united kingdom ( october ) 5 . washington , d.c. , united states ( december ) 1 . ottawa , canada ( april ) 2 . oslo , norway ( august ) 3 . sydney , australia ( november ) 1 . omaha , nebraska , united states ( march ) 2 . copenhagen , denmark ( july ) 3 . hamburg , germany ( november ) – regional oeg meeting 1 . miami , florida , united states ( april ) 2 . singapore ( july ) 3 . montreal , canada ( december ) 1 . auckland , new zealand ( march ) 2 . rhodes , greece ( october ) 1 . london , united kingdom ( february ) 2 . paris , france ( september ) .