as of september 2005 , this rule has not been issued . to obtain information on how threat information is shared and tsa's efforts to address threats , we met with officials from tsa's transportation security and intelligence service , federal bureau of investigation , and air cargo industry stakeholders . we also obtained these stakeholders' views on the timeliness , specificity , and clarity of threat information tsa disseminates . to determine the actions tsa has taken to ensure the security of domestic air cargo and the factors that may limit their effectiveness , we reviewed and analyzed tsa security requirements including current air cargo - related regulations , security directives , and program policies . in addition , we reviewed the aviation security advisory working group's committee's recommendations to tsa , tsa's air cargo security strategic plan , and tsa's proposed air cargo security rule to gain an understanding of the similarities , differences , and weaknesses among these plans . ( 2 ) what actions has tsa taken to ensure the security of air cargo , and what factors may limit their effectiveness ? ( 3 ) what are tsa's plans for enhancing air cargo security , and what financial , operational , and other challenges do tsa and industry stakeholders face in implementing these plans ? to answer these questions , we interviewed tsa headquarters officials responsible for managing the agency's air cargo security program . we also interviewed headquarters' officials at the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the federal bureau of investigation , and the united states postal service to obtain information about their role in air cargo security . in addition , we interviewed 48 air cargo industry stakeholders , including officials representing 7 air carriers , 4 indirect air carriers , 12 airport authorities , 16 associations representing airport operators , air carrier pilots , indirect air carriers , passenger air carriers , all - cargo air carriers , law enforcement agencies , and 9 air cargo security consultants and experts . the majority of these industry stakeholders participated in the aviation security advisory committee working groups that developed recommendations for enhancing air cargo security . we also conducted site visits at 12 united states commercial airports . because we selected a nonprobability sample of airports , the results from these visits cannot be generalized to other u.s. commercial airports . during our site visits , we met with federal security directors and inspections staff at each airport and observed pilot testing of air cargo inspection technology , including explosive detection systems at select airports . we also met with cbp officials at 4 of the airports we visited . in addition , we met with airport authorities at each airport we visited and interviewed air carrier and indirect air carrier officials at several airports we visited . specifically , we interviewed officials from four passenger and three all - cargo air carriers . to gain an understanding of current and planned air cargo security requirements , we reviewed air cargo security - related laws and regulations as well as tsa's air cargo security strategic plan and proposed air cargo security rule .