all primary dealers have contingency sites . according to treasury , most primary dealers have systems that link directly to treasury's auction systems at their contingency sites and have conducted connectivity tests to ensure they could participate in an auction from their contingency sites if required . because of the nature of the financial markets , almost all primary dealer contingency locations are within the same geographic region as their primary sites . treasury periodically visits dealers , and has suggested improvements in systems and testing for many dealers . according to 14 dealers with whom we spoke , dealer personnel are cross - trained to bid on and complete auctions for all types of treasury securities . a treasury official with whom we spoke noted that the nature of financial markets encourages the close proximity of staff . a professor of economics has stated , “high density levels are particularly conducive to chance meetings , regular exchanges of new ideas , and the general flow of information” that aid in the rapid access to information that is crucial to financial markets . this likely helps to explain why almost all primary dealers' primary sites are within the same geographic region . all 23 primary dealers also have at least one contingency site for their operations , generally in the same geographic region as their primary sites , since most primary dealers plan on relocating their staff from their primary sites to their contingency sites during a wide - scale disruption . treasury expects this migration might take several hours . treasury also expects it might have to postpone an auction for a day , depending on the severity of the disruption , so dealers have enough time to report to their contingency sites . according to treasury officials , 17 primary dealers have added systems at their contingency sites that directly link with treasury auction systems and have successfully tested the connectivity of these systems . treasury encouraged dealers to add these systems and offered cost information on these systems so dealers could more easily consider the systems implementation . all of the dealers have the ability to submit auction bids via the internet or phone at their contingency sites . eight dealers have told treasury that they have participated in live auctions from their contingency sites , but treasury told us that its auction systems do not automatically track whether or not dealers are participating in auctions from contingency sites . treasury has encouraged dealers to conduct live auction tests from their contingency sites and plans to continue to work with primary dealers to increase their resiliency by developing test plans for primary dealers to participate in mock auctions . one dealer expressed reservations about participating in an auction from a contingency site because it would not want to take bids from traders over the phone , while another dealer stated that it planned to conduct a mock auction before participating in a live auction from the contingency site . primary dealers we spoke with said they have cross - trained their staff to participate in auctions of different treasury securities and told us that they have sufficient staff trained to participate and provide backup support .