finally , h.r . 3550 provides 1 year of additional funding for seat belt and drunk driving incentive grants . in addition , s.1072 proposes to withhold 2 percent of certain highway construction funds to those states that have not enacted open - container laws for fiscal years 2008 to 2011 . ( see fig . under the formula grants program , about $859 million was provided to the states to carry out traffic safety programs designed to influence drivers' behavior in such areas as safety belt use , alcohol - impaired driving , regional traffic safety initiatives , traffic records and safety data collection systems , and pedestrian safety . incentive grants of about $1.2 billion under tea - 21 were provided to states for achieving improvements in safety belt use , reducing drunk driving , and improving highway safety data . penalty transfer of funds was required under tea - 21 for states that did not adopt specific laws prohibiting open alcohol containers in passenger compartments or setting minimum penalties for repeat drunk driving offenders . comprehensive highway safety planning . s. 1072 requires states to develop and implement strategic highway safety plans that are comprehensive , data driven , and based on a collaborative process involving state and local safety stakeholders . the plans must be comprehensive , including all aspects of highway safety — infrastructure , driver behavior , motor carrier , and emergency medical services . they must be based on improved crash data collection and analysis . while not directed specifically at rural road safety , the collaborative process required by this provision provides an opportunity for local rural officials and leaders to participate in developing the goals and investments included in the plan . 3550 would encourage comprehensive safety planning for both behavioral and construction safety programs . flexibility in moving funds between fhwa and nhtsa programs . s. 1072 allows states to use up to a quarter of their highway safety improvement program funds for behavioral projects , if the projects are included in a state comprehensive highway safety improvement plan . improving emergency medical systems . the presence of timely competent medical attention has been shown to reduce rural and other traffic fatalities . under these requirements , states that are currently subject to either penalty must transfer 3 percent of their federal - aid highway construction funds to the nhtsa programs . for example , we examined each study's methodology , including its limitations , data sources , analyses , and conclusions . in addition , we updated the earlier report by obtaining more current information on traffic deaths by using data from nhtsa's fatality analysis reporting system ( fars ) . this database provides information on all traffic - related fatalities . the design of the vehicle can contribute to rural road fatalities . state officials could not provide a breakdown of how much of these funds were used for rural road safety projects . the pennsylvania department of transportation has a goal of reducing road fatalities by 10 percent between 2002 and 2005 . the department has begun several engineering and behavioral improvement initiatives to help reach this goal . in fiscal year 2004 , 23 states were subject to one or both penalty transfer programs .