detection . one test team emulated a denial of service attack by rebooting the system , ensuring the system could not carry out its mission for a short period of time . operators reported that they did not suspect a cyber attack because unexplained crashes were normal for the system . another test report indicated that the intrusion detection system correctly identified test team activity , but did not improve users' awareness of test team activities because it was always “red.” warnings were so common that operators were desensitized to them . a common way to detect cyber activity is to review logs of system activity looking for unusual occurrences . multiple test reports indicated that test team activity was documented in system logs , but operators did not review them . one test report noted that the system had no documented procedures for reviewing logs . multiple test reports indicated that operators did not effectively respond to test team activities . in multiple tests , operators did not respond because , as noted above , they were simply unaware of the test team activities . in some cases , however , operators were unable to effectively respond even when they identified or were notified that the test team had carried out an attack . one test report indicated that operators identified test team intrusion attempts and took steps to block the test team from accessing the system . however , the test team was able to easily circumvent the steps the operators took . in another case , the test team was able to compromise a weapon system and the operators needed outside assistance to restore the system . dod does not know the full extent of its weapon systems cyber vulnerabilities due to limitations on tests that have been conducted . cybersecurity assessments do not identify all vulnerabilities of the systems that are tested . this is , in part , because cybersecurity assessments do not reflect the full range of threats that weapon systems may face in operation . test teams reported that they portray realistic threats and environments . however , the nature of tests imposes limitations on testers that do not apply to potential adversaries . for example , dod officials said that most cybersecurity assessments are conducted over a few days to a few weeks . one test report indicated that the cybersecurity assessment was cut short due to external factors so the test team only had 41 hours to work with the system . in contrast , dod officials we spoke to said that a determined adversary could spend months or years targeting our systems . further , because test teams have a limited amount of time with a system , they look for the easiest or most effective way to gain access , according to dod officials we met with and test reports we reviewed . they do not identify all of the vulnerabilities that an adversary could exploit . dot&e noted that longer - term tests generally identify more cyber vulnerabilities than shorter tests . dod officials we spoke to said that the department has increased the amount of long - term assessments it conducts in recent years .