iii ) . the agency's office of the chief acquisition officer will , among other things , take steps such as: distribute an acquisition alert reminding the acquisition community of the importance of subcontracting plan requirements , and the need to document decisions , including those regarding subcontracting plan requirements ; remind contracting officers of their responsibility to ensure that contractors properly report their subcontracting accomplishments as required ; and , include compliance with the guidance about subcontracting plan requirements in its regularly scheduled procurement management reviews as well as the special reviews it conducts during major catastrophes in order to ensure procurement statutes , regulations , and guidance are being met ; when appropriate , gsa indicated it will seek the assistance of the agency's inspector general to support these reviews . gsa emphasized — during the course of our review as well as in its comments on our draft report — that during catastrophic situations , time is of the essence in getting goods and services to a disaster area immediately . while its contracting officers and personnel worked to comply with all contracting requirements , including the subcontracting plan requirement , gsa stated that the latter proved to be impossible given the urgency of the needs resulting from the hurricane . gsa also noted that the subcontracting plan requirement is one it did not address when it waived certain procurement rules in early september 2005 during the emergency response . one reason gsa did not extend these waivers to the requirement for subcontracting plans is that , in the judgment of gsa procurement officials , there are no provisions or flexibility in the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) that would have given them the authority , even in an emergency situation such as the response to hurricane katrina , to deviate from subcontracting plan requirements . we agree with gsa's conclusion that the far currently does not specifically permit agencies to waive the requirement for an approved subcontracting plan prior to contract award . this is because the far requirement is based on the small business act , which does not provide for an agency to waive the subcontracting plan requirement or allow deferral of it until after the agency has awarded a contract . as a result of our findings and the lack of flexibility gsa determined the far has on subcontracting plan requirements , gsa plans to raise the issue of emergency processes with the far council . dod's director , defense procurement and acquisition policy , in the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , concurred with our recommendations ( see app . iv ) and noted that the department plans to issue a policy memorandum in 2007 containing the guidance we recommend . additionally , dod indicated it would direct review officials for each of its military departments and other defense agencies to include subcontracting guidance and compliance as a special interest item in the periodic oversight reviews they conduct of the organizations within each department or agency . moreover , dod will ask the military departments' offices of inspectors general as well as the dod inspector general to review the adequacy of departmental and agency oversight and management review processes .