ii ) . the panelists were provided the information packets prior to the panel sessions . we selected these case studies because they included power plants that had among the highest detected on - site groundwater tritium concentrations that were associated with underground piping system leaks , received a significant amount of publicity surrounding underground piping system leaks , and had contaminants from leaks that migrated off - site . the results of this survey are summarized below . proposed questions for the experts: 1 . to what extent have selected leaks from nuclear power plants degraded environmental resources , both on - site and off - site , in a manner that compromises their quality or limits their present or future value or use ( see attached case study information packets ) ? how would the environmental resource impacts change if the contaminant concentrations were twice the concentrations in the examples above ? how would they change if the concentrations were an order of magnitude greater ? if leaks of similar magnitudes were to occur at other plants , what factors might affect the extent of the resultant environmental impacts or make a particular site more vulnerable to impacts ? the overall characterization of public health and environmental impacts from leaks , including considerations for cumulative and long - term impacts , ability to fully characterize impacts based on the information available the additional information that would be required to fully characterize and assess impacts to public health and environmental resources . we selected three case study nuclear power plants for the experts' consideration: braidwood , oyster creek , and vermont yankee . each of these plants has had a recent underground piping system leak that generated public interest . in addition , the case studies represent some of the highest groundwater tritium concentrations detected at nuclear power plants in association with underground piping system leaks . summary information about each of the case studies is presented in table 3 . for each of the case studies , we compiled case study information packets for the panelists that include information on the case study nuclear power plant location and area demographics ; a description of the environment near the plant ; and information about each of the radioactive leaks , including groundwater tritium concentrations and dose assessment results . the following information was compiled from nrc reports , licensee - prepared reports to nrc , and exelon's “tritium project” web site . braidwood generating station ( see fig . 4 ) — which consists of two pressurized water reactors owned and operated by exelon nuclear — is located in braceville , illinois , and covers approximately 4,457 acres of land with a 2,537-acre cooling lake . more broadly , the site is situated in will county , illinois , about 20 miles southwest of joliet , illinois , and 60 miles southwest of chicago . in 2009 , approximately 685,000 people resided in will county's 837 square miles , resulting in density of 600 persons / square mile .