mr . chairmen and members of the subcommittees , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you may have at this time . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact davi m. d'agostino at ( 202 ) 512-5431 or dagostinod@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are margaret g. morgan and marc j. schwartz , assistant directors ; grace a. coleman ; gregory a. marchand ; erika a. prochaska ; kimberly c. seay ; and walter k. vance . in addition , amy e. brown ; amy d. higgins ; timothy m. persons ; and robert robinson made significant contributions to the january 2010 report that supported this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . figure 1 depicts the intelligence data processing cycle . my testimony today focuses on the processing , exploitation , and dissemination of isr information , shown in figure 1 as steps 3 and 4 of the intelligence data processing cycle . analysts who are responsible for processing , exploiting , and disseminating isr data can only use collected intelligence data if data are visible to them . making isr data discoverable in this way can be accomplished through meta - data tagging — a process in which data are described through other data ( meta - data ) that are usually produced at the time the data of interest are created . for example , a camera may create meta - data for a photograph , such as date , time , and lens settings . the photographer may add further meta - data , such as the names of the subjects . the process by which information is meta - data tagged depends on the technical capabilities of the systems collecting the information . most isr systems do not automatically meta - data tag the isr data when they are transferred from the sensor to the ground station for processing and exploitation because most of these systems were developed prior to dod's emphasis on enforcing meta - data standards . the under secretary of defense for intelligence has responsibility for ensuring implementation of dod intelligence policy , including monitoring the services' progress toward interoperability . although the services are responsible for managing their dcgs programs and conforming to information - sharing standards , according to office of the under secretary of defense for intelligence and military service officials , dod has not developed overarching guidance , such as a concept of operations that provides needed direction and priorities for sharing intelligence information within the defense intelligence community .