executive order no . 12862 ( dated sept. 11 , 1993 ) established and implemented customer service standards to guide the operations of executive branch agencies . the standards are to ensure that the federal government provides the highest quality service possible to the american people . according to the executive order , all executive departments and agencies that directly provide the public with significant services shall , among other things , post customer service standards and measure results against them ; make information , services , and complaint systems easily accessible ; and provide a means to address customer complaints . to comply with the president's initiative , as part of the national performance review ( npr ) efforts , teams of staff from various federal government agencies embarked on a series of benchmarking studies , one of which was to determine which businesses — public and private — are doing the best job of customer complaint resolution . the best complaint systems identified had , among other things , processes to make it easy for customers to complain through customer help telephone lines , 1-800 numbers , or complaint / comment cards . the best systems also had fully automated and integrated information systems in which to enter complaint data that can be analyzed and used to identify and fix root causes of the dissatisfaction and determine the future direction for product and service improvements . to implement the requirements of executive order no . 12862 , the service issued customer service policy 96-02 ( effective , aug. 6 , 1996 ) . according to the policy , all of the service's employees are expected to fully comply with the spirit and intent of the standards that were established to guide their actions as public servants . the policy establishes six standards — among them is that ( 1 ) customers be treated with courtesy and responded to in a timely and professional manner and ( 2 ) employees maintain a professional appearance and positive attitude . however , the service's policy does not address how to handle customer complaints or how to make information services and complaint systems easily accessible to customers , as directed by the executive order . despite this lack of guidance , carlsbad officials said that they take complaints seriously , and they have established an informal system for handling them . specifically , the office accepts customer feedback in various forms , including letters , e - mail , in - person meetings , and telephone calls . according to the carlsbad officials , complaints are routed to the supervisor of the affected employee or to the branch or division chief that has responsibility for the specific project . depending on the nature of the complaint , the line supervisor may elevate the action to senior management or handle the complaint directly . supervisors maintain their own files for the complaints they handle . the types of complaints that the office receives vary . for example , some complaints stem from misunderstandings . when a complaint is more serious , such as an employee's treating a customer harshly or in an unprofessional manner , the immediate supervisor has the responsibility to counsel the affected employee and identify corrective actions .