the cic program is funded through this appropriation account . medical support and compliance , which funds , among other things , the administration of the medical , hospital , nursing home , domiciliary , construction , supply , and research activities authorized under va's health care system . medical facilities , which funds , among other things , the operation and maintenance of the veterans health administration's capital infrastructure , such as costs associated with nonrecurring maintenance , utilities , facility repair , laundry services , and groundskeeping . our preliminary work suggests that the higher - than - expected obligations identified by va in april 2015 for va's cic program accounted for $2.34 billion ( or 85 percent ) of va's projected funding gap of $2.75 billion in fiscal year 2015 . these higher - than - expected obligations for the cic program were driven by an increase in utilization of va medical services across va , reflecting , in part , va's efforts to improve access to care after public disclosure of long wait times at vamcs . va officials expected that the veterans choice program would absorb much of the increased demand from veterans for health care services delivered by non - va providers . however , veterans' utilization of veterans choice program services was much lower than expected in fiscal year 2015 . va had estimated that obligations for the veterans choice program in fiscal year 2015 would be $3.2 billion , but actual obligations totaled only $413 million . instead , va provided a greater amount of services through the cic program , resulting in total obligations of $10.1 billion , which va officials stated were much higher than expected for that program in fiscal year 2015 . according to va officials , the lower - than - expected utilization of the veterans choice program in fiscal year 2015 was due , in part , to administrative weaknesses , such as provider networks that had not been fully established , that slowed enrollment in the program and that vamc staff lacked guidance on when to refer veterans to the program . the unexpected increase in cic obligations in fiscal year 2015 exposed weaknesses in va's ability to estimate costs for cic services and track associated obligations . while va officials first became concerned that cic obligations might be significantly higher than projected in january 2015 , they did not determine that va faced a projected funding gap until april 2015 — 6 months into the fiscal year . they made this determination after they compared authorizations in the fee basis claims system ( fbcs ) — va's system for recording cic authorizations and estimating costs for this care — with obligations in the financial management system ( fms ) — the centralized financial management system va uses to track all of its obligations , including those for medical services . in its 2015 agency financial report ( afr ) , va's independent public auditor identified the following issues as contributing to a material weakness in estimating costs for cic services and tracking cic obligations: vamcs individually estimate costs for each cic authorization and record these estimates in fbcs .