u.s. sanctions . we analyzed and matched registry data to u.s. sanctions data that contain information on blocked assets and sanctioned entities and individuals . through this data analysis as well as illustrative case and intermediary research , we identified six aircraft owned by entities subject to venezuela - related u.s. sanctions from 2017 to february 2019 . these six aircraft involved registrations established by intermediaries using noncitizen trusts or by u.s. citizen corporations using voting trusts , where aircraft were beneficially owned by noncitizen trustors or stockholders of companies using voting trusts to meet u.s. citizenship registration requirements . however , as discussed earlier , trust agreements that contain information on aircraft owners and related individuals and entities with potentially significant responsibilities for aircraft ownership are stored in pdf format that are not electronically analyzable , potentially inhibiting detection of sanctioned individuals or entities . additionally , our analysis identified limitations in the sharing of sanctions information within faa , specifically between the aircraft registry and dealer records . these limitations present the risk of registry abuse or illicit activity through sanctions violations while potentially impeding effective coordination between faa and treasury's ofac , which administers u.s. sanctions programs . on the basis of u.s. national security and foreign policy goals , ofac can impose controls on transactions and block or freeze assets under u.s. jurisdiction , including aircraft . by blocking an asset such as an aircraft , its title remains with the targeted individual or entity ; however , these individuals and entities cannot exercise the powers and privileges normally associated with ownership unless authorized by ofac . certain activities related to the use of the aircraft may violate the relevant sanctions program . these cases may not represent all existing vulnerabilities and are not generalizable to the federal aviation administration ( faa ) registry population as a whole . from 2010 to 2011 , an aircraft sales broker obtained multiple registration certificates from faa for aircraft he did not rightfully own or possess . according to court records associated with this case , the broker submitted to faa fraudulent registration applications and bills of sale with forged signatures for 22 aircraft as part of a multi - million - dollar bank fraud scheme . he used the registration documents that faa provided as an asset to support a loan application that ultimately resulted in an approximately $3 million bank loan used to float his failing aircraft - sales business . the bank uncovered the fraud over a year after the sales broker first submitted the fraudulent aircraft registration documents to execute the loan . a subsequent investigation by the federal bureau of investigation revealed the extent of the fraud , namely that the main thrust of the fraud scheme was to pledge as collateral 22 aircraft that neither the broker nor his company owned , in order to obtain money from the bank . court records reveal that law - enforcement officials interviewed some of the rightful owners of the aircraft , who stated that the aircraft were always in their possession and they had never sold the aircraft to the fraudulent broker . these owners identified the signatures on the bills of sale used to register the aircraft as forged .