ii ) . the majority of the suits ( 93 of 141 ) centered on an action for a single species , such as allegedly missing the deadline to issue a 90-day finding on a petition to list a specific species , but about one - third of the suits ( 48 of 141 ) involved actions for multiple species . for example , a 2009 suit filed by wildearth guardians alleged that fws failed to make 90-day findings for two petitions it had submitted to list 674 rocky mountain and southwestern species . similarly , in 2005 , california state grange — a nonprofit organization promoting agriculture and rural family farm units in california — filed a suit against fws for allegedly failing to conduct 5-year status reviews for 194 listed species located in california . factoring in species involved in the suits as well as the specific section 4 actions at issue , we found that collectively , the deadline suits comprised a total of 1,673 actions . fws was responsible for the majority of the actions ( 1,545 of 1,673 ) , nmfs was responsible for 120 of the 1,673 actions , and the two agencies worked jointly on 8 actions . table 2 provides a breakdown — by fiscal year and type of section 4 action — of the total number of actions involved across the deadline suits filed against the services during fiscal years 2005 through 2015 . see appendix ii for additional information on the number and type of actions specific to each agency . across the deadline suits filed during fiscal years 2005 through 2015 , 44 different lead plaintiffs representing a variety of interests filed suits against the services ( see table 3 ) . however , two environmental groups , the center for biological diversity and wildearth guardians , collectively filed more than half of the suits ( 73 of 141 ) . the esa is jointly administered by the department of the interior's u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) , within the department of commerce , collectively referred to as “the services.” to receive protection under the esa , a species must first be added to one of the federal lists of threatened or endangered species , which typically happens in response to a person or group filing a petition to list the species with one of the services . under section 4 of the esa , when one of the services receives a petition to list or delist a species , it must determine whether the petition presents substantial information that the action may be warranted , and if so , proceed with a review of the species . for those species where a review is conducted , the services must then determine whether the species' listing or delisting is warranted , and if so , issue a rule proposing to add or remove the species from the threatened or endangered lists .