mortgaged properties . requiring third parties , such as mortgage lenders , to report mortgaged property addresses in addition to information they are already required to report on mortgaged properties would help irs identify potential noncompliance . identifying additional third - party reporting opportunities is challenging . considerations include whether any third parties have accurate information available in a timely manner , the burden of reporting on the third parties , and whether irs can enforce the reporting requirement . ( 2 ) what are strategies for reducing the tax gap ? as requested , we will also provide information on potential long - term strategies to prevent refund fraud related to identity theft . my testimony is based largely on our recent reports on tax noncompliance and updates our 2011 testimonies on the tax gap and identity theft . information on our scope and methodology is available in our published products . gao , tax gap: complexity and taxpayer compliance , gao - 11-747t ( washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2011 ) , and taxes and identity theft: status of irs initiatives to help victimized taxpayers , gao - 11-721t ( washington , d.c.: june 2 , 2011 ) . this testimony and the reports and testimonies upon which it is based were conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . however , determining the appropriate level of enforcement resources to provide irs requires taking into account factors such as how effectively and efficiently irs is currently using its resources , how to strike the proper balance between irs's taxpayer service and enforcement activities , and competing federal funding priorities . for example , in a 2009 report , we found that despite investing nearly a quarter of all revenue agent time in 2008 , irs was able to examine ( audit ) about 1 percent of estimated noncompliant sole proprietors . not only are these exams burdensome for businesses , they are also costly for irs and yield less revenue than examinations of other categories of taxpayers , in part because most sole proprietorships are small in terms of receipts . irs could reduce the tax gap by expanding compliance checks before issuing refunds to taxpayers . for this hearing , we updated prior reported information about the estimated amounts for various components of the 2006 tax gap , the data and methodology used to estimate the 2006 tax gap , and actions irs has taken to address our recommendations to improve taxpayer compliance . we confirmed the new information with irs officials . the gross tax gap has grown in dollar terms since irs's previous estimate for tax year 2001 , increasing from $345 billion to $450 billion for tax year 2006 .