capturing and sharing knowledge . the competition process is ultimately about promoting innovation and creating more economical , efficient , and effective organizations . capturing and disseminating information on lessons learned and providing sufficient guidance on how to implement policies will be essential if this is to occur . without effectively sharing lessons learned and sufficient guidance , agencies will be challenged to implement certain a - 76 requirements . for example , calculating savings that accrue from a - 76 competitions , as required by the new circular , will be difficult or may be done inconsistently across agencies without additional guidance , which will contribute to uncertainties over savings . successful implementation will require adequate technical and financial resources , as well as sustained commitment by senior leadership to establish fact - based goals , make effective decisions , achieve continuous improvement based on lessons learned , and provide ongoing communication to ensure federal workers know and believe that they will be viewed and treated as valuable assets . building and maintaining agency capacity . conducting competitions as fairly , effectively , and efficiently as possible requires sufficient agency capacity — that is , a skilled workforce and adequate infrastructure and funding . agencies will need to build and maintain capacity to manage competitions , to prepare the in - house most - effective organization ( meo ) , and to oversee the work — regardless of whether the private sector or the meo is selected . building this capacity will likely be a challenge , particularly for agencies that have not been heavily invested in competitive sourcing previously . an additional challenge facing agencies in managing this effort will be doing so while addressing high - risk areas , such as human capital and contract management . in this regard , gao has listed contract management at the national aeronautics and space administration , the department of housing and urban development , and the department of energy as an area of high risk . with a likely increase in the number of public - private competitions and the requirement to hold accountable whichever sector wins , agencies will need to ensure that they have an acquisition workforce sufficient in numbers and abilities to administer and oversee these arrangements effectively . we recently initiated work to look at how agencies are implementing their competitive sourcing programs . our prior work on acquisition , human capital , and information technology management — in particular , our work on dod's efforts to implement competitive sourcing — provides a strong knowledge base from which to assess agencies' implementation of this initiative . finally , an important issue for implementation of the new circular a - 76 is the right of in - house competitors to appeal sourcing decisions in favor of the private sector . the panel heard frequent complaints from federal employees and their representatives about the inequality of protest rights . while both the public and the private sectors had the right under the earlier circular to file appeals to agency appeal boards , only the private sector had the right , if dissatisfied with the ruling of the agency appeal board , to file a bid protest at gao or in court .