regulations . ofac developed and issued the iranian financial sanctions regulations to administer the financial sanctions enacted in july 2010 pursuant to cisada . treasury has amended the iranian financial sanctions regulations to implement additional legislation , such as section 1245 of ndaa . while drafting , and before publishing regulations , ofac solicited input on the proposed regulations from other treasury officials and state . all u.s. persons must comply with the ofac regulations , including all u.s. citizens , all persons and entities within the united states , and all u.s. - incorporated entities and their foreign branches . outreach . according to treasury , since 2010 , treasury officials have conducted outreach to more than 145 foreign financial institutions in more than 60 countries as well as to foreign governments , regulators , and other trade groups and associations . u.s. embassy consulate staff in dubai informed us that treasury officials made several trips to the united arab emirates to conduct outreach with financial institutions . financial officials we met with in dubai confirmed that treasury had provided them with information on the new sanctions regulations under cisada . according to treasury officials , treasury conducted this outreach to raise awareness of u.s. financial sanctions . identification of violations . according to treasury , ofac continually compiles evidence and reviews information regarding potential sanctions violations from a variety of sources , including intelligence and public sources . treasury officials stated that ofac identifies potential violations through a variety of means , including financial irregularities from bank reports , referrals from federal bank regulators , and self - disclosures of potential violations by banks . according to treasury officials , when ofac designates an entity because of its engagement in sanctionable activity , ofac declassifies and uses a portion of the evidence in order to make the designation public . assessments . treasury regularly assesses the administration of sanctions and their impact on iran . according to treasury officials , treasury gathers various sources of information to monitor and assess the impact of u.s. sanctions targeting iran . treasury officials indicated that they rely on iranian press reports , input from banks and other financial institutions , iranian economic indicators , and intelligence information , among other sources . according to u.s. consulate officers in dubai , they monitor iranian events and the iranian economy , collecting information on trade , real estate , gold , and the volume of transactions in exchange houses in iran . treasury develops classified quarterly reports on the impacts of sanctions on iran's economy , trade , and other sectors . state is responsible for administering the significant reduction exception set forth in section 1245 of the ndaa of 2012 . the act requires the president to prohibit the opening , and prohibit or impose strict conditions on the maintenance , of a correspondent or payable - through account in the united states by a foreign financial institution found to have knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant financial transaction with the central bank of iran or another designated iranian financial institution . the sanction applies to foreign central banks only insofar as the transactions are related to the sale or purchase of petroleum or petroleum products to or from iran .