srinivasan . “the muddles over outsourcing.” journal of economic perspectives 18:4 ( fall 2004 ) : 93- 114 . bivens , l. josh . “who dies ? international trade , market structure , and industrial restructuring.” nber working paper 8327 . cambridge , mass . : national bureau of economic research , june 2001 . bernard andrew b. , j. bradford jensen , and peter k. schott . “falling trade costs , heterogeneous firms , and industry dynamics.” nber working paper 9639 . cambridge , mass . : national bureau of economic research , april 2003 . bernard andrew b. , j. bradford jensen , and peter k. schott . “survival of the best fit: exposure to low - wage countries and the ( uneven ) growth of u.s. manufacturing plants.” november 2004. http: / / mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu / pages / faculty / andrew.bernard / working_pap ers.html . ( accessed on apr . bhagwati , jagdish , arvind panagariya , and t.n . “truth and consequences of offshoring: recent studies overstate the benefits and ignore the costs to american workers.” briefing paper 155 . washington , d.c.: economic policy institute , august 2 , 2005 . the boston consulting group . capturing global advantage: how leading industrial companies are transforming their industries by sourcing and selling in china , india , and other low - cost countries . boston , mass . : april 2004 . how many workers will be displaced due to offshoring ? what are the reemployment experiences of workers dislocated due to offshoring ? some economists have expressed concern that offshoring could accelerate income inequality in the u.s. ; however , others argue that changes in the income distribution are driven primarily by factors unrelated to offshoring , and still others point out that offshoring could potentially decrease income inequality . those who think offshoring might accelerate income inequality believe it could do so by lowering the wages of some lower - wage and middle - class jobs , while potentially increasing the wages of smaller numbers of highly compensated positions . those who disagree argue that offshoring is unlikely to have significant effects on wages and the u.s. income distribution because changes in demand for different skills are driven more by technological developments than by the changing international division of labor . those who argue that offshoring could reduce income inequality note that this could occur if offshoring generates wage pressure on high - wage jobs , such as engineering , without significantly affecting the wages of low - wage jobs . offshoring could also reduce income inequality if it reduces the cost of services that are consumed by primarily lower - and middle - income americans . underlying these disagreements are debates about whether , in the long run , offshoring will change the demand for u.s. workers with different skill levels , which sectors of the income distribution are most likely to be affected by this changing demand , and whether offshoring leads to reductions in the cost of services that primarily benefit lower - and middle - income americans .