( see app . ii for the list of organizations and individuals who provided information responding to our research questions. ) the parties provided us their input through a variety of means , including group meetings , individual interviews , and written responses . maintain the current point of order mechanism . strengthen the point of order mechanism . are the potential revenue sources available to the various level of government adequate to finance their responsibilities ? because issues involving umra and unfunded mandates are part of a broader public policy debate to be had by congress , we are making no recommendations in this report . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we will not distribute it until 30 days from the date of this letter . we will then send copies of this report to the ranking member , subcommittee on oversight of government management , the federal workforce , and the district of columbia , committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , u.s. senate ; the chair and ranking member of the government reform committee , house of representatives ; the directors of omb and cbo and others on request . it will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me or tim bober at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or williamso@gao.gov or bobert@gao.gov . key contributors to this report were tom beall , kate gonzalez , boris kachura , paul posner , and michael rose . for this report , you asked us to provide more information and analysis regarding the unfunded mandates reform act of 1995 ( umra ) and federal mandates in general . specifically , you asked us to consult with a diverse group of knowledgeable parties familiar with the act and to report their views on ( 1 ) the significant strengths and weaknesses of umra as the framework for addressing federal mandates issues , including why the parties believed the issues they identified were significant , and ( 2 ) potential options suggested for reinforcing the strengths or addressing the weaknesses . congress and omb should develop more expertise on regulations and how to govern them . the most important point is to clarify in advance what consequences federal actions will have . although additional program evaluation of federal mandates would help , this was not the initial intent of umra . research into the scope and scale of unfunded mandates will not be informative unless and until the law has adequate incentives for compliance and accounting . it would be useful for the gao to provide an annual report documenting the total budgetary shortfall of unfunded mandates . make the potentially affected nonfederal parties aware when there is a finding that proposed legislation contains a mandate . enhance the work of cbo's state and local government cost estimates unit by providing the unit more timely access to bills and joint resolutions that may impose unfunded federal mandates .