tricare eligibility . effective october 1 , 2001 , retirees age 65 and older enrolled in medicare part b became eligible for tricare coverage — commonly termed tricare for life . as a result , tricare is now a secondary payer for these retirees' medicare - covered services — paying most of their required cost - sharing . this includes copayments required of retirees enrolled in civilian medicare managed care plans . retirees are eligible to enroll in tricare plus but are not allowed to enroll in tricare prime . medicare is a federally financed health insurance program for persons age 65 and older , some people with disabilities , and people with end - stage kidney disease . eligible beneficiaries are automatically covered by part a , which covers inpatient hospital , skilled nursing facility and hospice care , as well as some home health care . they also can pay a monthly premium to join part b , which covers physician and outpatient services as well as those home health services not covered under part a . traditional medicare allows beneficiaries to choose any provider that accepts medicare payment and requires beneficiaries to pay for part of their care . most beneficiaries have supplemental coverage that reimburses them for many of the costs that medicare requires them to pay . major sources of this coverage include employer - sponsored health insurance ; “medigap” policies , sold by private insurers to individuals ; and medicaid , a joint federal - state program that finances health care for low - income people . the alternative to traditional medicare , medicare+choice , offers beneficiaries the option of enrolling in managed care or other private health plans . all medicare+choice plans cover basic medicare benefits , and many also cover additional benefits such as prescription drugs . typically , medicare+choice managed care plans have limited cost - sharing but restrict members' choice of providers and may require an additional monthly premium . under the medicare subvention demonstration , dod established and operated six medicare+choice managed care plans , called tricare senior prime , at sites selected jointly by dod and hcfa . enrollment in senior prime was open to military retirees enrolled in medicare part a and part b who resided within roughly 40 miles of a participating mtf . about 125,000 retirees were eligible for the demonstration . dod capped enrollment at about 28,000 for the demonstration as a whole ; each mtf had its own enrollment cap . in addition , retirees enrolled in tricare prime who had a primary care provider at a demonstration mtf could “age in” to senior prime upon reaching age 65 , even if mtfs' enrollment caps had been reached . senior prime offered enrollees the full range of medicare - covered services as well as additional tricare services , notably prescription drugs . it also gave them higher priority for care at mtfs than retirees who did not join the program . enrollees paid the medicare part b premium , but no additional premium to dod . care at mtfs was free of charge , but enrollees had to pay any applicable cost - sharing amounts when mtfs referred them to the civilian network for care ( for example , $12 for an office visit ) .