these changes have made the markets more complex . in addition , the markets have become more international , and legislative changes have resulted in a regulatory framework that requires increased coordination among financial regulators and requires that the sec regulate a greater range of products . moreover , as i have discussed , the collapse of enron and other corporate failures have stimulated an intense debate on the need for broad - based reform in such areas as oversight of the accounting profession , accounting standards , corporate governance , and analysts conflicts of interest issues , all of which could have significant repercussions on the sec's role and oversight challenges . the new body should have sources of funding independent of the accounting profession . the new body could have authority to set annual registration fees for public companies . it could also have authority to set fees for services , such as inspections of public accounting firms , and authority to charge for copies of publications , such as professional standards and related guidance . the above fees and charges should be set to recover costs and sustain the operations of the new body . for accountability , we believe the new body should report annually to the congress and the public on the full - range of its activities , including setting professional standards , inspections of public accounting firms , and related disciplinary activities . such reporting also provides the opportunity for the congress to conduct oversight of the performance of the new body . the congress also may wish to have gao review and report on the performance of the new body after the first year of its operations and periodically thereafter . accordingly , we suggest that the congress provide gao not only access to the records of the new body , but also to the records of accounting firms and other professional organizations that may be needed for gao to assess the performance of the new body . for over 70 years , the public accounting profession , through its independent audit function , has played a critical role in enhancing a financial reporting process that has supported the effective functioning of our domestic capital markets , which are widely viewed as the best in the world . the new body should be created by statute as an independent federal government body . to facilitate operating independently , the new body's board members should be highly qualified and independent from the accounting profession , its funding sources should not be dependent on voluntary contributions from the accounting profession , and it should have final approval for setting professional standards and its operating rules . in that respect , the new body would have independent decisionmaking authority from the sec . it would approve professional standards , set sanctions resulting from disciplinary actions , and establish its operating rules . at the same time , it should coordinate and communicate its activities with the sec and the various state boards of accountancy . the new body should set its own human resource and other administrative requirements and should be given appropriate flexibility to operate as an independent entity and to provide compensation that is competitive to attract highly competent board members and supporting staff .