its financial statements . subsequently , the ndaa for fiscal year 2013 added that the fiar plan must also describe the steps to be taken , with associated costs , to ensure that the department's statement of budgetary resources ( sbr ) is validated as audit ready no later than september 30 , 2014 . my statement today focuses on two topics: the effect of continuing financial management weaknesses on dod management and operations and dod's actions to improve its financial management and achieve audit readiness , and its remaining challenges . my statement is primarily based on previously issued reports , including our reporting on dod high - risk areas and our audit reports on dod's financial management , inventory management controls and asset visibility , weapon system costs , business transformation , business system modernization , improper payments , military payroll , and audit risk . a list of related products is included at the end of this statement . this statement also is based on our ongoing analyses of the army's sbr audit readiness efforts and the defense finance and accounting service's ( dfas ) audit readiness efforts for dod payments to contractors , or “contract pay.” we expect to report the final results from this work in june 2014 . for our analyses , we reviewed army and dfas documentation , such as departmental guidance and army and dfas action plans and statuses , and met with component officials to discuss the basis and timing of their audit readiness assertions . we discussed the preliminary results of our work with cognizant dod officials . the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . additional information on our scope and methodology is available in the previously issued products cited in this statement . in the face of continuing reports of financial management weaknesses across the federal government , including wasteful spending , poor management , and losses totaling billions of dollars , the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 was signed into law . the act focuses on establishing a leadership structure ; improving systems of accounting , financial management , and internal control ; and enabling effective management and oversight through the production of complete , reliable , timely , and consistent financial information . with the foundation of the cfo act and the government management reform act of 1994 ( gmra ) , with its goal “to provide a more effective , efficient and responsive government,” along with other federal agency management reform legislation , such as the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) and ffmia , a framework was put in place to improve stewardship , accountability , and transparency in the executive branch . major goals of the reform legislation have included the following: strengthening internal control .