ii for limitations ) . exclusion results in a range of effects . for example , when we assume that institutions target capital ratios equivalent to replacing 70 percent of excluded hybrid instruments , estimates range from a decline of 0.13 to 1.81 percentage points for loan volumes and from an increase of 0.06 to 0.43 percentage points for lending spreads . although exact comparisons are not always possible , the averages of the estimates are generally consistent with our model results.studies examine the impact of a generalized shock to capital . however , in the case of the tier 1 hybrid capital exclusion , the capital shock is specific to bank holding companies with assets of $15 billion or more . given the large number of banking institutions with assets of less than $15 billion , the ability of affected institutions to raise loan rates significantly may be limited by competitive forces , and the decline in loan growth may be mitigated by substitution across institutions . long - term effects of the hybrid capital exclusion on loan rates will likely also be small , although the exact impact is unknown . to assess the potential impact on loan rates for these institutions , we used a modified version of an existing loan pricing model . banking institutions have multiple options for adjusting to more costly forms of tier 1 capital — such as shifting lending activity to lower - risk borrowers , reducing returns to shareholders , increasing efficiency , or raising lending rates — and the loan pricing model allowed us to consider these different scenarios . for all of the scenarios we examined , our model indicated minimal potential loan rate increases from institutions' use of higher cost and quality tier 1 capital and , as a result , modest effects on loan volumes ( table 6 ) . even if institutions are assumed to adjust solely by raising lending rates , rates would increase by 0.12 percentage points . other scenarios assuming that institutions' adjustments also occurred in other areas led to smaller increases in lending rates . the long - term effects on lending rates may be more significant for certain institutions . for example , customers of smaller institutions could experience larger increases in loan rates , but even these effects likely will remain modest . again , the effects on lending rates would likely be mitigated since it may be difficult for the impacted institutions to pass the higher cost on to borrowers without losing market share . the lack of tax - deductible tier 1 hybrid capital instruments could result in a cost disadvantage for u.s. institutions relative to their foreign peers , although the overall competitive effects are unclear . hybrid capital instruments , in particular trust preferred securities and real estate investment trust ( reit ) preferred securities , generally have been the primary tier 1 capital instruments for which u.s. institutions have received tax - deductible treatment.instruments receive favorable tax treatment compared to equity . the tax code generally allows interest expenses on debt instruments to be deducted from income , but not dividends or other payments to equity in the united states , debt holders .