circular no . a - 127 refers to the series of publications entitled federal financial management systems requirements , initially issued by the joint financial management improvement program's ( jfmip ) program management office ( pmo ) as the primary source of governmentwide requirements for financial management systems . however , as of december 2004 , the financial systems integration office ( fsio ) assumed responsibility for coordinating the work related to federal financial management systems requirements and omb's office of federal financial management ( offm ) is responsible for issuing the new or revised regulations . in december 2004 , the jfmip principals voted to modify the roles and responsibilities of jfmip , resulting in the creation of fsio . appendix ii lists the federal financial management systems requirements published to date . figure 8 is the current model that illustrates how these systems interrelate in an agency's overall systems architecture . omb establishes governmentwide financial management policies and requirements and has issued two sources of guidance related to ffmia reporting . first , omb bulletin no . 01-02 , audit requirements for federal financial statements , dated october 16 , 2000 , prescribed specific language auditors should use when reporting on an agency system's substantial compliance with the three ffmia requirements . specifically , this guidance called for auditors to provide negative assurance when reporting on an agency system's ffmia compliance . on august 23 , 2006 , omb issued bulletin no . 06-03 , audit requirements for federal financial statements , which superseded omb bulletin no . this bulletin did not substantially revise the ffmia audit guidance included in bulletin no . second , in omb memorandum , revised implementation guidance for the federal financial management improvement act ( jan. 4 , 2001 ) , omb provides guidance for agencies and auditors to use in assessing substantial compliance . the guidance describes the factors that should be considered in determining whether an agency's systems substantially comply with ffmia's three requirements . further , the guidance provides examples of the types of indicators that should be used as a basis for assessing whether an agency's systems are in substantial compliance with each of the three ffmia requirements . finally , the guidance discusses the corrective action plans , to be developed by agency heads , for bringing their systems into compliance with ffmia . we have worked in partnership with representatives from the president's council on integrity and efficiency ( pcie ) to develop and maintain the joint gao / pcie financial audit manual ( fam ) . the fam provides specific procedures auditors should perform when assessing ffmia compliance . as detailed in appendix v , we have also issued a series of checklists to help assess whether agencies' systems meet systems requirements . the fam guidance on ffmia assessments recognizes that while financial statement audits offer some assurance regarding ffmia compliance , auditors should design and implement additional testing to satisfy ffmia criteria . omb circular no . a - 127 also requires agencies to purchase commercial off - the - shelf ( cots ) software that has been tested and certified through the pmo software certification process when acquiring core financial systems .