oversight questions 1 . what coordination and integration mechanisms has the u.s. government established to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of u.s. international food assistance ? what is the nature and scope of current u.s. global food security activities ? what agencies , programs , and funding levels are involved ? how are ngos , international organizations , foreign governments , and host governments involved in these efforts ? what progress have u.s. agencies made in developing an integrated governmentwide global food security strategy ? what are the goals and timeframe for the implementation of the strategy ? what key criteria has the u.s. government developed to assess the implementation of the global food security strategy ? does the u.s. government plan to report annually to congress on the results of the strategy ? time period ( see fig . in 2009 , we determined that lrp is generally more cost - effective and timely than u.s. in - kind food aid ( see fig . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the work on which this report is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . usaid and the departments of agriculture and transportation provided technical comments on a draft of this report , which have been incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the congressional committees listed below . in addition , we are sending copies of this report to the president and vice president of the united states , and executive branch agencies . the report also is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . a list of related gao products appears at the end of this report . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact thomas melito at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs can be found on the last page of this report . for press inquiries , please contact chuck young at ( 202 ) 512-4800 . gao staff who made key contributions are listed in appendix ii . key findings international food assistance , which includes both food aid and food security programs , is provided by multiple u.s. agencies with differing strategies , goals , and objectives . in 2008 , we reported that donors and other implementing partners experienced difficulties in coordination and that the united states lacked an integrated , governmentwide strategy to address the root causes of food insecurity . we will publish a new report on u.s. efforts to address global food insecurity in february 2010 . the united states has principally employed six programs to deliver food aid: public law ( p.l. ) 480 ( renamed the food for peace act in 2008 ) , titles i , ii , and iii ; food for progress ; mcgovern - dole food for education and child nutrition ; and section 416 ( b ) .