we disagree . as we state in the report , dod's existing policy leaves these compliance activities to the discretion of the program manager and the investment decision authority , and it does not provide for measurement and verification of the use of best practices , both of which are recognized components of effective control processes . a copy of dod's comments is reprinted in appendix iii , along with our response . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate and house committees on armed services ; subcommittees on defense , senate and house committees on appropriations ; and the subcommittee on military readiness , house committee on armed services . we are also sending copies to the director , office of management and budget ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense ( at&l ) ; the assistant secretary of defense ( nii ) / chief information officer ; and the director , ot&e . we will make copies available to others on request . this report will also be available at no charge on our web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3439 . i can also be reached by e - mail at hiter@gao.gov . other contacts and key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objectives were to determine whether the department of defense's ( dod ) revised systems acquisition policies for acquiring information technology ( it ) business systems ( 1 ) are consistent with industry best practices , including those pertaining to commercial component - based systems , and ( 2 ) provide the necessary controls to ensure that the department's component organizations adhere to the practices . to accomplish the first objective , we identified the dod policies and guidance relevant to business systems . acquisition planning begins with the earliest identification of a requirement that is to be satisfied through an acquisition . activities: ( 1 ) plans are prepared during acquisition planning and maintained throughout the acquisition . ( 2 ) planning addresses the entire acquisition process , including life cycle support of the products being acquired . ( 3 ) the acquisition organization has a written policy for planning the acquisition . ( 4 ) responsibility for acquisition planning activities is designated . purpose: to ensure that the acquisition is consistent with the organization's enterprise architecture . description: architectural alignment is the process for analyzing and verifying that the proposed architecture of the system being acquired is consistent with the enterprise architecture for the organization acquiring the system . such alignment is needed to ensure that acquired systems can interoperate and are not unnecessarily duplicative of one another . exceptions to this alignment requirement are permitted , but only when justified and only when granted an explicit waiver from the architecture . these policies and guidance are contained in three documents — dod directive 5000.1 , dod instruction 5000.2 , and the interim defense acquisition guidebook — and are generally referred to as the 5000 series .