david j . wise , ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , david sausville , assistant director ; russell burnett , kathleen gilhooly ; nancy lueke ; nitin rao ; amy rosewarne ; and jack wang made key contributions to this report . omb generally agreed with our recommendation . specifically , omb stated that the june 2010 memorandum had positive effects on federal real - property management , and acknowledged that there are opportunities to improve future cost - savings efforts , as identified in our report . omb stated that our recommendation was generally reasonable as it applies to prospective initiatives that directly address cost savings . the omb guidance did not specify how these types of savings were to be reported . doj , state , and usda had no comments . further details on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we have identified numerous challenges related to the government's management of its real property , including issues pertaining to using and disposing of underutilized and excess property , an overreliance on leasing , and having unreliable real property data to support decision making.management after we designated it high risk in 2003 . however , it has not yet fully addressed the underlying challenges that hamper reform , such the government has made progress reforming real property as those related to environmental cleanup and historic preservation , a lack of accurate and useful data to support decision making , and competing stakeholder interests that make it difficult to dispose of real property . in the meantime , the federal government continues to retain more real property than it needs . to address the excess and underutilized property the government holds , previous and current administrations have implemented a number of cost savings initiatives associated with better managing real property . for example , in may 2011 , the administration proposed legislation — the civilian property realignment act ( cpra ) — which , among other things , would have established a legislative framework for consolidating and disposing of civilian real property as a means of generating savings to the federal government . although cpra and other real property reform legislation introduced in the previous session of congress have not been enacted , according to the president's budget request for fiscal year 2014 , the administration will continue to pursue enactment of cpra . most recently , omb issued guidance for implementing the administration's freeze the footprint policy , which requires agencies to document their efforts to restrict any growth in the size of their domestic office and warehouse inventories . the june 2010 presidential memorandum required federal agencies to achieve $3 billion in cost savings by the end of fiscal year 2012 from increased proceeds from the sale of assets ; reduced operations , maintenance , and energy expenses from asset disposals ; or other efforts to consolidate space or increase occupancy rates in existing facilities , such as ending leases or implementing telework arrangements . agency actions taken under the memorandum were to align with and support previous administration initiatives to measure and reduce greenhouse gas emissions in federal facilities and consolidate data centers .