mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the council may have . further information about this statement , please contact barbara bovbjerg at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or bovbjergb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . i am pleased to be here today to discuss voting access for people with disabilities . as you know , voting is fundamental to our democratic system , and federal law generally requires federal election polling places to be accessible to all eligible voters , including voters with disabilities and the elderly . under the law , state political subdivisions responsible for conducting elections must assure that polling places used in federal elections are accessible , as determined by the state . these requirements present a challenge to state and local election officials because achieving accessibility — which is affected by the type of impairment and various barriers posed by polling place facilities and voting methods — is part of a larger set of challenges they face in administering elections on a periodic basis . as part of these early efforts , justice provided guidance to poll workers on how to assess and create a physically accessible polling place . specifically , in 2004 , justice published the americans with disabilities act: ada checklist for polling places , which provided information to voting officials on key accessibility features needed by most voters with disabilities to go from the parking area to the voting area . according to our survey , 34 states found the checklist to be moderately to very helpful . in the 2008 federal election , an estimated 15 million voters with disabilities cast ballots . however , during the 2000 federal election , we found that only 16 percent of polling places had no potential impediments to voting access for people with disabilities . congress passed the help america vote act of 2002 ( hava ) to address these and other challenges encountered during the 2000 federal election . subsequently , congress asked gao to assess voting access for people with disabilities again and examine actions taken to facilitate voting for residents of long - term care facilities during the 2008 federal election . much has happened since the 2008 federal election , and states have made various changes to their election laws that may affect voters with disabilities . state and local governments may generally comply with ada accessibility requirements in a variety of ways , such as reassigning services to accessible buildings or alternative title iii of the ada generally covers commercial accessible sites.facilities and places of public accommodation that may also be used as polling places . public accommodations must make reasonable modifications in policies , practices , or procedures to facilitate access for people with disabilities . these facilities are also required to remove physical barriers in existing buildings when it is “readily achievable” to do so ; that is , when the removal can be done without much difficulty or expense , given the entity's resources .