dod , the u.s . of the recommendations we made , eight were closed as implemented and four were closed as not implemented . in table 5 , we list the 12 recommendations and summarize the status of each recommendation at the time we closed it . to determine the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) has identified challenges associated with its military and overseas absentee voting assistance efforts and developed plans to address those challenges , we interviewed program officials at the federal voting assistance program ( fvap ) ; obtained relevant documents , studies , and data ; and discussed their voting assistance efforts , including challenges and planned corrective actions . we interviewed the senior service voting representative and voting action officers from each of the military services , including the u.s. coast guard , to discuss their coordination with fvap and management of the service voting assistance activities . we also contacted officials at other dod organizations , the military services , other executive branch agencies , and nongovernmental organizations to discuss the challenges that fvap faces in providing voting assistance to military and overseas voters . in table 6 we list the dod entities , other federal agencies , and other organizations that we contacted for this review . we reviewed reports that resulted from two studies on fvap that dod commissioned and that were issued in 2015 and 2014 , respectively . the first study , conducted by the rand corporation , examined fvap's internal operations ; the second study , conducted by lake research partners , identified challenges faced by overseas absentee voters , their eligible family members , dod's voting assistance officers , overseas citizens , and local election officials . we interviewed staff from the rand corporation that conducted the study of fvap's internal operations to discuss their views of the program and its challenges . we reviewed documentation that fvap provided from the lake research partners study , including transcripts from focus groups with voters covered under the uniformed and overseas citizens absentee voting act ( uocava ) , including servicemembers , their family members , and overseas citizen to identify the absentee voting challenges faced by those fvap customers . we also reviewed and analyzed the results of post - election surveys that fvap had conducted with the defense manpower data center and the election assistance commission between 2008 and 2014 . the surveys are used to determine participation in the electoral process by uocava voters ; assess the impact of fvap's efforts to simplify and ease the process of voting absentee ; evaluate progress made to facilitate absentee voting ; and identify remaining obstacles to voting by individuals covered by uocava . these surveys include questions for the voter about the methods voters used to cast a ballot and the effectiveness of the information sources the voters consulted . the surveys also collect data from local election officials regarding the numbers of absentee ballots processed and the reasons for rejection . we determined that that fvap's surveys with the defense manpower data center and the election assistance commission were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . we reviewed communication plans and a media engagement plan that fvap uses to promote awareness of its resources .