buprenorphine . buprenorphine is a partial opioid agonist , meaning it binds to opioid receptors and activates them . it reduces or eliminates opioid withdrawal symptoms , including drug cravings , and blunts the euphoria or dangerous side effects of other opioids , such as heroin . it can be used for detoxification treatment and maintenance therapy . buprenorphine is available as a mat medication in two oral formats — ( 1 ) tablets for sublingual ( under the tongue ) administration , and ( 2 ) film for sublingual or buccal ( inside the cheek ) administration ; as a subdermal ( under the skin ) implant ; and in an injectable format . oral formats are often used for beneficiaries that are in the beginning stages of treatment . the implantable format is generally used for beneficiaries who are already stable on a low or moderate dosage of oral buprenorphine . the oral formats are taken daily , while the injectable format is administered monthly , and the implantable format is administered every 6 months . the medication carries a risk of abuse , particularly in oral formats where it can be used inappropriately or illegally re - sold . the injectable and implantable formats of buprenorphine are intended to minimize this risk and to increase beneficiary compliance , because the medication is administered by a provider . buprenorphine - naloxone . naloxone is a medication added to some oral formats of buprenorphine to reduce the chances of misuse or abuse . buprenorphine - naloxone is available in an oral format as either a film or a tablet . it discourages people from inappropriately injecting a crushed and dissolved tablet of buprenorphine by inducing symptoms of opioid withdrawal when injected by individuals physically dependent on opioids . naltrexone . naltrexone is an opioid antagonist , meaning it binds to opioid receptors , but does not activate them , thereby blocking the euphoria the user would normally feel from opioids . it also may result in withdrawal symptoms if recent opioid use has occurred . therefore , it is used for relapse prevention following complete detoxification from opioids . it can be taken daily in an oral format or as a once - monthly injection ; though due to low patient compliance , samhsa does not recommend using oral naltrexone for oud treatment . naltrexone carries no known risk of abuse . for the injectable format of naltrexone , beneficiaries have to be free from opioids for at least a week before they can begin the medication . subject to certain requirements , state medicaid agencies may use different strategies , such as prior authorization and preferred drug lists ( pdl ) , to manage the cost of prescription medications and ensure that patients are taking medications that are clinically appropriate . prior authorization requires that certain conditions are met before services can be provided to patients , in part , to control utilization and prevent improper payments . pdls reflect state medicaid agencies' determinations on whether medications , including those used for mat , will be covered and whether these medications will be categorized as preferred or non - preferred . a pdl indicates the first - choice or preferred medication for a beneficiary's particular medical condition .