open . fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to provide in the financial statements all the financial information relevant to the defined reporting entity , in all material respects . such information would include , for example , the reporting entity's assets , liabilities , and revenues . ( preparation material weakness ) treasury was able to collect data from all reporting entities in the executive branch for fiscal year - end 2014 . partial data were also collected from the judicial and legislative branches , despite those entities not being statutorily required to report to treasury . treasury and omb will continue to work with non - executive branch entities to collect all necessary information . 02-24 the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to disclose in the financial statements all information that is necessary to inform users adequately about the reporting entity . such disclosures should clearly describe the reporting entity and explain the reason for excluding any components that are not included in the defined reporting entity . ( preparation material weakness ) treasury revamped the wording in appendix a of the financial report to clearly demonstrate the reporting entities included in the financial report . in addition , appendix a clearly discloses the reasons for excluding certain reporting entities . closed . closed . open . fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to help ensure that federal agencies provide adequate information in their legal representation letters regarding the expected outcomes of the cases . ( preparation material weakness ) treasury and omb will work with the agencies to encourage the proper usage of the “unable to determine” category for the legal cases . in addition , treasury will work to limit agency use of this category , require that additional information be reported when this category is selected , or both . 02-37 the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to establish written policies and procedures to help ensure that major treaty and other international agreement information is properly identified and reported in the cfs . specifically , these policies and procedures should require that federal agencies develop a detailed schedule of all major treaties and other international agreements that obligate the u.s. government to provide cash , goods , or services , or that create other financial arrangements that are contingent on the occurrence or nonoccurrence of future events ( a starting point for compiling these data could be the state department's treaties in force ) . ( preparation material weakness ) per treasury and omb treasury and omb will develop a process to leverage the existing information from agencies , where possible , and assess methods and approaches for obtaining additional information from agencies . 02-38 the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to establish written policies and procedures to help ensure that major treaty and other international agreement information is properly identified and reported in the cfs .