denial of task . for nuclear weapons or nuclear test devices that terrorists might seek to steal , doe requires the prevention and / or neutralization of the adversaries before they can complete a specific task , such as stealing such devices . containment with recapture . where the theft of nuclear material ( instead of a nuclear weapon ) is the likely terrorist objective , doe requires that adversaries not be allowed to escape the facility and that doe protective forces recapture the material as soon as possible . this objective requires the use of specially trained and well - equipped special response teams . the effectiveness of the protective system is formally and regularly examined through vulnerability assessments . a vulnerability assessment is a systematic evaluation process in which qualitative and quantitative techniques are applied to detect vulnerabilities and arrive at effective protection of specific assets , such as special nuclear material . to conduct such assessments , doe uses , among other things , subject matter experts , such as u.s. special forces ; computer modeling to simulate attacks ; and force - on - force performance testing , in which the site's protective forces undergo simulated attacks by a group of mock terrorists . the results of these assessments are documented at each site in a classified document known as the site safeguards and security plan . in addition to identifying known vulnerabilities , risks , and protection strategies for the site , the site safeguards and security plan formally acknowledges how much risk the contractor and doe are willing to accept . specifically , for more than a decade , doe has employed a risk management approach that seeks to direct resources to its most critical assets — in this case category i special nuclear material — and mitigate the risks to these assets to an acceptable level . levels of risk — high , medium , and low — are assigned classified numerical values and are derived from a mathematical equation that compares a terrorist group's capabilities with the overall effectiveness of the crucial elements of the site's protective forces and systems . historically , doe has striven to keep its most critical assets at a low risk level and may insist on immediate compensatory measures should a significant vulnerability develop that increases risk above the low risk level . compensatory measures could include such things as deploying additional protective forces or curtailing operations until the asset can be better protected . in response to a september 2000 doe inspector general's report recommending that doe establish a policy on what actions are required once high or moderate risk is identified , in september 2003 , doe's office of security issued a policy clarification stating that identified high risks at facilities must be formally reported to the secretary of energy or deputy secretary within 24 hours . in addition , under this policy clarification , identified high and moderate risks require corrective actions and regular reporting . through a variety of complementary measures , doe ensures that its safeguards and security policies are being complied with and are performing as intended . contractors perform regular self - assessments and are encouraged to uncover any problems themselves .