the trust is managed by a 7-member board of directors . the president of the united states appoints six members and the secretary of the interior or her designee is the seventh member . board members , who are not compensated , are generally appointed to 4-year terms and can be reappointed ; however , no board member may serve more than 8 consecutive years . the board must hold three meetings per year , two of which must be open to the public . an executive director oversees the daily operations of the trust and , as of may 30 , 2001 , managed a 468-member staff . the trust is organized into an office of general counsel and six divisions , each managed by a deputy director ; these managers report directly to the executive director . over the years , the depth of the 4-acre lake has fallen from 30 feet to less than 10 feet . in addition , the lake's water quality has deteriorated because of sedimentation , runoff , and the byproducts of nearby road construction . the national park service , golden gate national park association , and the trust have jointly sponsored a public planning process , including community forums , site research , and other technical analyses , to produce a plan to restore the lake and adjacent shoreline , which encompass a total of 14 acres . a two - phased plan and an environmental assessment were completed and adopted in the spring of 2001 . the trust can set the compensation and duties of the executive director and staff as it deems appropriate . for fiscal year 2001 , the trust projects that its revenues will be $79.4 million . figure 2 shows the trust's projected revenues from all sources for fiscal year 2001 . the trust's projected expenditures for fiscal year 2001 are $79.4 million . figure 3 shows the trust's projected expenditures for fiscal year 2001 , including operations costs such as salaries , day - to - day operations , costs associated with future planning efforts , and public safety . from 1997 through march 30 , 2001 , the trust spent about $15.4 million to repair and replace the presidio's infrastructure , upgrading roads and grounds , telecommunications systems , electrical , and water and sewer systems . from april 1 , 2001 , through the end of fiscal year 2002 , the trust plans to spend an additional $7 million and , with these expenditures , about 80 percent of the electrical , water , sewer , and telecommunications upgrades will be complete . according to the trust , these improvements have increased health and safety systems , enhanced park resources , and prepared more of the presidio for residential and commercial tenants .