some discounts were larger . dhs , for example , received a 76 percent flat rate discount on a $22 million bpa established to purchase software and services . when vendors provided ranges of discounts , the minimum discount was most often between zero and 10 percent , while maximum discounts were more dispersed , with a majority ranging up to 30 percent . some bpas included discounts that varied by volume , while others included discounts that varied according to the product or service offered . for example , under a department of agriculture schedule bpa for software and associated maintenance , the vendor provided discounts ranging from 5 percent on a single order up to $250,000 to 20 percent on a single order over $1 million . the social security administration received discounts ranging from 15 percent off labor rates to 91 percent off software under one of its schedule bpas used to purchase software , maintenance , consulting services , and training . figure 4 demonstrates the wide range of discounts received by each of the agencies in our sample . in addition to requesting a discount at the time the schedule bpa is established , agencies can request additional discounts when they issue orders , although the far does not require them to do so . the agencies in our review infrequently requested discounts when placing orders . of the 352 orders we reviewed , agencies clearly requested discounts for 51 of them . contracting officers indicated that their rationale for not seeking additional discounts when placing orders was the fact that pricing was already established at the time the bpas were awarded . as with discounts at the time a bpa is established , we found that agencies were more likely to receive discounts when they specifically requested them than when they did not . in some cases , agencies had negotiated discounts when establishing the schedule bpas and were also able to obtain further discounts for orders . in the department of justice example noted above , in which the vendor provided an 18 percent discount for the bpa , the contracting officer received an additional 10 percent discount for a $6.3 million order , saving $630,000 . a vendor also provided an additional 45 percent discount for a $2.6 million order under a bpa for which the social security administration had already received discounts when the bpa was established , resulting in a dollar savings of over $1 million . as an illustrative example of the potential for savings , had the contracting officer in another case we reviewed negotiated even a 2 percent discount for a bpa with an estimated amount of $205 million , it would have saved nearly $4 million based on obligations under this bpa from its establishment in 2005 . contracting officers conducted annual reviews that addressed all of the required far elements for only 19 of the 320 bpas in our sample that required an annual review . a number of contracting officers stated that they were unfamiliar with the far's specific annual review requirements for schedule bpas . contracting officers also cited heavy workloads and a lack of acquisition personnel as additional reasons for not conducting annual reviews .