we also interviewed bureau officials . to determine what steps the bureau is taking to improve its cost estimation practices , we attended a demonstration of the decennial budget integration tool , the new bureau automated budget system currently being developed that should enable the bureau to produce better cost estimates . we also interviewed bureau officials . we conducted our work from october 2006 to june 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . according to the ig , the bureau has not included the cost for fingerprinting temporary staff . commerce stated that the bureau will determine if it will be possible to make improvements in the short term to its cost estimates and methods . further , commerce made some suggestions where additional context or clarification was needed and where appropriate we made those changes . commerce commented that our report , in its discussion of increasing census costs , does not mention other significant factors that have contributed to substantial cost increases over the last 40 years . we agree and have clarified in our report that other factors have contributed to increased costs , such as accommodating more complex households , busier lifestyles , more languages and greater cultural diversity , and increased privacy concerns . commerce also stated that it would have been premature to include the cost of fingerprinting temporary workers in the 2010 census life cycle cost estimate . however , best practices state that having a realistic estimate of projected costs makes for effective resource allocation and increases the probability of a program's success . to be prudent and conservative , an agency should include possible program costs that may have an impact on the overall life cycle cost estimate . we appropriately characterize the cost for fingerprinting temporary workers for the 2010 census by stating that it is a “potential” cost . also , understanding that the life cycle cost estimate is , in fact , an estimate , the draft report states that “there is risk that the life cycle cost estimate has been substantially understated.” we therefore made no change to the report . in commenting on our description of how the bureau updates the estimate to reflect costs , commerce stated that it believes that for budget purposes , using enacted appropriations is the best way to adjust the life cycle cost estimate . however , best practices require that an estimate be updated to reflect actual costs when a difference occurs . this enables an agency to determine the precise reasons why actual costs differ for the estimate and document lessons learned . because the draft report already reflected the bureau's practice of using enacted appropriations , we made no changes . commerce did not agree with our statement that the 2010 life cycle cost estimate is not accurate as it relates to assumed productivity rates for the fiscal year 2009 address canvassing operation . commerce stated that at the time of gao's review of the life cycle cost estimate , the bureau had not completed its analysis of the dress rehearsal productivity data . however , productivity data from the address canvassing dress rehearsal were provided to us in december 2007 .