gao - 15-100 . washington , d.c.: december 15 , 2014 . james webb space telescope: project meeting commitments but current technical , cost , and schedule challenges could affect continued progress . gao - 14-72 . washington , d.c.: january 8 , 2014 . this is particularly the case with jwst given its complexity . challenges with the development and manufacturing of the sunshield and the cryocooler were the most significant causes of the decline in schedule reserve that we reported on in december 2014 . the sunshield experienced a significant manufacturing problem during the construction of the large composite panel that forms part of the sunshield's primary support structure . the cryocooler compressor assembly — one component of the cryocooler — delivery is a top issue for the project and its development has required a disproportionate amount of cost reserves to fund additional work , caused in part , by issues such as a manufacturing error and manufacturing process mistake that caused delays to the schedule . the development of the cryocooler has been a concern for project officials as far back as 2006 . since that time , the cryocooler has faced a number of technical challenges , including valve leaks and cryocooler underperformance , which required two subcontract modifications and significant cost reserves to fund . the contractor and subcontractor were focused on addressing valve problems , which limited their attention to the cooling underperformance issue . this raised questions about the oversight of the cryocooler and why it did not get more attention sooner before significant delays occurred . in august 2013 , the cryocooler subcontract was modified to reflect a 69 percent cost increase and that the workforce dedicated to the cryocooler effort at the subcontractor increased from 40 staff to approximately 110 staff . since we issued our december 2014 report , jwst schedule reserve continued to decline: project schedule reserve decreased by 1 month , leaving 10 months of schedule reserve remaining , and the critical path switched from the cryocooler to the isim . the project is facing additional challenges with the testing of the isim and ote and the manufacturing of the spacecraft in addition to continuing challenges with the cryocooler compressor assembly that further demonstrates continued schedule risk for the project . for example , after the second test for the isim — the element of jwst that contains the telescope's four different scientific instruments — electronic , sensor , and heat strap problems were identified that impact two of the four instruments . mitigating some of these issues led to a 1.5-month slip to the isim schedule and made isim the current critical path of the project to allow officials time to replace the unusable and damaged parts . as a result , isim's third and final cryovacuum test scheduled to begin in august 2015 has slipped until september 2015 . the ote and spacecraft efforts are also experiencing challenges that may impact the schedules for those efforts . for example , it was discovered that over 70 harnesses on the ote potentially had nicks on some wires and the majority will need to be repaired or rebuilt . the effects of these challenges on the project's schedule are still being determined .