training requirements . to ensure that rme is reprocessed in accordance with manufacturers' guidelines , va requires that each vamc develop device - specific training for reprocessing rme . to develop this training , va requires vamcs to create device - specific standard operating procedures ( sop ) , which provide step - by - step instructions for reprocessing . va also requires vamcs to assess staff annually on their competence to reprocess rme in accordance with these sops . operational requirements . to ensure that reprocessing activities are performed safely and that rme is reprocessed correctly , va policies establish operational requirements for vamcs , which include that vamc staff must monitor sterilizers to ensure that they are functioning properly , use personal protective equipment when performing reprocessing activities , and segregate dirty and clean rme . after selecting these requirements for our review , we judgmentally selected six vamcs from the following locations to visit: albany , new york ; cheyenne , wyoming ; detroit , michigan ; miami , florida ; palo alto , california ; and st. louis , missouri . these vamcs represent different surgical complexity groups , sizes of veteran populations served , and geographic regions . at these six vamcs , we examined the adequacy of the selected reprocessing requirements to help the facilities ensure the safety of veterans who received care at these facilities . to do this , we examined how the selected requirements were implemented and whether or to what extent these requirements directly or indirectly created a potential risk to veterans' safety . we reviewed applicable vamc committee meeting minutes and other documentation on the implementation of these requirements . we interviewed officials responsible for overseeing vamcs' compliance with the requirements we selected for review from va headquarters , va's office of inspector general ( oig ) , and six visns that are responsible for overseeing compliance with the requirements we selected for review at the vamcs we visited . in addition , we obtained and reviewed relevant documents regarding va oversight , including internal reports , vamcs' plans to correct problems identified through oversight activities , and policy memorandums . we conducted this performance audit from march 2010 to may 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in summary , we found that the va reprocessing requirements we selected for review are inadequate to help ensure the safety of veterans who receive care at vamcs . although va requires vamcs to develop device - specific training for staff on how to correctly reprocess rme , it has not specified the types of rme for which this training is required . furthermore , va has provided conflicting guidance to vamcs on how to develop device - specific training on reprocessing rme . this lack of clarity may have contributed to delays in developing the required training .