intermittency of wind power . renewable energy sources such as wind power have unique technical characteristics that can constrain their use in an existing transmission system that was built to accommodate large central - station power plants located near population centers . this system relies on precisely predicting and controlling power plant output to avoid blackouts and other disruptions . as a result , with this system , the value of electricity is determined in part by the time of day at which the electricity is delivered to the grid and also by the probability that it will be available when needed . in general , fossil fuel and nuclear power generation plants can be run without interruption and are consistently available when called upon , except when idled by equipment problems or for maintenance . however , wind power is an intermittent source in that wind speed and availability can vary from day to day , and thus the amount of electricity produced varies . on average , wind power turbines operate the equivalent of less than 40 percent of the peak hours in a year due to the intermittency of wind . while penalties may apply whenever energy deliveries vary from scheduled amounts , the possibility of penalties is of particular concern for intermittent sources . as a result , utilities that derive part of their electricity generation from wind power may have to develop or purchase costly reserve capacity in case wind power is not available on demand . however , some federal and wind industry officials downplayed the importance of this factor , noting that if wind power constitutes less than 20 percent of a utility's generating capacity , the remaining capacity may be sufficient to meet demand during periods of low winds . furthermore , according to doe , recent studies show that in cases where wind power constitutes up to 10 percent to 20 percent of a utility's generating capacity , the additional operating cost of integrating wind power is only up to 0.5 cents per kwh . specifically , this amount represents the ancillary cost due to the variability of wind . barriers to marketplace entry . as emerging technologies , renewable energy sources such as wind power face market entry barriers . for example , developing new renewable facilities requires high up - front costs to build the necessary infrastructure , such as construction costs to connect power lines to the transmission grid . according to doe , the average cost of building new power lines to connect wind turbines to the transmission grid could be $100,000 or more per mile , depending on such factors as the size of the wind project , terrain , and the transmission line rating . in addition , manufacturers produce renewable energy components on assembly lines , where mass production can reduce costs . as long as relatively few units are produced , prices will remain high . economies of scale would likely lead to cost reductions for wind and other renewable technologies . furthermore , small renewable energy projects have high transaction and other costs at various stages of the development cycle . for example , lending institutions charge more to evaluate the creditworthiness of many small projects than one large one .