because of your oversight responsibilities , we are sending this report to you . the impact of decisions related to the brac process and dod's overseas forces restationing strategy present further uncertainties in the army's facility cost estimate . adding these known costs for construction and personnel to the army's official estimate brings the total potential known costs to $75.5 billion . according to army data and our projection of personnel costs , equipment accounts for 54 percent of the costs , personnel for 30 percent , military construction and facilities for 8 percent , and sustainment and training for 8 percent as well . we further discussed assumptions and areas of uncertainty with these offices' organizational counterparts at forces command in fort mcpherson , georgia ; the 3rd infantry division , in fort stewart , georgia ; the 101st airborne division in fort campbell , kentucky ; and the 4th infantry division , in fort hood , texas . we also reviewed reports by non - department of defense entities such as the congressional budget office , and our own reviews related to army personnel . we compared these sources against the army's cost assumptions to determine if they comprehensively accounted for expenses stemming from the strategy , scope , and schedule for transforming to a modular force . to determine the army's plan for funding these costs and factors that may affect its ability to fund the modular force , we considered the cost estimates in the context of the larger army budget , particularly the army's reliance on supplemental appropriations and how funding the modular force fit into other programs and initiatives . specifically , we examined justification materials for the 2006 presidential budget , the 2005 supplemental appropriation request , and budget guidance from the office of the deputy secretary of defense . to identify factors that could affect the army's ability to fund modularity , we questioned deputy chief of staff g - 8 officials about the army's plan to garner efficiencies to apply to costs of the modular force to determine the status of these plans . we also relied on ongoing and previous gao reviews of business process reengineering to evaluate army efficiency claims . in addition , we considered the impact other priorities might have on the implementation of the army's modularity plan , including current operations , the future combat systems , base realignment and closure decisions , and decisions to restation soldiers from overseas . applying federal internal control standards , we determined whether the army has an adequate approach in place to track obligations related to the modular force . in that regard , we interviewed officials from the office of the deputy assistant secretary of the army for budget and the resource management office at forces command , and resource management officials at the 3rd infantry division , the 101st airborne division , and the 4th infantry division to determine how these entities tracked funds earmarked for the modular force . we reviewed documents establishing guidance from army headquarters and discussed and documented how this guidance was implemented at lower command levels .