unilateral change . the contracting officer may direct a unilateral change , executed through a change order , without the contractor's agreement on the terms and conditions of the change . a unilateral contract modification is signed only by the contracting officer . the contractor is generally required to perform the related work . when change orders do not include an agreed - upon price for the work , they may also be referred to as an unpriced change . if a contract change causes an increase or decrease to the cost of performing the work or the scheduled time for performing the work , the contractor will communicate these price and schedule changes to the contracting officer . for there to be an adjustment to the contract's price , the contractor must submit a specific request or proposal seeking reimbursement for the change . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or woodsw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report were tatiana winger ( assistant director ) ; betsy gregory - hosler ( analyst - in - charge ) ; michael dworman ; gail - lynn michel ; peter anderson ; george depaoli ; lorraine ettaro ; lori fields ; gina hoover ; sam portnow ; bill shear ; and anne louise taylor . this report ( 1 ) identifies factors that affect the time it takes to finalize contract changes at selected agencies , and ( 2 ) assesses the extent to which selected agencies monitor time frames for finalizing contract changes . in this report we examined the process for managing unilateral and bilateral contract changes , but exclude certain types of contract modifications to focus on the issues of payments and cash flow challenges . specifically , we excluded ( 1 ) administrative modifications because they do not entail changes to contract costs or time frames ; ( 2 ) contract changes that go beyond the scope of the existing contract , referred to as cardinal changes ; ( 3 ) contract options because exercising an existing priced option does not entail the same type of negotiations that unilateral and bilateral changes require ; ( 4 ) contract disputes and claims because they follow a separate and distinct process ; ( 5 ) the payment process after a contract change has been finalized because that process is directed by the prompt payment act ; and ( 6 ) any processes taking place between a prime contractor and its subcontractors because that is outside the focus of this review . we recommended that officials collect information on contract modifications , establish target time frames that trigger a higher - level review of contract modifications , and centrally establish a mechanism to monitor and review certain contract modifications that were taking longer than the established target time frame . to date , the veterans health administration has not yet fully implemented the recommendations .