only a few proposed projects are selected as new starts . we identified the users from a selected number of active projects in fiscal year 1999 and 2000 for the navy , army , air force and defense logistics agency . appendix i contains further details on our scope and methodology . we conducted our work from december 2000 through june 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the mantech program is designed to enable dod to develop advanced technologies to use in manufacturing weapon systems . such technologies , in turn , should reduce weapon system costs and improve quality . mantech projects address development of technology in areas such as metals , composite materials , electronics , munitions , as well as technology to sustain weapons systems . the users of the mantech program are service and dla managers responsible for the development of new weapons systems and for the repair , maintenance and overhaul of fielded systems . however , the projects are executed through agreements or contracts with several types of organizations including defense contractors , government facilities , suppliers , consortia , centers of excellence , academia , and research institutes . the military services and dla execute the mantech program under the general direction of the director , defense research and engineering , office of the deputy under secretary of defense ( science & technology ) , office of technology transition . each component has established a mantech office within its organization to set policies and procedures for operating its mantech program and determining which projects to fund . dod established the joint defense manufacturing technology panel , staffed by service and dla mantech office personnel , to set program objectives , promote effective integration and program management , conduct joint planning , and oversee program execution . it reports to and receives taskings from the director of defense research & engineering on manufacturing technology issues of multiservice concern and application . the panel organized the program into subpanels to serve as focal points for specific technology areas . mantech program appropriations have fluctuated significantly over the past several years , and annually since fiscal year 1991 , the congress has appropriated more funds to the program than the services requested in the presidents' budgets . the funding trends for the program since fiscal year 1991 are shown in figure 1 . in addition , funding by dod component has also fluctuated . figure 2 shows the funding for the services from fiscal years 1997 to 2001 . users in the military services and dla look to the mantech program to help meet certain needs related to weapons systems they are responsible for , such as developing technologies , products and processes that will reduce the total cost and improve the manufacturing quality of their systems . users reported to us that the mantech projects we selected in our analysis were generally addressing their needs . in addition , the military services and dla have processes in place that include users in the project identification and selection process . such processes increase the likelihood that projects will meet user needs .