all other expenditures . participating agencies expended 2 percent ( $0.6 million ) of their dce / sp funds on training , and another 1 percent ( $0.4 million ) on miscellaneous commercial contracts from 2015 through fiscal year 2017 . participating agencies also expended less than 1 percent of their dce / sp funds on both container and space rental ( $0.2 million ) and vehicle rental ( $0.1 million ) from 2015 through fiscal year 2017 . factors that affect how participating agencies expended funds . how does dea use performance assessment to help manage dce / sp ? to address all three questions , we analyzed relevant dea documentation , and interviewed dea officials in headquarters . we also conducted semi - structured interviews with officials from dea , the u.s. forest service , and participating agencies in the following six states: california , georgia , kentucky , michigan , nevada , and texas . we selected these states to include varying levels of dce / sp funding and numbers of marijuana grow sites eradicated from 2014 through fiscal year 2016 — the most recent year for which dea data were available at the time of our state selection . the six states in our sample collectively received approximately 52 percent of total dce / sp funding obligated to states from 2014 through fiscal year 2016 . when selecting states , we also considered whether a state had experienced a significant level of marijuana eradication on national forests in recent years , as well as the status of medical or recreational marijuana legalization under state law . for each of our selected states , we interviewed dea field officials responsible for implementing dce / sp in the state ; forest service law enforcement officials responsible for overseeing and conducting marijuana eradication efforts on national forests in the state ; and participating agencies' points - of - contact for dce / sp . we conducted our interviews in person in california , georgia , and texas . the information we obtained from these interviews cannot be generalized to all states that received dce / sp funding , but provides a range of perspectives and experiences regarding dce / sp from federal , state , and local law enforcement officials . to address our first question , we also reviewed dea documentation related to dce / sp funding , including dea's funding requests for dce / sp from doj's assets forfeiture fund for fiscal years 2015 through 2018 . we reviewed documents describing how participating agencies use program funds , including the dce / sp coordinator handbook and program guide ( dce / sp handbook ) , participating agencies' annual strategic plans for using dce / sp funds to conduct eradication and suppression activities , and letters of agreement between participating agencies and dea . also , we analyzed dea data on ( 1 ) dce / sp funding obligated to participating agencies , and to dea for program support from 2015 through fiscal year 2018 and ( 2 ) dce / sp funding expended by participating agencies in each state from 2015 through fiscal year 2017 , organized by categories of expenses , such as overtime and equipment .