see table 1 . gsa lacked sufficient control activities to ensure that the 33 courthouses were constructed within the congressionally authorized gross square footage , initially because it had not established a consistent policy for how to measure gross square footage . gsa established a policy for measuring gross square footage by 2000 , but has not ensured that this space measurement policy was understood and followed . moreover , gsa has not demonstrated it is enforcing this policy because all 6 courthouses completed since 2007 exceed their congressionally authorized size . according to gsa officials , the agency did not focus on ensuring that the authorized gross square footage was met in the design and construction of the courthouse until 2007 , even though , according to gsa officials , controlling the gross square footage of a building is important to controlling its construction costs . all seven of the courthouses we examined in our case studies had increases in building common and other space — such as mechanical spaces and atriums — as compared with the square footage planned for these spaces within the congressionally authorized gross square footage . the percent increases over the planned space ranged from 19 percent to 102 percent . according to a gsa official , at times , courthouses were designed to meet various design goals without an attempt to limit the size of the building common or other space to the square footage allotted in the plans provided to congressional authorizing committees — and these spaces may have become larger to serve a design goal as a result . for example , the building common and other space in the eagleton u.s . courthouse in st. louis is 77 percent larger than planned , and the courthouse has an efficiency of 56 percent . while we could not determine the cause of all of this additional space , all courtroom floors of the st. louis courthouse have mechanical rooms near the courtrooms , and in total , the mechanical space in the st. louis courthouse takes up proportionally more space than it does in the deconcini u.s . courthouse in tucson , arizona . in addition , the eagleton u.s . courthouse in st. louis has two empty elevator shafts — rising all 33 floors — that were built but are not used . most judges with experience sharing courtrooms agreed that court staff must work harder than in nonsharing arrangements to coordinate with judges and all involved parties to ensure that everyone is in the correct courtroom at the correct time , but that such coordination is possible as long as people remain flexible and the lines of communication remain open . another concern about sharing courtrooms was how the court would manage when judges have long trials . judges noted that long trials present logistical challenges requiring substantial coordination and continuity , which could be difficult when sharing courtrooms . however , when the number of total trials is averaged across the total number of judges , each judge has approximately 15 trials per year , with the median trial lasting 1 or 2 days . hence , it is highly unlikely that all judges in a courthouse will simultaneously have long trials .