( app . i contains a detailed description of our methodology. ) we performed our work between august 2004 and july 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . through the national pollutant discharge elimination system program , the clean water act established the basic structure for regulating discharges of pollutants into the waters of the united states , including rivers , lakes , and streams . under this program , epa and epa - authorized states issue and enforce permits to regulate pollution from specific entities , including , for example , industrial dischargers and municipal wastewater treatment facilities , known as “point sources.” in support of the permitting program , epa and the states perform a number of important activities , such as monitoring water quality and setting limits on the amounts of specific pollutants that can be discharged into water bodies . the act also requires states to implement management programs for controlling pollution from diffuse or “nonpoint” sources , such as agricultural runoff . to carry out its responsibilities for controlling point and nonpoint source pollution , epa relies on the office of water , the office of enforcement and compliance assurance , and 10 regional offices , as well as states' water pollution control agencies . as table 1 shows , since the clean water act was amended in 1972 , the scope of epa and state responsibilities and the associated workload , has increased significantly . even as the overall workload has increased as a result of these changes , the states have been playing a greater role in carrying out required tasks . as shown in figure 1 , since 1972 , epa has authorized 45 states to perform at least some of the permitting activities associated with controlling pollution from wastewater treatment and industrial facilities . as epa authorizes states to take on more responsibilities , the agency's workload shifts from direct implementation to oversight . epa budgets and allocates resources incrementally , largely based on historical precedents , and thus its process does not reflect a bottom - up review of the nature or distribution of the current workload — either for specific environmental laws or the broader goals and objectives in the agency's strategic plan . these historical precedents are drawn from workload models epa had developed in the 1980s , but the distribution of epa's workload has changed over time as epa has taken on new responsibilities under the clean water act and other laws and the states gradually assumed a greater role in the day - to - day implementation of key aspects of this workload . other factors , such as the introduction of new technologies and shifts in regional population , have also affected the amount , type , and distribution of epa's resource needs . nonetheless , in developing the amounts of its budget request and subsequent resource allocations , epa officials use prior years' allocations as a baseline and make adjustments to reflect ( 1 ) direction from the office of management and budget and the congress and ( 2 ) spending caps imposed by epa's chief financial officer , such as ceilings on staff years and payroll .