as a result , units cannot plan for them . instead , the exercise sponsors identify shortly before the exercise the ordnance the carrier air wings should bring . this will keep the stockpile below requirements and force the navy to either forego some training and accept lower training readiness , develop alternative training strategies , or accept the readiness risks attendant to using war reserve assets for training . according to officials in the office of the chief of naval operations , releasing war reserve ordnance for training is a subjective judgement that balances the value of training against the risk of not having the ordnance available in the event of war . the navy also has shortages of inert training ordnance . inert training ordnance includes the laser - guided training round , and inert bombs . these items are not stockpiled and the navy generally buys about a year's worth of inventory at a time . navy data shows a total requirement of $72 million for inert ordnance in fiscal year 2003 . however , funding is projected at $41 million , $31 million short of the total inert ordnance requirement . additionally the navy's $72 million requirement is based on fleet requests , many of which are understated . for example , in fiscal year 2001 the pacific naval air forces asked for only 700 laser - guided training rounds or approximately 28 percent of its actual requirement of 2,542 . inventory shortages raise the question of whether accurate fleet ordnance requests would have resulted in the atlantic and pacific naval air forces receiving sufficient quantities of ordnance to support their training . as mentioned , stocks of some munitions are short and priority is given to war reserve stocks , making it unlikely that training requirements for all munitions would have been met , regardless of what the fleets requested . however , planned ordnance procurements are based on the requirements received from the various claimants . when requirements are understated , it becomes less likely that future stockpiles will meet future requirements . the navy's understating of its training requirements during each of the 4 years in our review would indicate that this has contributed in part to the stockpile shortages . the navy's annual ordnance procurement budget request submitted to congress includes aggregated war reserve ordnance and training ordnance requirements making it impossible for congress to understand how funding decisions affect training readiness . identifying the amount of the navy's and marine corps' ordnance procurement request that is for war reserve and the amount that is for training would make the impact on training more readily apparent . misallocation of available resources also contributes to the problem . appendix iii shows examples where the naval air forces atlantic received ordnance in excess of the requirements identified while naval air forces pacific received less than its requirement for the same type of ordnance . for example , in fiscal year 2000 naval air force atlantic received 137 percent of its inert bomb requirement while naval air forces pacific received 91 percent . even in situations where neither fleets' full requirements were met , there are examples of inequitably distributed assets .