this assessment is expected to be completed in 2017 . to minimize the risk of counterfeit parts entering its supply chain , dod is implementing steps to improve its ability to trace electronic parts back to the original manufacturer and lower supply chain levels . dla officials told us , for example , that they validate the traceability of 100 percent of their contract awards for microcircuits by applying a botanically - derived marking to all electronic microcircuits — determined to be at a high - risk for counterfeiting — that are purchased by the agency . the marking contains tracking information about the part such as the supplier , lot number , and other identification codes , which can all be retrieved with a hand scanner at any point throughout its serviceable life . dla places the markings on the surface of the microcircuits at a single facility once it is inspected and its trace documentations authenticating its origin with the original component manufacturer are confirmed . according to dla officials , dla applies the marking to about 85,000 microcircuits a year , and is exploring the possibility of expanding the program to other parts that are at high - risk for counterfeiting . the defense advanced research projects agency is also developing a system to authenticate and track electronic parts throughout the supply chain . the supply chain hardware integrity for electronics defense program is developing a microscopic computer chip , which unlike dla's marking program , will be inserted at the original source of the part and , according to contractor officials , would further strengthen authentication . the microchip will contain a unique identifier for authentication and will record the reliability of the part through the chip's sensors and communications systems . dod announced that the defense advanced research projects agency awarded a development contract for the program in january 2015 and plans to transition the technology to field trials within 3 years , then to industry partners in 4 years once trials are completed . one industry official noted , however , that the success of this program depends upon the willingness of original component manufacturers to implement it . a group of federal agencies , including dod , are working collaboratively to improve the detection and interception of counterfeit parts in the defense supply chain . specifically , immigration and customs enforcement's homeland security investigations within the department of homeland security began an initiative in 2011 , called operation chain reaction . this initiative is led by the department of homeland security's national intellectual property rights coordination center with a mission to align federal efforts to combat the proliferation of counterfeit goods into the dod and federal government supply chains . sixteen federal agencies , including the defense criminal investigative service , the military investigative services , and the dla office of the inspector general , as well as the department of energy , the nasa office of the inspector general , and the u.s customs and border protection are participating in the initiative .