( see fig . according to the institute of international education ( iie ) , the decline in the number of international students attending u.s. higher education institutions between 2003 and 2006 was the first drop in over 30 years . while the united states continues to be the leading destination for international students , the u.s. share of international students worldwide dropped — from 26 to 20 percent — between 2000 and 2008 . ( see fig . according to the pew global attitudes project , since 2002 the united states' image has declined in both the muslim world and among many of america's oldest allies . in the wake of september 11 , the united states also tightened its immigration policy and made it more difficult for foreign nationals , including international students , to apply for a visa . as we previously reported , these changes , made to help protect our nation's security interests , may have contributed to our declining share of international students and the perception that the united states was an unwelcoming place for international students . the u.s. government seeks to improve global attitudes toward america through diplomatic and development assistance efforts , which include funding higher education for international students in the united states . many of the programs that support these efforts are administered through the department of state's bureau of educational and cultural affairs , which funds programs aimed at advancing public diplomacy goals , and the united states agency for international development , which is primarily concerned with providing assistance to developing nations . these efforts typically create face - to - face exchange opportunities with foreign students , researchers , professionals , and educators to provide a better understanding of a nation's views , values , and culture . the united states also funds higher education for international students to help developing nations alleviate poverty and promote peace and security , public health , economic growth , education , and democratization . these programs target the economic , social , or technological needs of developing nations by equipping students and professionals for future leadership roles in their communities , businesses , and governments and to fill critical labor and skill gaps . while the federal government funds education for international students to achieve public diplomacy and development objectives , the vast majority of students who come to the united states to study do not receive funding from the u.s. government . according to the institute of international education's open doors 2008 report , 623,805 students came to the united states to study during the 2007-2008 academic year and nearly 9 out of 10 international students reported their primary source of funding for education as coming from either personal and family sources or from their host college or university in the united states . although the primary source of funds for the vast majority of students that enter the united states is not provided by the federal government , promoting study in the united states can support a range of u.s. objectives in addition to the public diplomacy and development goals supported by state and usaid efforts .