see figure 2 below . as part of its civil works program , the corps operates and maintains the fuel - taxed inland waterways for the purpose of facilitating navigation . the corps is responsible for balancing its navigation mission with other civil works missions , including hydropower generation , flood risk management , emergency response , environmental stewardship , and recreation ( see fig . for example , the corps may consider the migration of fish when designing locks and dams that facilitate navigation . congress appropriates funding for the corps' civil works program . for inland waterways , the corps uses funding for two main purposes: ( 1 ) inland waterways operations and maintenance and ( 2 ) inland waterways construction . pursuing alternative - financing arrangements . the current administration and others have proposed alternative - financing options that could enable the corps to leverage either private capital or other available funds in order to provide full upfront funding for inland waterways construction projects . numerous proposals call for the corps to leverage private capital , such as public - private partnerships or debt financing , to access full funding at the beginning of inland - waterways construction projects . from fiscal years 2006 – 2017 ( the years for which data were available ) , the corps obligated an average of $690 million annually for operations and maintenance of the fuel - taxed inland waterways . funding for operations and maintenance is appropriated entirely from general revenues . figure 4 shows annual obligations for inland waterways operations and maintenance for fiscal years 2006 through 2017 . for construction projects , congress appropriates funding from the inland waterways trust fund ( trust fund ) in addition to funds from general revenues . since the inland waterways revenue act of 1978 ( 1978 act ) , commercial waterway users have paid taxes on fuel used by commercial towboats and other vessels that typically move barges , revenues from which are deposited in the trust fund . the water resources development act of 1986 ( 1986 act ) increased the initial fuel - tax rate per gallon and established a cost - sharing process for inland waterways expenditures . together , the 1978 act and the 1986 act established a means for the inland waterways industry to provide economic support for infrastructure development . these users currently pay a $0.29 per gallon tax on diesel fuel used on the fuel - taxed portion of the inland waterways , revenue from which is then deposited into the trust fund . traditionally , 50 percent of a project's funding is appropriated from general revenues and 50 percent is appropriated from the trust fund , though congress reduced the trust fund's cost share for the ongoing new construction of the olmsted locks and dam project to 25 percent for fiscal year 2014 and to 15 percent for subsequent fiscal years . in fiscal year 2018 , commercial waterway users contributed about 35 percent of the $399 million allocated to various construction projects ( see fig . on average , from fiscal years 1997 through 2018 , the corps has allocated about $240 million annually for construction to repair or improve existing inland - waterways navigation infrastructure .