recognizing equity issues . at our recent panel on the authorities and responsibilities of igs , the majority of panel participants stated that the pay structure for igs needed to be addressed given the importance of providing reasonable and competitive compensation . currently , there are differences in the basic pay rates for igs based on the level of appointment , even though the powers and duties extended to igs in either appointment are essentially the same . most igs for cabinet departments and major agencies are appointed by the president subject to senate confirmation ( paid at executive schedule level iv ) . however , igs for some agencies , such as the national science foundation and the securities and exchange commission , are appointed by the agency head and paid at varying amounts including general schedule grade 15 or senior executive service ( ses ) pay rates . such equity issues should be examined in any restructuring of executive - level pay . considering performance - based bonuses . there are executive - level positions that are not eligible to receive bonuses ( or awards ) due to the nature of the positions . for example , selected executive schedule positions that are appointed by the president subject to senate confirmation ( including selected igs ) , aljs , and federal justices and judges do not . bonuses awarded within a system that incorporates appropriate safeguards may be an option for rewarding individuals in these positions for their contributions . appropriate safeguards , including reasonable transparency and appropriate accountability mechanisms , can help ensure fairness and prevent abuse . any bonuses must be performance - based with a mechanism for assessing individuals' performance from multiple sources of input . in addition , checks and balances to help ensure that the positions' independence is not compromised are especially important for igs , federal justices and judges , and selected other positions . recognizing anomalies between comparable pay plans . there are anomalies between comparable pay plans , such as for the career ses and senior level / scientific or professional ( sl / st ) positions . for example , as of january 2004 , the aggregate pay cap ( basic pay plus awards / bonuses ) for ses and sl / st positions is higher for individuals whose agencies have performance management systems certified by the office of personnel management with concurrence from the office of management and budget . however , the higher basic pay cap only applies to ses members under certified performance management systems , not sl / st positions . as i have discussed , leading organizations understand that they must often change their culture to successfully transform themselves , and that such a change starts with top leadership . to help attract this talent , restructuring of executive and judicial pay — guided by a set of principles — may be necessary to help the government remain competitive with the relevant markets . however , any restructuring of executive and judicial pay should consider basic pay received by executive - level positions as one part of the total compensation package .