the plan consists of three volumes . volume i contains information on how the court will address case management issues , including organizational and human capital requirements . volume ii contains information on the development of ijis and its planned applications . volume iii addresses the physical space the court needs to house and operate the family court . courts interact with various organizations and operate in the context of many different programmatic requirements . in the district of columbia , the family court frequently interacts with the child welfare agency — the child and family services agency ( cfsa ) — a key organization responsible for helping children obtain permanent homes . cfsa must comply with federal laws and other requirements , including the adoption and safe families act ( asfa ) , which placed new responsibilities on child welfare agencies nationwide . asfa introduced new time periods for moving children who have been removed from their homes to permanent home arrangements and penalties for noncompliance . for example , the act requires states to hold a permanency planning hearing not later than 12 months after the child is considered to have entered foster care . permanent placements include the child's return home and the child's adoption . other organizations that the family court interacts with include the office of corporation counsel ( occ ) and the metropolitan police department . the family court transition plan provides information on most , but not all , of the elements required by the family court act ; however , some aspects of case management , training , and performance evaluation are unclear . for example , the plan describes the family court's method for transferring child abuse and neglect cases to the family court , its one family / one judge case management principle , and the number and roles of judges and magistrate judges . however , the plan does not ( 1 ) include a request for judicial nomination , ( 2 ) indicate the number of nonjudicial staff needed for the family court , ( 3 ) indicate if the 12 judges who volunteered for the family court meet all of the qualifications outlined in the act , and ( 4 ) state how the number of magistrate judges to hire under the expedited process was determined . developing a systems engineering life - cycle process for managing the d.c. courts information technology efforts . this will help define the processes and events that should be performed from the time that a system is conceived until the system is no longer needed . examples of processes used include requirements development , testing , and implementation . developing policies and procedures that will help ensure that the d.c. courts' information technology investments are consistent with the requirements of the clinger - cohen act of 1996 ( p.l . developing the processes that will enable the d.c. courts to achieve a level 2 rating — this means basic project management processes are established to track performance , cost , and schedule — on the software engineering institute's capability maturity model .