( app .  facility investigation . if it is determined that information beyond initial facility assessment is needed , epa or the authorized state requires the company owning or operating the facility to conduct a more detailed investigation to establish the nature and extent of contamination released to groundwater , surface water , air , and soil . depending on a facility's particular circumstances , this phase may be complex and take years to complete . the process is monitored by the agency overseeing the correction action , and the outcome is subject to that authority's approval . while facility investigation is under way , interim measures may be needed to control or abate ongoing risks to human health and the environment . epa headquarters officials told us that they may consider adding an explicit completion goal as the program progresses . epa has established a formal process for its regions and authorized states to follow to determine whether facilities undergoing cleanup have controlled human exposures to contaminants and the migration of contaminated groundwater . an epa document outlining the process calls for a facility's lead regulator ( an epa or state official ) to evaluate the site , using a standard assessment tool , to determine if these goals have been met . both the individual completing the evaluation and that person's supervisor must sign off on the evaluation and provide supporting documentation for their determination . the resulting determination represents the status of the facility . in 1994 , epa established two environmental indicators: controlling exposures to humans and controlling the migration of contaminated groundwater . in 1998 , epa took steps to remove some barriers to cleanups , such as providing for more flexible treatment of contaminated soil that may temporarily accumulate during cleanups . in 1999 and 2001 , epa implemented a set of administrative reforms to promote faster and more flexible cleanup . these reforms called for new results - oriented cleanup guidance , promoting program flexibility through training and outreach , and enhancing community involvement . as part of its effort to focus and streamline the rcra corrective action program , epa has since 1997 set a series of progressively more ambitious performance goals and identified which facilities must meet them . the agency also issued guidance to expedite cleanup . goals set by epa for the corrective action program have encompassed progressively more facilities and longer time frames . in response to gpra , the agency first set performance goals to be achieved by fiscal year 2005 , which focused on high - risk facilities deemed to have potentially unacceptable levels of contaminants . epa then began focusing on longer - term concerns by setting goals to be achieved by fiscal year 2008 . epa also began to establish a long - range vision for the program , which included a larger universe of facilities and goals for fiscal year 2020 . the majority of facilities in this category are medium - and low - priority facilities . but a small number of high - priority facilities still fall into this category and have been unable to contain contamination at their sites despite numerous years as a high - priority facility .