iv ) . to address our objectives , we analyzed data on migrant border - crossing deaths that occurred between 1990 and 2005 within the bsi target zone — which includes 45 counties on or near the border in california , arizona , new mexico , and texas . we analyzed data on border - crossing deaths recorded by the border patrol in the border safety initiative tracking system ( bsits ) for fiscal years 1998 through 2005 . we also analyzed data from the national center for health statistics ( nchs ) mortality files from the national vital statistics system for the years 1990 through 2003 , the most recent year for which nchs data were available at the time we did our work . the nchs data contain information from death certificates for all deaths occurring within the united states , regardless of the cause of death . because death certificates do not explicitly identify deaths as border - crossing deaths , we used information about place of birth , residence , and cause of death to identify likely incidents of migrant deaths . these estimates may either under or over count actual border - crossing deaths , depending on a number of factors ( see app . ( 3 ) to what extent do existing data allow for an evaluation of the effectiveness of the bsi and other border patrol efforts to prevent border - crossing deaths ? you also asked us to compare deaths among migrants to deaths in the general u.s. population living within the bsi target zone . we compared each group's share of deaths for the causes of death most commonly associated with border - crossing ( see app . i for additional discussion ) . we assessed the reliability of both sources of data and determined that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes of describing trends in deaths over time and across locations . we then supplemented our analysis of these data by reviewing data on transient migrant deaths reported in studies by the university of houston's center for immigration research ( cir ) that used state vital registry data to estimate the number of border - crossing deaths among migrants for the years 1985 through 1998 . because both the nchs and state vital registry data are collected independently of the border patrol's efforts to collect bsi data , we used them to corroborate or refute the trends that were identified in our analysis of the bsi data . ( for details regarding our methods for analyzing the data , see app . in addition to the data analysis , we reviewed the written bsi methodology for tracking and recording deaths in the bsits database , and we interviewed border patrol officials at department of homeland security headquarters in washington , d.c. , as well as officials in the nine southwest border patrol sectors , about issues related to migrant border - crossing deaths and the bsi .