we have incorporated these comments into the report as appropriate . table 2 lists these goals and the objectives for each . each goal in the roadmap is supported by several tasks , for a total of 43 tasks . in response to the roadmap tasks , organizations across dod have undertaken specific initiatives . for example , dod has centralized and standardized contract language support , and published a strategic language list that identifies prioritized languages for which dod has current and projected requirements and for which training and testing will be provided , incentives applied , and other resources allocated . moreover , each military service has developed a strategy for language and regional proficiency transformation , using the roadmap either as guidance or as a complementary document . while dod has goals and objectives , some of dod's objectives are not measurable or time - bound . for example , one of dod's objectives is for the total force to understand and value the tactical , operational , and strategic asset inherent in regional expertise and language . however , dod does not define how it intends to measure the total force's understanding of language and regional expertise or provide a time frame for achieving the objective . in the absence of such measurable objectives , dod officials assess progress toward goals and objectives by tracking the number of associated roadmap tasks that they consider to be fully operational , meaning the dod senior language authority has determined the intent of the task has been met . according to dod officials , 93 percent of the tasks in the roadmap were fully operational as of april 2009 . however , this approach focuses solely on the achievement of specific tasks rather than the extent to which these tasks support progress toward language and regional proficiency transformation goals . in addition , we found that dod may consider a task fully operational before the task is complete , further complicating dod's ability to measure progress toward goals and objectives . for example , dod considers the roadmap task that assigned responsibility to the secretary of the army to create courses for emerging language needs to be fully operational because a plan to build these courses has been developed . still , work remains to be done to complete this task — specifically , the creation of the courses themselves . dod does not continue to formally track these fully operational but uncompleted tasks . dod officials state that they identify funding priorities for language and regional proficiency in their budget requests , but linkages between these funding priorities and the goals in the roadmap are unclear and dod lacks information about the total cost of language and regional proficiency transformation . more detailed information on our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from november 2008 to june 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .