labor reviews the activities of the sacs . sacs ensure that apprenticeship programs for their respective states comply with federal labor standards , equal opportunity protections , and any additional state standards . figure 2 shows the agencies responsible for the approval processes for the various types of education and training programs . in 2001 , saas received additional responsibilities as a result of legislative changes . this included responsibility for actively promoting the development of apprenticeship and on - the - job training programs and conducting more outreach activities to eligible persons and veterans to increase awareness of va education assistance . saas were also charged with approving tests used for licensing and certification , such as tests to become a licensed electrician . for those tests that have been approved , veterans can use va benefits to pay for testing fees . from fiscal years 2003 to 2006 , saa funding increased from $13 million to $19 million to expand services and support the additional responsibilities . funding is scheduled to begin to decrease in fiscal year 2008 . many education and training programs approved by saas have also been approved by education and labor . sixty - nine percent of all programs approved by saas are offered by institutions that have also been certified by education . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . labor directly registers and oversees programs in 23 states but has granted 27 states , the district of columbia , and 3 territories authority to register and oversee their own programs , conducted by state apprenticeship councils ( sacs ) . from fiscal years 2003 to 2006 , saa funding increased from $13 million to $19 million to expand services and support the additional responsibilities . seventy - eight percent of saa - approved programs in institutions of higher learning ( eg , colleges and universities ) have been certified by education . also , 64 percent of saa - approved non - college degree programs are in institutions that have been certified by education . although less than 2 percent of all programs approved by saas are apprenticeship programs , va and saa officials reported that many of these programs have also been approved by labor . similar categories of approval standards exist across agencies , but the specific standards within each category vary and the full extent of overlap is unknown . for example , while va and education's approval standards both have requirements for student achievement , the new england association of schools and colleges , an accrediting agency , requires that students demonstrate competence in various areas such as writing and logical thinking , while va does not have this requirement . also among the student achievement standards , va requires schools to give appropriate credit for prior learning , while education does not have such a requirement . table 2 shows the similar categories of standards that exist across agencies .