who should pay for it ? how should it be paid for ? and if changes to the current system are necessary , how can we make those changes while minimizing unintended consequences and maximizing public benefits ? we stand ready to assist the congress as it deliberates answers to those questions . this concludes my prepared remarks . i would be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee might have . for further information , please contact jayetta z. hecker at heckerj@gao.gov or at ( 202 ) 512-2834 . individuals making key contributions to this statement include colin fallon , richard jorgenson , and steve martin . intercity passenger rail has the potential to generate benefits to society ( called “public benefits” ) by complementing other more heavily used modes of transportation in those markets in which rail transport can be competitive . these benefits include reduced highway and air congestion , pollution , and energy dependence , and provide an option for travelers to use passenger rail systems in the future . one potential public benefit of intercity passenger rail service is the reduced highway congestion that will result if some people travel by train rather than on highways . where congestion exists , intercity passenger rail would not have to capture a large share of the travelers who would otherwise use other modes of transportation in order to generate a substantial public benefit from reduced highway congestion . roadway congestion often results when vehicles access a roadway that is already at or near capacity . the additional users have a disproportionate , detrimental effect on the flow of traffic . as a result , diverting a small group of highway users to rail transport could reduce congestion and have a substantial public benefit . the specific markets where intercity passenger rail has the most potential to generate public benefits by reducing highway congestion are regions where the highway systems are consistently operating beyond capacity and are characterized by slow moving traffic . ( see fig . therefore , rail service likely to alleviate the most highway congestion would parallel congested corridors that link cities with significant intercity transportation demand and urban congestion , such as in the northeast . however , realizing these benefits might be difficult because the prices people pay to drive do not reflect the true costs of driving ( and some costs due to pollution and congestion are borne by others ) and americans have a strong attachment to cars as their principal means of transportation . intercity passenger rail could also potentially ease air travel congestion . this is contingent on intercity passenger rail being able to capture enough market share to reduce the number of flights between cities through frequent , competitively priced , and attractive service . for rail transport to capture the market share necessary to reduce air travel congestion , the distance between potential intercity passenger rail cities must be short enough to make rail travel times competitive with air travel . amtrak's market share decreases rapidly as travel time and distance increases .