such a specification previously had not been available . according to nist officials , the first version of the interoperability specification , completed in august 2000 , did not include sufficient detail to establish interoperability among vendors' disparate smart card products . the officials stated that this occurred because representatives from nist , the contractors , and other federal agencies had only a very limited time to develop the first version . the current version , version 2.1 , released in july 2003 , is a significant improvement , providing better definitions of many details , such as how smart cards should exchange information with software applications and card readers , as well as a specification for contactless cards and accommodations for the future use of biometrics . however , potential interoperability issues may arise for those agencies that purchased and deployed smart card products based on the original specification . although concerns about security are a key driver for the adoption of smart card technology in the federal government , the security of smart card systems is not foolproof and must be addressed when agencies plan the implementation of a smart card system . smart cards can offer significantly enhanced control over access to buildings and systems , particularly when used in combination with other advanced technologies , such as pki and biometrics . although smart card systems are generally much harder to attack than traditional id cards and password - protected systems , they are not invulnerable . in order to obtain the improved security services that smart cards offer , care must be taken to ensure that the cards and their supporting systems do not pose unacceptable security risks . smart card systems generally are designed with a variety of features designed to thwart attack . for example , cards are assigned unique serial numbers to counter unauthorized duplication and contain integrated circuit chips that are resistant to tampering so that their information cannot be easily extracted and used . however , security experts point out that because a smart - card – based system involves many different discrete elements that cannot be physically controlled at all times by an organization's security personnel , there is at least a theoretically greater opportunity for malfeasance than would exist for a more self - contained system . in fact , a smart - card – based system involves many parties ( the cardholders , data owner , computing devices , card issuer , card manufacturer , and software manufacturer ) that potentially could pose threats to the system . for example , researchers have found ways to circumvent security measures and extract information from smart cards , and an individual cardholder could be motivated to attack his or her card in order to access and modify the stored data on the card — perhaps to change personal information or increase the cash value that may be stored on the card . further , smart cards are connected to computing devices ( such as agency networks , desktop and laptop computers , and automatic teller machines ) through card readers that control the flow of data to and from the smart card .