these changes are identified in the report . the inability to detect significant differences from year to year in our results may be related to sampling error alone or the nature of our sample , which was relatively small and was designed only for cross - sectional analysis . our sample is based on a stratified random selection and it is only one of a large number of samples that we may have drawn . because each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval . this interval would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples that we could have drawn . the percentage estimates for ld - 2 reports have 95 percent confidence intervals of within plus or minus 12.5 percentage points or fewer of the estimate itself . we contacted all the lobbyists and lobbying firms in our sample and , using a structured web - based survey , asked them to confirm key elements of the ld - 2 and whether they could provide written documentation for key elements in their reports , including the amount of income reported for lobbying activities , the amount of expenses reported on lobbying activities , the names of those lobbyists listed in the report , the houses of congress and federal agencies that they lobbied , and the issue codes listed to describe their lobbying activity . after reviewing the survey results for completeness , we interviewed lobbyists and lobbying firms to review the documentation they reported as having on their online survey for selected elements of their respective ld - 2 report . prior to each interview , we conducted a search to determine whether lobbyists properly disclosed their covered position as required by the lda . we reviewed the lobbyists' previous work histories by searching lobbying firms' websites , linkedin , leadership directories , legistorm , and google . prior to 2008 , lobbyists were only required to disclose covered official positions held within 2 years of registering as a lobbyist for the client . the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 amended that time frame to require disclosure of positions held 20 years before the date the lobbyists first lobbied on behalf of the client . lobbyists are required to disclose previously held covered official positions either on the client registration ( ld - 1 ) or on an ld - 2 report . consequently , those who held covered official positions may have disclosed the information on the ld - 1 or a ld - 2 report filed prior to the report we examined as part of our random sample . therefore , where we found evidence that a lobbyist previously held a covered official position , and that information was not disclosed on the ld - 2 report under review , we conducted an additional review of the publicly available secretary of the senate or clerk of the house database to determine whether the lobbyist properly disclosed the covered official position on a prior report or ld - 1 .