reg . 12,102 , 12,114 ( apr . other agencies such as nist.thought that osha should reevaluate its approach to accreditation . for example , a few of the nrtl applicants we interviewed said there has been a shift in accreditation approaches since the nrtl program started in the late 1980s and osha has not always kept pace with these changes . the expenditure figure is based on the existing four nrtl program staff and includes estimates of salary and benefits for the program staff and for one labor attorney who assists the program ; travel expenses , mainly for performing audits ; and general office expenses . we selected this date range to ensure that our analysis included decisions for each of the three types of applications , reflected osha's most recent time frames and processes , and included decisions made under two administrations . after interviewing osha officials and comparing federal register notices that identify key application dates for approved applications to separately generated data from osha's internal database , we determined that the data on application submission dates and final decision dates were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . our analysis focused primarily on application submission dates and final decision dates because the available data in osha's database for intermediary stages of the review process were less reliable . we used the following criteria to assess the length of osha's accreditation process: osha's view on desirable time frames for accreditation reviews . for completed applications , duration of the accreditation application and approval process relative to duration of the accreditation itself ( 5 years ) ; for pending applications , existence and duration of application backlogs ; stakeholders' views ; and to gather more information about the amount of time that initial applications were with applicants for revisions versus with osha during the accreditation review , we also reviewed the application files for the three initial applications processed by osha between june 2007 and june 2012 . two of these applications were approved by osha and one was withdrawn by the applicant after the initial review and revision stages of the process . to further understand the accreditation process and factors that might affect its timing , we interviewed osha officials and reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and nrtl program documents . we also interviewed eight nrtl applicants who represented a mix of initial , expansion , and / or renewal accreditation applications that have been pending , approved , or otherwise closed since june 2007 . we selected labs so that our review would include the perspectives of applicants at different points in the decision - making process and with a variety of initial , expansion , and renewal applications . we also chose labs that represented a variety of sizes , as measured by the number of approved nrtl testing sites . in addition , we interviewed other stakeholders including a manufacturing organization and an employer organization to obtain information about any effects the duration of the nrtl accreditation process may have had on these sectors .