gao / rced - 00-7 . washington , d.c.: i november 1999 . bison attempting to leave the park are herded back to the park . when attempts to herd the bison back to the park are repeatedly unsuccessful , the bison are captured or lethally removed . generally , captured bison are tested for brucellosis exposure . those that test positive are sent to slaughter , and eligible bison — calves and yearlings that test negative for brucellosis exposure — are vaccinated . given the confidential and evolving nature of these negotiations , specific details about funding sources or the provisions being discussed , including the length of the lease and other potential conditions related to bison management , are not yet available . regardless of vaccination - eligibility , partner agency officials may take a variety of actions with captured bison that test negative including , temporarily holding them in the capture facility for release back into the park or removing them for research . in order to progress to step two , cattle can no longer graze in the winter on certain private lands north of yellowstone national park and west of the yellowstone river . step two , which the partner agencies expected to reach by the winter of 2002 / 2003 , would use the same management methods on bison attempting to leave the park as in step one , with one exception — a limited number of bison , up to a maximum of 100 , that test negative for brucellosis exposure would be allowed to roam in specific areas outside the park . finally , step three would allow a limited number of untested bison , up to a maximum of 100 , to roam in specific areas outside the park when certain conditions are met . these conditions include determining an adequate temporal separation period , gaining sufficient experience in managing bison in the bison management areas , and initiating an effective vaccination program using a remote delivery system for eligible bison inside the park . the partner agencies anticipated reaching this step on the northern boundary in the winter of 2005 / 2006 and the western boundary in the winter of 2003 / 2004 . in 1997 , as part of a larger land conservation effort in the greater yellowstone area , the forest service partnered with the rocky mountain elk foundation — a nonprofit organization dedicated to ensuring the future of elk , other wildlife and their habitat — to develop a royal teton ranch ( rtr ) land conservation project . the ranch is owned by and serves as the international headquarters for the church universal and triumphant , inc. ( the church ) — a multi - faceted spiritual organization . it is adjacent to the northern boundary of yellowstone national park and is almost completely surrounded by gallatin national forest lands . the overall purpose of the conservation project was to preserve critical wildlife migration and winter range habitat for a variety of species , protect geothermal resources , and improve recreational access .