incarcerated registrants . we found 28 individuals associated with 32 dea registrations who may have been either ineligible for a controlled substance registration or presented issues that may increase the risk of illicit diversion of controlled substances because they were incarcerated in federal prisons for crimes related to controlled substances , health - care fraud , or other crimes . of the 28 incarcerated individuals , 1 was incarcerated for crimes related to controlled substances . in this case , the individual was convicted of possession of approximately 535 pounds of marijuana with the intent to distribute in september 2013 , required to undergo treatment for substance abuse , and subsequently imprisoned in december 2013 . the registrant surrendered her state - level authority in february 2014 . according to dea od officials , the registrant's csa2 record did not contain any notes indicating awareness of the crime . the physician's registration expired in april 2014 . we identified another physician who pled guilty to two felony counts of sexual exploitation of a minor in october 2012 and subsequently surrendered his medical license and state - level controlled substance registration in february 2013 . according to dea od officials , the registrant's csa2 record did not contain any notes indicating awareness of the crime . the dea registration expired in may 2015 . potentially invalid ssns . we identified 11,740 out of about 1.3 million ssns associated with individual registrations whose ssn or date of birth ( or both ) could not be validated by ssa's evs . specifically , we compared dea registrants' names , dates of birth , and ssns to ssa's records using evs . evs flags ssns in which the name or date of birth ( or both ) do not match its records for the ssn , as well as ssns that have never been issued . specifically , of the 11,740 ssns , we found 8,235 ssns that did not match the name identified , 3,441 ssns that did not match the date of birth , and 64 ssns that had never been issued by ssa . mismatches in names , ssns , or dates of birth could be a potential identity fraud indicator but could also be due to data - entry errors or unreported name changes . as previously mentioned , dea has procedures in place to compare identifying information , such as first and last names , from registrant applications to license information maintained by state professional licensing boards . in contrast , however , dea does not have procedures to verify other identifying information , such as ssns or dates of birth . for example , dea does not have an agreement with ssa to access evs as one possible option to verify the ssns provided by dea registrants . dea officials said that while they had not previously considered strategies to validate ssns and dates of birth , they were open to exploring options to do so . in our discussions , ssa officials said they would be open to the option of providing dea with access to evs , although it would require a legal review based on dea's intended use . multiple individuals registered using same ssn .