( app . i contains details of our survey methodology. ) ( please check all that apply. ) n=624 part 2: information from former usda ppq officers 4 . when did you begin working as a usda ppq officer ( not as an agriculture technician or aide ) ? during your first year working as a usda ppq officer , about how many weeks did you spend in on - the - job ( in port ) training ? during the past year , about how many hours per month did you spend compiling and entering data into the databases listed below ? how easy or difficult is it for you to get samples to a pest identifier ? when you send a sample to a pest identifier , about how long does it usually take to get the results ? how are the following types of information delivered to you ? if you do not receive a type of information on a regular basis , please indicate that . ( please check all that apply. ) not received on a regular ( percent ) ( percent ) communication ( percent ) basis ( percent ) 21 . is the information delivered to you in a timely manner ? ( please check one in each row. ) ( please check one in each row. ) n=626 part 5: questions for canine handlers 24 . are the following resources readily available to you ? ( please check one in each row. ) during the past year , have there been any instances when you thought it would be helpful to contact the national detector dog training center , but you were told by cbp management not to contact them ? does cbp management allow you enough time each month to schedule training with your dog ? during the past year , about how frequently have you been directed to perform duties outside your primary mission as a canine handler ? n=62 part 6: your views and opinions about working at cbp 28 . based on you own experiences , how would you describe the work - related communication between agriculture specialists and the others listed below ? ( please check one in each row. ) we agree with usda's suggestion regarding two of our recommendations . we now recommend that the secretaries of agriculture and homeland security work together to ( 1 ) adopt meaningful performance measures for assessing the aqi program's effectiveness at intercepting foreign pests and disease and ( 2 ) establish a process to identify and assess the major risks posed by foreign pests and disease and develop and implement a national staffing model to meet those risks . usda noted that revisions to aphis's agreement with cbp should address the concerns we raised in the report regarding the timely and accurate transfer of aqi funds to cbp . usda states that aphis made the first three transfers of fiscal year 2006 on time . we discuss these positive steps in our report and note a problem with one of aphis's transfers . as usda carries out its three - phase approach to revising user fees , and dhs works to advance proposed consolidation of customs , immigration , and agriculture user fees ( see app .