hackers . hackers sometimes crack into networks for the thrill of the challenge or for bragging rights in the hacker community . while remote cracking once required a fair amount of skill or computer knowledge , hackers can now download attack scripts and protocols from the internet and launch them against victim sites . thus , while attack tools have become more sophisticated , they have also become easier to use . hacktivists . hacktivism refers to politically motivated attacks on publicly accessible web pages or e - mail servers . these groups and individuals overload e - mail servers and hack into web sites to send a political message . information warfare . several nations are aggressively working to develop information warfare doctrine , programs , and capabilities . such capabilities enable a single entity to have a significant and serious impact by disrupting the supply , communications , and economic infrastructures that support military power — impacts that , according to the director of central intelligence , can affect the daily lives of americans across the country . insider threat . the disgruntled organization insider is a principal source of computer crimes . insiders may not need a great deal of knowledge about computer intrusions because their knowledge of victim systems often allows them to gain unrestricted access to cause damage to the system or to steal system data . virus writers . virus writers are posing an increasingly serious threat . several destructive computer viruses and “worms” have harmed files and hard drives , including the melissa macro virus , the explore.zip worm , and the cih ( chernobyl ) virus . concerns about computer - based vulnerabilities have been publicly reported repeatedly during the 1990s . examples of these concerns include the following: in 1991 , the national research council studied the issue and reported that “as computer systems become more prevalent , sophisticated , embedded in physical processes and interconnected , society becomes more vulnerable to poor system design , accidents that disable systems , and attacks on computer systems.” the report generated a great deal of interest in both the government and private sectors , alerting them to vulnerabilities and dangers being rapidly introduced with technology dependence . in june 1995 , a critical infrastructure working group , led by the attorney general , was formed to ( 1 ) identify critical infrastructures and assess the scope and nature of threats to them , ( 2 ) survey existing government mechanisms for addressing these threats , and ( 3 ) propose options for a full - time group to consider long - term government response to threats to critical infrastructures . the working group identified critical infrastructures , characterized threats to them , and recommended creating a commission to investigate such issues . in february 1996 , the national defense authorization act required the executive branch to provide a report to the congress on the policies and plans for developing capabilities , such as warnings of strategic attacks against the national information infrastructure . later that year , the permanent subcommittee on investigations , senate committee on governmental affairs , began to hold hearings on security in cyberspace . since then , congressional interest in protecting national infrastructures has remained strong .