dod does not meet any of these conditions . in september 2004 , the dod comptroller identified 11 major deficiencies that would affect the department's ability to prepare accurate and reliable financial statements for fiscal year 2004 . subsequently , the dod inspector general issued a disclaimer of opinion on dod's fiscal year 2004 financial statements , citing material weaknesses in internal controls and noncompliance with ffmia requirements . pervasive weaknesses in dod's financial management and related business processes and systems have ( 1 ) resulted in a lack of reliable information needed to make sound decisions and report on the status of dod activities , including accountability of assets , through financial and other reports to congress and dod decision makers ; ( 2 ) hindered its operational efficiency ; ( 3 ) adversely affected mission performance ; and ( 4 ) left the department vulnerable to fraud , waste , and abuse , as the following examples illustrate . mobilized army national guard soldiers have experienced significant problems getting accurate , timely , and consistent reimbursement for out - of - pocket travel expenses . these weaknesses were more glaring in light of the sustained increase in mobilizations for army national guard soldiers over the last 3 years . our case study units experienced a broad range of travel reimbursement problems , including disputed amounts for meals that remained unpaid at the end of our review and vouchers that were submitted five or more times before being paid . one of the primary causes for these problems is rooted in the paper - intensive process used by dod to reimburse army national guard soldiers for their travel expenses . according to the program management office , the dod cio classified the system as a national security system , but the program management office was informed by the dod comptroller that the system needed to be submitted to the dod comptroller for review in accordance with section 1004 ( d ) of the fiscal year 2003 defense authorization act . however , the section of the act relating to the dod comptroller review does not apply to national security systems . in our may 2004 report , we noted that the army reported that it obligated almost $22 million for modernization of the system in fiscal year 2003 without its having been subject to review by the dod comptroller for consistency with dod's bea . the army's global combat support system was reclassified as a national security system in the fiscal year 2005 budget , even though it is still being reported as a business system in the department's current inventory . furthermore , bmmp officials stated that reclassification was incorrect and the system was submitted to the dod comptroller for review in accordance with section 1004 ( d ) of the fiscal year 2003 defense authorization act . the dod comptroller approved investment in the system in august 2003 and january 2004 . in addition , this is the first year in which the navy erp was listed in the budget and incorrectly classified as a national security system . its forerunners , four pilot erp projects , have been classified as business systems since their inception .