the subsets are: 1 . ( washington , d.c.: september 18 , 2018 ) . education collects biennial data on private schools through its private school universe survey , which we determined was a reliable dataset for describing aggregate data on the total number of indian students that attended private schools in school year 2015-16 . however , we determined the data were not sufficiently reliable to map the specific locations of private schools . to better understand the public school options available for indian students , we interviewed or received input from a number of experts on indian education . for example , we spoke with federal officials from education , bie , and the white house initiative on american indian and alaska native education ; received input from representatives from national organizations that advocate on behalf of indian students and tribes , such as the national indian education association , the national advisory council on indian education , and the national congress of american indians ; and met with academic subject matter experts on indian education . in addition to these experts , we heard from some tribal leaders about their perspectives on indian education , school choice , and academic achievement . appendix i contains detailed information about the scope and methodology for this report . we conducted this performance audit from march 2018 to january 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as discussed , we used the pss for such purposes in this report . in its comments , education also encouraged us to further explore specific examples of school options that have a mission to address the unique educational needs of indian students . we reviewed several relevant studies as part of our work , including some related to the sources education suggested . however , an in - depth review of specific examples was outside the scope of our work . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of education , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0580 or nowickij@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . this report examines the public school choice options located in areas with large populations of american indian and alaska native students , collectively referred to as indian students . to conduct this work , we analyzed the department of education's ( education ) national data on k - 12 public schools from the common core of data ( ccd ) for school year 2015-16 ( the most recent available ) .