some examples are below . updates to policies and processes we found that the coast guard revised its major systems acquisition manual in november 2010 to include a description of the roles and responsibilities of a flag - level executive oversight council , which was formed in 2009 to review programs and provide oversight ; aligning roles and responsibilities of independent test authorities to dhs standards , which satisfied one of our prior recommendations ; a formal acquisition decision event before a program receives approval for low - rate initial production , which addressed one of our prior recommendations ; and a requirement to present an acquisition strategy when dhs is asked to validate the need for a major acquisition program . the coast guard has made progress in reducing its acquisition workforce vacancies . from april through november 2010 , the percentage of vacancies for government positions dropped from about 20 percent to13 percent . over the past several years , we have reported on the coast guard's efforts to build its in - house acquisition workforce capacity — one of the reasons the coast guard initially turned to a contractor as the deepwater systems integrator was largely because it did not have that in - house capacity . acquisition workforce vacancies have decreased , but program managers have ongoing concerns about staffing program offices . for example , the hh - 65 helicopter program office has funded and filled 10 out of the 33 positions needed . to help make up shortfalls in filling systems engineer and other acquisition workforce positions , the coast guard uses support contractors . as of november 2010 , the coast guard support contractors made up 25 percent of the coast guard's acquisition workforce . while we have cited the risks in using support contractors , we previously reported that the coast guard has acknowledged these risks and has taken steps to address them , such as releasing guidance on the appropriate oversight of contractors and the work they perform . according to the coast guard , it currently has 81 interagency agreements , memorandums of agreement , and other arrangements in place primarily with dod to support its major acquisition programs . support from dod ranges from acquiring products and services from established dod contracts to using the navy's engineering and testing expertise . for example , the coast guard benefited from discounts by coordinating c - 130j aircraft contracting efforts through the air force acquisitions office rather than contracting directly with the aircraft manufacturer . to leverage navy engineering and testing expertise , most coast guard major acquisition programs use the navy's commander , operational test and evaluation forces , to support test activities . coast guard program managers , however , do not have a systematic way to gain insight into the existence and details of such agreements . according to coast guard contracting officials , the coast guard recently began to develop a database of all interagency agreements with dod and other agencies , but at this point program staff have access to only 5 of the approximately 81 agreements .