however , it did not agree that the army does not have such a process . therefore we continue to believe that our recommendation has merit . dod concurred with the point of our third recommendation that there is a need to identify potential production capability problems such as those resulting from a wartime surge in demand for spare parts . while the army's approach may have many analytical features , it does not provide specific analyses of production capability . such analyses contribute to identifying possible production capability problems and could enhance the army's management decisions . therefore , we continue to recommend that the army create such analytical tools . furthermore , in response to dod's comment about the need to validate survey data on production capability before taking action , we added information to our report stating that dla does validate its industry surveys as part of its process . with regard to our fourth recommendation , dod concurred with the concept that management strategies are needed to resolve spare parts availability problems . but , it disagreed with the implication that the army has no such strategies . while the army does have some processes at the individual command level that identify and address spare parts availability problems , we did not find an overarching process to create management strategies designed to reduce lead times and inventories . therefore , we continue to believe that our recommendation is appropriate . to determine whether the army is using current industrial base data for assessing wartime spare parts industrial base capability , we interviewed army officials responsible for war reserve spare parts planning , requirements development , and estimation of industrial base capability in the office of the army deputy chief of staff for logistics in washington , district of columbia ; the army materiel command in alexandria , virginia ; the army aviation and missile command at redstone arsenal , alabama ; and the army materiel systems analysis agency at aberdeen proving grounds , maryland . to determine whether opportunities exist to improve the reliability of the army's industrial base capabilities assessments , we compared the army's approach to key attributes of the dla's program by interviewing dla officials in the supplier assessment and capability division at fort belvoir , virginia , and the defense supply centers in richmond , virginia , and columbus , ohio , that are responsible for an industrial base data collection and analysis activity using information from private industry to improve spare parts management . we also reviewed the processes used by the army and dla to assess industrial base capability . we performed our review between october 2001 and may 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and the secretary of the army . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you or your staff has any questions concerning this report .