cms contracted audits . in 2016 , cms began to transition and consolidate audits of providers to a type of contractor called unified program integrity contractors ( upic ) . this transition is intended to integrate contracted audit activities across cms health care programs , such as medicaid and medicare , according to cms . additionally , upic audits can include health care providers who participate in multiple federal programs . within the medicaid program , upics may conduct audits with states interested in pursuing what are called “collaborative audits.” cms's contract with upics allows for audits of providers in mco networks . focused program integrity reviews . cms officials said that in 2016 , the agency updated the review guide used to conduct focused program integrity reviews of state medicaid managed care programs . cms program integrity reviews have identified some common issues , such as a low number of investigations of overpayments conducted by managed care plans and a low amount of recoveries by plans . however , cms officials stated these reviews are not focused primarily on assessing specific payment risks . for example , these reviews do not involve an actual review or audit of mco payments to providers to assess the extent that inaccurate payments were made . instead , they review program integrity policies and processes , such as whether and how the state monitors overpayments , and whether mcos comply with state requirements . despite cms's efforts to improve oversight of program integrity in medicaid managed care , there have been delays in issuing guidance , and gaps in key auditing and monitoring activities . these delays and gaps are inconsistent with the agency's current program integrity plan , which established goals for improving state oversight of program integrity in medicaid managed care , as well as the financial accountability of medicaid mcos . publication of cms guidance that would assist states in oversight of payment risks has been delayed . cms officials told us in april 2017 that they planned to issue a compendium of guidance related to the managed care rule's program integrity regulations . the compendium is intended to provide guidance on ( 1 ) mco program integrity requirements , ( 2 ) state audits of mco encounter data that must be conducted at least every 3 years , and ( 3 ) mco overpayments to providers . however , in september 2017 , cms officials told us that although they had a draft of the compendium , they did not have a timeline for issuing it , because the managed care rule was under review . as of may 2018 , no issuance date has been set for the guidance . over half of the stakeholders we interviewed who identified federal responsibilities as an oversight challenge to managed care cited the complexity of federal regulations and the lack of federal guidance as key issues . the lack of available federal guidance resulting from delays in issuing such guidance is inconsistent with federal internal control standards that call for federal agencies to communicate quality information to those responsible for program implementation for the purposes of achieving program objectives and addressing program risks .