106-107 goals . omb added that it will also continue to seek input from the grant community , such as at regular stakeholder meetings , webcasts , and other methods as policies are developed . we are sending copies of this report to the director of omb . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 6520 . i can also be reached by e - mail at czerwinskis@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to address our objectives , we reviewed p.l . 106-107 to identify requirements and criteria for evaluating the effectiveness of grant administration reform efforts . we also reviewed ( 1 ) the initial plan developed by teams with representation from grant - making agencies across the federal government in 2001 and its annual updates and ( 2 ) the individual agency progress reports on p.l . 106-107-related activities for 2005 . we interviewed officials from omb and from the various initiatives that are addressing p.l . 106-107 requirements — the grants.gov program management office , the grants management line of business leaders , and leadership from the grants policy committee and its cross - agency teams . these officials updated us on the status of their initiatives . to obtain information on grantees' views on the streamlining that has occurred and additional efforts that they believe should be done , we used several approaches . we reviewed testimony related to deliberation of streamlining legislation . we also analyzed comments submitted by grantees on the initial plan . we interviewed representatives from several associations representing various sectors of grantees , such as states , counties , small municipalities , tribal governments , universities , and nonprofit organizations . we obtained information from them on their constituents' concerns regarding grant administration and the p.l . 106-107 initiatives , and on states that were undertaking grant management reforms of their own . to obtain a better understanding of how grantees implement grants from multiple sources , and how they are affected by grant administration initiatives ( including those responding to p.l . 106-107 ) , we purposefully selected a set of grantees who received federal funds from three or more different federal agencies . our objective in selecting grantees was to obtain a diverse mix of grant recipients from grantee communities of different sizes and geographical areas of the united states . we used the single audit data for 2003 , which included recipients of federal assistance who received more than $300,000 in that year , to develop a list of potential grantees from which to select . in addition , when determining which states to select , we focused on those states that had projects underway or implemented to improve their grant management and potentially reduce administrative burden on their grantees .