eligible . however , the secretary of the military department may authorize payment only to those reservists on active duty in excess of 180 days . eligible . however , the secretary of the military department may authorize payment only to those reservists on active duty in excess of 180 days . eligible . however , the secretary of the military department may authorize payment only to those reservists on active duty in excess of 180 days . eligible , if the member meets the statutory and regulatory requirements of the pay . eligible for officers only , for each day of duty that meets the statutory and regulatory requirements of the pay . eligible for officers only , if the member meets the statutory and regulatory requirements of the pay . eligible for officers only , if the member meets the statutory and regulatory requirements of the pay . eligible for officers only , if the member meets the statutory and regulatory requirements of the pay . eligible for officers only , if the member meets the statutory and regulatory requirements of the pay . active duty for training ( adt ) eligible when assigned to a designated mission . eligible when assigned to a designated mission . eligible when assigned to a designated mission . eligible , if the member meets the statutory and regulatory requirements for the pay . eligible from the first day if assigned permanently to a designated location or if assigned temporarily to a designated location for more than 30 consecutive days , payable from first day . eligible from the first day if assigned permanently to a designated location or if assigned temporarily to a designated location for more than 30 consecutive days , payable from first day . eligible from the first day if assigned permanently to a designated location or if assigned temporarily to a designated location for more than 30 consecutive days , payable from first day . eligible if the member meets the statutory and regulatory requirements for the pay . eligible at 1 / 30 of the authorized rate for each duty day . eligible at 1 / 30 of the authorized rate for each duty day . eligible at 1 / 30 of the authorized rate for each duty day . eligible at 1 / 30 of the authorized rate for each duty day . eligible at 1 / 30 of the authorized rate for each duty day . eligible , medical officers are authorized $450 / month and dental officers $350 / month . eligible , medical officers are authorized $450 / month and dental officers $350 / month . eligible , if the member meets the statutory and regulatory requirements of the pay . eligible , if the member meets the statutory and regulatory requirements of the pay . eligible for officers who agree to fill critical shortfalls . eligible for officers who agree to fill critical shortfalls . eligible for officers who agree to fill critical shortfalls . eligible for officers who agree to fill critical shortfalls . eligible for officers who agree to fill critical shortfalls ; however , dod policy prohibits . active duty for training ( adt ) limited to selected reserve who enlist to fill critical shortfalls .