computable data . data in computable form are exchanged through the chdr interface , which links the modernized health data repositories for the new systems that each department is developing . implementing the interface required the departments to agree on standards for various types of data , put the data into the agreed standard formats , and populate the repositories with the standardized data . currently , the types of computable health data being exchanged are limited to outpatient pharmacy and drug allergy data . the next type of data to be standardized , included in the repositories , and exchanged is laboratory data . these data are not shared for all patients — only those who are seen at both dod and va medical facilities , identified as shared patients , and then “activated.” once a patient is activated , all dod and va sites can access information on that patient and receive alerts on allergies and drug interactions for that patient . according to dod and va officials , outpatient pharmacy and drug allergy data were being exchanged on more than 18,300 shared patients as of june 2008 ; however , officials stated that they are unable to track the number of shared patients currently receiving care from both departments , so the number of patients for whom data could potentially be shared is unknown . viewable data . data in viewable form are shared through the bhie interface . through bhie , clinicians can query selected health information on patients from all va and dod sites and view current data onscreen almost immediately . because the bhie interface provides access to up - to - date information , the departments' clinicians expressed strong interest in expanding its use . as a result , the departments decided to broaden the capability and expand its implementation . for example , the departments completed a bhie interface with dod's clinical data repository in july 2007 , and they began sharing viewable patient vital signs information through bhie in june 2008 . extending bhie connectivity could provide both departments with the ability to view additional data in dod's legacy systems , until such time as the departments' modernized systems are fully developed and implemented . according to a dod / va annual report and program officials , the departments now consider bhie an interim step in their overall strategy to create a two - way exchange of electronic health records . table 1 summarizes the types of health data currently shared via the departments' various initiatives ( including fhie and ldsi ) , as well as additional types of data that are currently planned for sharing . as depicted in table 3 , dod and va are sharing or plan to share a wide range of health information ; however , other health information that the departments currently capture has not yet been addressed ( for example , immunization records and history and data on exposure to health hazards ) . further , although va's health information is all captured electronically , many dod medical facilities continue to rely on paper records .