blm . blm has conducted 21 facility security assessments on its approximately 280 occupied facilities , but officials do not know when they will complete the remaining assessments and do not have a plan to do so . forest service . the forest service has conducted at least 135 facility security assessments on its approximately 1,135 occupied facilities , but officials do not know when they will complete the remaining assessments and do not have a plan for doing so . park service . the park service has conducted at least 148 facility security assessments on its approximately 1,505 occupied facilities , but officials do not know when they will complete the remaining assessments and do not have a plan to do so . the isc standard requires that agencies conduct assessments using a methodology that meets , among other things , two key requirements: ( 1 ) consider all of the undesirable events ( eg , arson and vandalism ) identified in the isc standard as possible risks to facilities , and ( 2 ) assess the threat , vulnerability , and consequence for each of these events . the forest service's methodology meets these two requirements and utilizes an isc - compliant facility security assessment methodology developed by the u.s. department of agriculture . the park service's methodology partially meets the requirements because it does not include a step to assess the consequences of specific undesirable events , as required by the isc standard . blm and fws have not yet established methodologies for conducting facility security assessments , although officials we interviewed from each agency stated that they intend to develop an isc - compliant methodology . specifically: fws . fws has conducted five facility security assessments on its approximately 465 occupied facilities . however , fws's description did not indicate that the agency would evaluate the consequences of specific undesirable events , as required by the isc standard . without developing a plan for conducting all of the remaining facility security assessments and using a methodology that complies with isc requirements , agencies may not identify the risks their facilities face or identify the countermeasures they could implement to mitigate those risks . according to fws headquarters officials , fws employees have limited physical security expertise to conduct facility security assessments ; therefore , the agency has developed a plan to meet the isc standard's requirement using contractors . specifically , blm officials told us that they plan to hire a security manager who will develop an assessment methodology but did not know when the manager would be hired . fws officials we interviewed provided a high - level description of what they expected to be included in their new methodology . based on these findings , we made a total of six recommendations to the four land management agencies , including that blm , the forest service , and the park service each develop a plan to conduct all required facility security assessments agency - wide ; the park service update its facility security assessment methodology to address the consequences of specific undesirable events in order to comply with requirements in the isc standard ; and blm and the forest service each develop facility security assessment methodologies that comply with requirements in the isc standard .