b . cash equivalents and certificate of deposit the foundation considers funds held in its checking account and all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of 3 months or less to be cash equivalents . money market funds held in the foundation's congressional award fellowship trust ( the trust ) are not considered cash equivalents for financial statement reporting purposes . the foundation has a $50,000 certificate of deposit which is pledged as collateral on the $100,000 line of credit ( see note 8 ) . unconditional promises to give are recorded as revenue when the promises are made . contributions receivable to be collected within less than one year are measured at net realizable value . d. equipment , furniture and fixtures , and related depreciation equipment , furniture , and fixtures are stated at cost . depreciation of furniture and equipment is computed using the straight - line method over estimated useful lives of 5 to 10 years . expenditures for major additions and betterments are capitalized ; expenditures for maintenance and repairs are charged to expense when incurred . for the fiscal years ended september 30 , 2005 and 2004 upon retirement or disposal of assets , the cost and accumulated depreciation are eliminated from the accounts and the resulting gain or loss is included in revenue or expense , as appropriate . e. congressional award fellowship trust - investments the trust investments consist of equity securities and money market funds which are stated at market value . f. classification of net assets the net assets of the foundation are reported as follows: unrestricted net assets represent the portion of expendable funds that are available for the general support of the foundation . temporarily restricted net assets represent amounts that are specifically restricted by donors or grantors for specific programs or future periods . the foundation has no permanently restricted net assets . contribution revenue is recognized when received or promised and recorded as temporarily restricted if the funds are received with donor or grantor stipulations that limit the use of the donated assets to a particular purpose or for specific periods . when a stipulated time restriction ends or purpose of the restriction is met , temporarily restricted net assets are reclassified to unrestricted net assets and reported in the statement of activities as net assets released from restrictions . h. functional allocation of expenses the costs of providing the various programs and other activities have been summarized on a functional basis as described in note 11 . accordingly , certain costs have been allocated among the programs and supporting services benefitedthe preparation of financial statements in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect certain reported amounts and disclosures . accordingly , actual results could differ from those estimates . for the fiscal years ended september 30 , 2005 and 2004 certain reclassifications have been made to the fiscal year 2004 statement of cash flows to conform to the fiscal year 2005 presentation . in fiscal year 2005 , the foundation changed the format of its statement of cash flows from direct method to the indirect method for purposes of reporting cash flows from operating activities .