b . information assurance . all relevant unclassified and classified network information generated by ia elements to include , but not limited to , personnel usernames and aliases , levels of network access , audit data , unauthorized use of removable media , print logs , and other data needed for clarification or resolution of an insider threat concern . c. human resources . all relevant hr databases and files to include , but not limited to , personnel files , payroll and voucher files , outside work and activities requests , disciplinary files , and personal contact records , as may be necessary for resolving or clarifying insider threat matters . establish procedures for access requests by the insider threat program involving particularly sensitive or protected information , such as information held by special access , law enforcement , inspector general , or other investigative sources or programs , which may require that access be obtained upon request of the senior official ( s ) . establish reporting guidelines for ci , security , la , hr , and other relevant organizational components to refer relevant insider threat information directly to the insider threat program . ensure insider threat programs have timely access , as otherwise permitted , to available united states government intelligence and counterintelligence reporting information and analytic products pertaining to adversarial threats . monitoring user activity on networks: agency heads shall ensure insider threat programs include: 1 . either internally or via agreement with external agencies , the technical capability , subject to appropriate approvals , to monitor user activity on all classified networks in order to detect activity indicative of insider threat behavior . when necessary , service level agreements ( slas ) shall be executed with all other agencies that operate or provide classified network connectivity or systems . slas shall outline the capabilities the provider will employ to identify suspicious user behavior and how that information shall be reported to the subscriber's insider threat personnel . policies and procedures for properly protecting , interpreting , storing , and limiting access to user activity monitoring methods and results to authorized personnel . agreements signed by all cleared employees acknowledging that their activity on any agency classified or unclassified network , to include portable electronic devices , is subject to monitoring and could be used against them in a criminal , security , or administrative proceeding . agreement language shall be approved by the senior official ( s ) in consultation with legal counsel . classified and unclassified network banners informing users that their activity on the network is being monitored for lawful united states government - authorized purposes and can result in criminal or administrative actions against the user . banner language shall be approved by the senior official ( s ) in consultation with legal counsel . employee training and awareness: agency heads shall ensure insider threat programs: 1 . provide insider threat awareness training , either in - person or computer - based , to all cleared employees within 30 days of initial employment , entry - on - duty ( eod ) , or following the granting of access to classified information , and annually thereafter .