these comments are reprinted in appendix i . in responding to a draft of our report , nasa partially concurred with our three recommendations , citing among other reasons that actions already in place at the time of our review such as establishing sls , orion , gsdo as separate programs and a block upgrade approach for sls — and actions it plans to take to track costs — met the intent of our recommendations . in most cases , the actions that nasa plans to take do not fully address the issues we raised in this report . we continue to believe that our recommendations are valid and should be fully addressed as discussed below . nasa also provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . nasa partially concurred with our first recommendation to establish a separate cost and schedule baseline for work required to support the sls block i em - 2 , report this information to the congress through nasa's annual budget submission , and establish separate life cycle cost and schedule baseline estimates for em - 2 if nasa decides to fly block i beyond em - 2 . nasa also partially concurred with our second recommendation to establish separate cost and schedule baselines that encompass life cycle costs , including operations and sustainment , for each additional sls , orion , and gsdo capability and to report cost estimates for the capabilities annually via the agency budget submission until key requirements are defined and baselines can be established . in its response , nasa stated that it had established separate programs for sls , orion , and gsdo and adopted a block upgrade approach for sls . this approach , nasa stated , is in concert with best practices and nasa policy . in addition , nasa indicated that it will establish cost and schedule estimates for initial demonstration of the three programs as they enter respective implementation phases and will begin reporting development , operations , and sustainment costs for sls block i and subsequent variants starting in fiscal year 2016 via its annual budget submission to congress . finally , the agency stated that it intends to conduct design reviews for upgraded sls elements , including the upper stage and booster , and set up cost commitments similar to what it has done for block i capability as part of that design review process , but that it does not intend to establish life cycle estimates for sls through the end of the program because flight rates , mission destinations and other strategic parameters are yet unknown . as discussed in the report , best practices for cost estimating recognize that nasa's evolutionary development approach for sls , orion , and gsdo helps reduce risk and provide capabilities more quickly . given nasa's planned long - term use of the sls , orion , and gsdo , its block upgrade approach and intention to conduct design reviews for each of the planned upgrades will provide some understanding of the development work and resources required . for example , such reviews are typically expected to yield information about technical progress against requirements .