reg . oig noted that the five - part test is narrow and hampers ebsa's enforcement efforts . in place of the five - part test , the proposed regulation would establish erisa fiduciary status based on a broader standard . in particular , the proposed regulation makes the following key changes , among others: acknowledgment or representation as an erisa fiduciary is sufficient to result in erisa fiduciary status . advice does not need to be provided on a regular basis to be considered a fiduciary act . what steps has the department of labor ( labor ) taken to address conflicts of interest related to the selection of investment options ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant research and federal laws and regulations on investment advice arrangements for plan sponsors and participants . we conducted interviews with 401 ( k ) plan service providers , government officials , and other industry experts to identify different practices that may create conflicts of interest in the provision of investment advice to plan sponsors and participants . in addition , we reviewed relevant securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and labor enforcement cases and spoke with field investigators to examine revenue - sharing arrangements and other business practices where conflicts of interest were identified . to identify current practices in participant - level investment advice , we conducted a poll of plan sponsors and service providers in partnership with the society for human resource management ( shrm ) and the society of professional asset - managers and record keepers ( spark ) . in addition , we obtained and analyzed data from service providers , the investment company institute ( ici ) , and the survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) to ascertain the percentage of plan participants who have transferred or rolled 401 ( k ) plan assets into individual retirement accounts ( ira ) . we assessed the reliability of the data we present and found the data to be sufficiently reliable as used in this report . to determine the extent to which labor's actions address the potential for conflicted investment advice , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations and interviewed labor's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) officials , including consultant / adviser project and field investigators , and industry experts . in addition , we reviewed reports and interviewed officials from labor's office of inspector general ( oig ) who evaluated ebsa's efforts to protect pension plan assets from conflicts of interest in pension plan service providers . we also interviewed service providers and industry experts on the likely impact of recent regulations issued by labor pertaining to investment advice to participants and disclosure of compensation received by service providers . for additional information on the methodology used in this review , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from january 2010 through january 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .