this has been the case at gao . in 2000 , we sought and received certain narrowly tailored human capital authorities , including early out and buyout authorities . the government is composed of organizations , programs , and functions that are overlapping , fragmented , and interdependent . are there clear goals , measures , and data with which to track progress built into its planning and reporting systems ? chief operating officer ( coo ) . transformation of a large organization is a difficult undertaking , especially in government . success depends on committed , top - level leadership and sustained attention to management issues . a coo could provide the sustained management attention essential for addressing key infrastructure and stewardship issues and could facilitate the transformation process . establishing a coo in selected federal agencies could provide a number of benefits . a coo would be the focal point for elevating attention on management issues and transformational change , integrating various key management and transformation efforts , and instituting accountability for addressing management issues and leading transformational change . a coo would provide a single organizational position for key management functions , such as human capital , financial management , information technology , acquisition management , and performance management as well as for transformational change initiatives . to be successful , in many cases , a coo will need to be among an agency's top leadership ( eg , deputy secretary or under secretary ) . however , consistent with the desire to integrate responsibilities , the creation of a senior management position needs to be considered with careful regard to existing positions and responsibilities so that it does not result in unnecessary “layering” at an agency . consideration also should be given to providing a term appointment , such as a 5 — 7 year term . a term appointment would provide sustained leadership . no matter how the positions are structured , it is critical that the people appointed to these positions have a proven track records in similar positions and be vested with sufficient authority to achieve results . to further clarify expectations and responsibilities , the coo should be subject to a clearly defined , results - oriented performance contract with appropriate incentives , rewards , and accountability mechanisms . for selected agencies , a coo should be subject to a senate confirmation . in creating such a position , the congress might consider making certain subordinate positions , such as the chief financial officer , not subject to senate confirmation . governmentwide human capital reforms . there are a number of reforms that might be considered . as i have previously testified , congress should consider providing governmentwide authority to implement broadbanding , other pay for performance systems , and other authorities whereby whole agencies are allowed to use additional authorities after opm has certified that they have the institutional infrastructures in place to use them effectively and fairly . in addition to requiring a human capital strategic plan from each agency , the congress should establish statutory principles for standards that an agency must have in place before opm can grant additional pay flexibilities .