we requested 48 contracts . we contacted the state officials responsible for the contracts in our sample and requested a copy of the contracts . we received all but 1 of the 48 contracts . to further understand the nature of contracting for these programs , we visited the states of florida , utah , and new york , where we interviewed state program officials and contractors and reviewed documents pertaining to program contracts . we selected these states because program directors stated that there were services offshored for at least two programs or multiple contracts with offshoring in one program . in addition , we conducted follow - up interviews with selected state program directors and contractors . to examine work performed outside of the united states in two federal student aid programs , we interviewed officials from the office of federal student aid and the office of management at the u.s. department of education . we reviewed u.s. department of education departmental directives concerning contractor employee personnel security screenings and contract monitoring and contracting documents . we also examined previous gao reports , congressional research service reports , and reports from the office of the inspector general at the u.s. department of education . to determine what legal actions state governments have taken related to offshoring in these programs , we reviewed current laws and executive orders identified by states through our survey . we also reviewed legislation proposed in 2005 and reports from legal experts and databases from policy and trade organizations . to determine what federal requirements exist that relate to offshoring , we reviewed applicable federal laws and regulations , including the federal acquisition regulations and other policies and guidance . our work was conducted between january 2005 and february 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . information that we gathered through our surveys , on our site visits , and during our interviews represent only the conditions present in the states and with contractors at the time of our review . we cannot comment on any changes that may have occurred after our fieldwork was completed . furthermore , our interviews and site visits focused on in - depth analysis of only a few selected states , contractors and contracts . based on our interviews , we cannot generalize our findings beyond the states and contractors we contacted . in addition to the contact named above , andrew sherrill , assistant director ; tahra nichols , analyst - in - charge ; deborah owolabi ; amy sweet ; margaret armen ; carolyn boyce ; jay smale ; robert alarapon ; and tovah rom made significant contributions to this report . international trade: current government data provide limited insight into offshoring of services . gao - 04-932 . washington , d.c.: september 22 , 2004 . higher education: federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics programs and related trends . gao - 06-114 . washington , d.c.: oct. 12 , 2005. international trade: u.s. and india data on offshoring show significant differences . gao - 06-116 . washington , d.c.: october 27 , 2005 . the report is also available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .