gao - 05-157 . washington , d.c.: january 28 , 2005 . rotterdam is europe's largest port . the volume of containers passing through rotterdam is roughly 7 million twenty - foot equivalent units ( teu ) annually , about 6 percent of which is shipped to the united states . approximately 20 percent of cargo passing through rotterdam is transshipped , meaning it does not pass through any natural choke points , such as vehicle or rail entry and exit gates . containers at the port are handled primarily in four container terminals . in addition , the department of homeland security began conducting container security initiative ( csi ) activities at rotterdam in june 2002 . the directorate general of customs and excise of the ministry of economy and finance of the hellenic republic , the greek atomic energy commission , and doe signed a tripartite agreement on october 30 , 2003 to include the port of piraeus in the megaports initiative . the port is located in the southwestern aegean sea on the innermost point of the saronikas gulf . the port received increased attention because of security concerns associated with the 2004 olympic games . piraeus was also considered a significant port for inclusion in the initiative because it not only serves as a major seaport for greece , but also is the third largest passenger port in the world . the volume of containers passing through piraeus is about 1.6 million teus annually . in addition , roughly 11,000 teus were shipped from piraeus directly to the united states during 2003 . greece was the second european union country to join the initiative and become fully operational . csi also began operations at piraeus in june 2004 . the ministry of ports and aviation of the democratic socialist republic of sri lanka and doe signed an mou on july 20 , 2004 to include the port of colombo in the megaports initiative . the port is located on the southwest coast of the country . the port of colombo has a high level of container traffic — over 1.9 million teus annually . the port uses cranes to move containers within and out of the terminals . doe anticipates using vehicle monitors to screen all containers imported to sri lanka , all export containers originating in sri lanka , and all inter - terminal transshipment containers as they exit the terminals . csi became operational at colombo in june 2003 . the federal public service of finance of the kingdom of belgium signed an mou with doe on november 24 , 2004 to include the port of antwerp in the megaports initiative . antwerp is the 4th largest seaport in the world and the largest port in belgium . container traffic through the port is over 5 million teus annually , while traffic to the united states accounts for nearly 5 percent of the total annual container traffic through antwerp . in 2003 , antwerp ranked 9th in the world for total volume of container traffic shipped to the united states . additionally , there are direct cargo routes from antwerp to many major u.s. seaports . the port is geographically split into a right and a left bank .