the additional documentation allowed sba to approve the loan . although sba is not required to maintain specific underwriting criteria for its disaster loan program under the provisions of the small business act , we think that sba's policies are generally consistent with good lending policies as reflected in industry best practices and regulatory guidance , and , when properly applied , should help maintain the integrity of the program . sba's underwriting procedures evaluate applicants' credit risk and analyze their ability to repay the loan . these procedures , along with requiring collateral to secure the loans , help ensure that sba fulfills its mission in providing loans that will assist small businesses in recovering from disasters . by assessing repayment ability , sba can more effectively use its resources to assist small businesses that are more likely to be able to repay the loan , thus limiting the loan program's cost to the government , and therefore the taxpayer . ( 3 ) did sba correctly apply its policies and procedures in its disposition of september 11 eidls ? to determine whether sba's program policies are consistent with the law and overall mission of sba's disaster loan program , we reviewed the law related to the program as well as sba's regulations and operating procedures . to determine sba's underwriting policies and criteria for september 11 eidls , we analyzed sba's policies and procedures for approving , declining , and withdrawing disaster loans , and changes in its policies and the law made after september 11 . we discussed the provisions of the law and sba's policies and procedures with sba officials . we also analyzed the underwriting policies and procedures of three selected nonprofit lenders that provided loans to small businesses in new york after september 11 and discussed the lenders' policies with officials of the respective organizations . in addition , we compared sba's underwriting requirements with best practices for managing credit risk during the loan - making process of industry and banking regulators . to determine whether sba correctly applied its policies in the disposition of september 11 eidl applications , we reviewed a representative random sample of declined and withdrawn september 11 eidl application files drawn from all disaster area offices , and a small sample of application files for approved september 11 loans . the representative sample of declined and withdrawn files allowed us to project to the universe of about 12,000 declined and withdrawn eidls , but the small sample of approved loans did not allow us to project to the universe of all approved loans , and we discuss only the disposition of the 27 approved loans we reviewed . appendix i contains a detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted our work between may 2003 and june 2004 in atlanta , ga ; new york , ny ; and washington , d.c. in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . when a disaster occurs , staff from sba's disaster loan program , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , and other government agencies work together to assess the damage to the affected area and aid household and business disaster victims . either the president or the sba administrator may issue a disaster declaration .