however under e.o . 12866 , oira is also responsible for oversight of agencies' rulemaking , consistent with law , and reviews regulations before publication , which provides it an opportunity to identify and help agencies avoid potential noncompliance . oira staff asserted that they already take steps to check agencies' compliance with cra . however , we found that oira completed its e.o . 12866 reviews for 110 of the 132 noncompliant economically significant regulations within 90 days of the stated effective date . oira staff noted that they cannot monitor every action agencies take following their review of draft final regulations , such as the specific date a regulation is published in the federal register or whether an agency submits a copy of the regulation to congress or us . however , because economically significant regulations are generally classified as major rules under cra , this indicates that oira frequently completes its review in close proximity to the start of the 60-day period intended for congressional review , and in such cases the regulation is at high risk of noncompliance with cra . this close proximity to the 60-day period provides an opportunity for oira to identify potentially noncompliant regulations before agencies publish them and work with agencies on actions that would avoid noncompliance . our analysis identified such actions agencies could use to comply with cra . for example , we found instances of agencies explaining to the public that cra requires a 60-day review period for major rules and therefore identifying an effective date more than 2 months after publication in the federal register . in other instances , agencies stated that the regulation would take effect 60 days after publication in the federal register , which ensures compliance with cra provided that the regulation is submitted to congress and us on or before the day it is published . in other cases , agencies stated they had “good cause,” to not delay the effective delay , such as a statutory or judicial deadline or an emergency situation . agencies anticipated that economically significant regulations published during transition periods were more likely to result in economic costs and benefits and generally less likely to result in “transfers” of income from taxpayers to program beneficiaries . to identify the types of economic effects that agencies anticipated , we placed the 527 economically significant regulations reviewed across all periods into one of four categories based on information agencies provided in the published regulation concerning the anticipated costs , benefits , or transfers resulting from a regulation: expected economic costs , benefits , or both: for 197 of the 527 economically significant regulations ( or 37 percent ) , agencies expected costs or benefits or both to result and made no mention of transfers . our previous work has noted that regulations typically require a desired action or prohibit certain actions by regulated parties . such requirements may impose costs on private - sector parties , such as businesses and individuals , and may also provide benefits to society as a whole . examples we reviewed included epa regulations limiting emissions from industrial facilities with the goal of improving air quality and labor department regulations intended to improve workplace safety .