approving changes . under the existing process , the financial integration team does not check whether changes that federal program managers submit to them have been reviewed and approved , at a minimum , by program office management prior to making changes to the work breakdown structures in costex . the program director for financial integration said that they defer to the program offices to ensure that program office management review and approve changes to the work breakdown structure before the program managers submit these changes to the financial integration team . documenting changes . nnsa officials said that not all program offices have tracked changes to their work breakdown structures over time . nnsa's office of defense programs has a process for tracking changes to its work breakdown structure , but that process — or a similar process — was not utilized consistently by all of nnsa's other program offices . if the program offices do not track the changes to their work breakdown structures over time , they cannot ensure the data are comparable across fiscal years . according to officials , nnsa built a tool in costex to track work breakdown structure changes across fiscal years . nnsa officials said the tool was tested at the end of fiscal year 2019 by the office of defense programs . nnsa plans to test using the tool to track changes for the other program offices in fiscal year 2020 . communicating decisions . nnsa did not always communicate changes to the work breakdown structure to the m&o contractors in a timely manner . representatives from the seven m&o contractors stated that they encountered challenges in submitting their data in costex on multiple occasions throughout fiscal years 2018 and 2019 because federal program managers in some offices made frequent changes to the work breakdown structures that often were not communicated to the m&o contractors in a timely manner . when work breakdown structures change , representatives from the seven m&o contractors said they have to redo the crosswalk of their financial data to the new work breakdown structures before they submit the data — this takes time and additional resources and may result in delayed data submissions . representatives from three of the m&o contractors said the frequency of changes to the work breakdown structures decreased for the fiscal year 2019 data collection effort , but representatives from six m&o contractors said they continued to encounter challenges when changes were made to the work breakdown structures . however , some of the program offices have not used the data collected through common financial reporting for various reasons . this is our second review . this report evaluates ( 1 ) the steps nnsa has taken to implement common financial reporting since our january 2019 report , and ( 2 ) the extent to which nnsa's approach to data collection aligns with the purpose of common financial reporting , including collecting accurate and consistent data from m&o contractors . to determine the steps nnsa has taken to implement common financial reporting since our january 2019 report , we reviewed available project documentation such as meeting minutes and briefing slides regarding nnsa's progress to implement the effort , m&o contractors' site strategic plans , nnsa's financial integration policy , and nnsa's recent annual reports .