this has only happened rarely , though . appendix i provides further information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from july 2013 to december 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . military test and training ranges are used primarily to test weapon systems and to train military forces . test ranges are used to evaluate warfighting systems and functions in a natural environment and under simulated operational conditions . training ranges include air ranges for air - to - air , air - to - ground , drop zone , and electronic combat training ; live - fire ranges for artillery , armor , small arms , and munitions training ; ground maneuver ranges to conduct realistic force - on - force and live - fire training ; and sea ranges to conduct ship or submarine maneuvers . in february 2014 , dod reported to congress that it had 533 test and training ranges throughout the united states and overseas . these included 456 army ranges , of which 384 were in the united states ; 23 navy ranges , of which 18 were in the united states ; 40 air force ranges , of which 35 were in the united states ; and 14 marine corps ranges , of which 13 were in the united states . figure 1 shows the location of major dod test and training ranges throughout the united states as of june 2014 . before dod can determine whether a project or transaction poses a potential security threat to a range by providing a foreign entity a permanent platform for observing operations , it must first become aware of the proposed project or transaction . multiple federal entities may be involved in identifying and approving potential business activities near dod ranges . dod , working with these federal entities , uses multiple methods to determine what activities are occurring in proximity to its ranges . none of these methods , with the exception of the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) , discussed below , was designed to consider security concerns . the following entities and processes are available to dod to become aware of and gather information on projects located near ranges . cfius , an interagency committee chaired by the department of the treasury and including dod as a member , reviews certain covered transactions to assess the impact on national security of foreign control of u.s. companies , such as by considering the control of domestic industries and commercial activity by foreign citizens as it affects the capability and capacity of the united states to meet the requirements of national security . dod has the opportunity to comment on these transactions , including raising any security concerns . for more information on cfius , see appendix ii . the information from these four ranges is not generalizable to all of dod's domestic ranges .