army . the first phase of training consists of an 8-week common core course for all uas pilots . during this phase , the army is responsible for teaching its pilots the fundamentals of aerodynamics , flight safety , and navigation . during the second phase of training , the army is responsible for teaching its uas pilots to fly one of the army's three uas . this training lasts between 12 and 25 weeks depending on the uas that is the focus of the course . during this phase , the army teaches its pilots to launch and recover a uas , conduct reconnaissance and surveillance , and participate in a field training exercise . in addition , all army uas pilots are trained as sensor operators in the aircrew of a uas . thus , pilots learn to operate uas sensors during their initial qualification training . one of the core characteristics of a strategic training and development process calls for agency leaders and managers to consistently demonstrate that they support and value continuous learning . however , the army's training and doctrine command conducted a review from january 2015 through march 2015 and found that 61 of the army's 65 shadow units that were not deployed had completed an average of 150 hours of flight training . further , the army assessed that these units were at the lowest levels of unit training proficiency in the army's readiness reporting system . army training and doctrine command officials stated that in january 2015 , the chief of staff of the army directed the army training and doctrine command to evaluate unit training for army uas units to determine if training was a factor that caused uas mishaps in combat . these officials stated that in response to the chief of staff's direction they evaluated the total flight hours completed to conduct training by 65 shadow units that were not deployed , 13 deployed shadow units , and 2 shadow units at the uas initial qualification school at ft. huachuca . training and doctrine command assessed the level of unit readiness associated with the amount of training these units completed using the army's unit training proficiency system specified in army pamphlet 220-1 , defense readiness reporting system - army procedures . this system includes a four - tiered rating system ranging from t - 1 to t - 4 . in this system a t - 1 rating indicates the highest level of unit training proficiency , whereas t - 3 and t - 4 ratings indicate that the unit is untrained on one or more of the mission essential tasks that the unit was designed to perform in an operational environment . using this system to assess the 65 shadow units that were not deployed , training and doctrine command found that 1 unit was rated at t - 1 , 3 units were rated at t - 2 , and 61 units were rated at t - 3 or t - 4 .