such workforce challenges are not unique to iraq . dod's civilian workforce shrank by about 38 percent between fiscal years 1989 and 2002 , but dod performed this downsizing without ensuring that remaining staff had the specific skills and competencies needed to accomplish future dod missions . in other cases , contractors have taken over support positions that were traditionally filled by government personnel . for example , a contractor began providing intelligence support to the army in germany in 1999 and deployed with the army to iraq in 2003 . the army , however , found itself unprepared for the volume of iraqi detainees and the need for interrogation and other intelligence and logistics services . we and others have reported on the impact of the lack of adequate acquisition personnel and high turnover rates on reconstruction efforts . for example , among the lessons learned identified by the special inspector general was that one of the cpa's critical personnel shortcomings was the inadequate link between position requirements and necessary skills . in this case , gaps existed in the experience levels of those hired , as well as in the quality and depth of their experiences relative to their assigned jobs . similarly , in january 2004 , an interagency assessment team was sent to iraq to review the cpa's contracting capability . the team found that existing contracting personnel were insufficient to handle the increased workload that was expected with the influx of fiscal year 2004 reconstruction funding and that the cpa needed more individuals with acquisition expertise who could help the programmatic side of the operation . in part , the cpa's decision to award seven contracts in early 2004 to help better coordinate and manage the fiscal year 2004 reconstruction efforts was in recognition of this shortfall . as a result , dod finds itself in the position of relying on contractors to help manage and oversee the work of other contractors . at the contract level , having personnel who are trained to conduct oversight , assigned at or prior to contract award , and held accountable for their oversight responsibilities is essential for effective oversight . our work has shown that if oversight is not conducted , is insufficient , or is not well documented , dod , and other reconstruction agencies , risk not identifying and correcting poor contractor performance in a timely manner and paying contractors more than the value of the services they perform . for example , our june 2004 report found that early contract administration challenges were caused , in part , by the lack of sufficient personnel . we found that , due to the lack of government personnel to provide oversight , one contractor may have purchased $7 million in equipment and services that were not specifically authorized under the contract . similarly , on another contract , to provide subject matter experts to the cpa and iraqi ministries , dod officials stated that some experts failed to report to duty or when they did , did not perform as expected . dod officials attributed such performance issues to the lack of personnel to provide oversight when the experts arrived in iraq .