( see app . i for more information about nuclear smuggling cases. ) the state department noted that , per our recommendation , it is taking the lead in facilitating the development of a governmentwide plan to provide detection equipment and maintenance support . state also commented , however , that the report gave insufficient weight to the progress that has been made in the past 1-½ years to improve coordination and planning . specifically , state cited its establishment of the office of export control cooperation and sanctions , which is responsible for , among other things , managing and coordinating u.s. government export control and related border security programs . in addition , the office chairs an interagency working group that evaluates , prioritizes , and approves projects that u.s. agencies undertake to improve countries' export control and related border security capabilities . the department also stated that it has taken steps to improve internal coordination as well as accountability for equipment previously provided to other countries and noted that the country advisors play a prominent role in these matters . regarding these points , we recognized in the draft report that state had improved coordination through an interagency group that it chairs . further , we noted that recipient country officials told us that the advisors play a valuable role in implementing their assistance programs . in addition , we recognized in the draft report that the office of export control cooperation and sanctions has improved coordination . however , we continue to believe that interagency coordination has been inadequate and needs to be improved . state acknowledged this point in its comments and said that a more coherent , better coordinated approach to providing radiation detection equipment is needed . the department concurred with all of our recommendations and said that it will work with other agencies to implement them . in its comments , the department of energy's national nuclear security administration agreed that it is difficult to assess the impact and effectiveness of u.s. - supplied equipment unless data from the recipient countries are routinely obtained and analyzed . doe believes that sharing data is critical to the success of the u.s. program and countries' efforts to combat nuclear smuggling . doe also endorsed the need for a more uniform approach to radiation monitoring at countries' borders . the department wanted to clarify that it has three programs that operate in this area: the second line of defense program that has historically focused on russia ; the international export control program that deals with equipment that has both civilian and military applications , material and technology ; and a program that uses department of state funding to maintain and install equipment outside of russia . a significant number of the cases reported by iaea involved material that could be used to produce a nuclear weapon or a device that uses conventional explosives with radioactive material ( “dirty bomb” ) to spread radioactive contamination over a wide area . nuclear material can be smuggled across a country's border through a variety of means: it can be hidden in a car , train , or ship , carried in personal luggage through an airport , or walked across an unprotected border .