as shown in fig . 1 , sfas receive cash reimbursements from fns through the state agency for each meal they serve , based on the type of meal served ( lunch or breakfast ) and the meal category ( free , reduced price , or full price ) . in addition , unless they are eligible for free meals , students pay a full - price or reduced - price fee to sfas for each meal they receive , depending on their household income . to supplement the federal reimbursement , some state agencies also use state funds to provide cash reimbursements to sfas based on the number of meals they serve . in school year 2008-2009 , fns per meal reimbursement rates ranged from 24 cents for a full - price lunch to $2.57 for a free lunch ( see table 1 ) . the majority of the meals served through the nslp and sbp are provided for free or at a reduced price to low - income students . in fiscal year 2008 , about half of the school lunches served were provided for free and about 10 percent were provided at a reduced price . ( 3 ) what factors may help or hinder the establishment or continuation of programs that eliminate reduced - price fees ? to answer these questions , we identified states and school districts that have implemented erp programs and collected information about their experiences . in august 2008 , fns provided us with a preliminary list of 4 states with erp programs and 43 school districts with erp programs in 16 other states . however , fns is not necessarily aware of all the states and districts with erp programs , because states and districts are not required to report this information to fns . we conducted follow - up with child nutrition officials in washington , d.c. , and the 28 states for which no information was provided , as well as officials in 10 states for which information was incomplete or needed clarification . we identified 5 states with erp programs: colorado , maine , minnesota , vermont , and washington . in each of these states , we conducted semistructured phone interviews with state child nutrition officials . we also conducted a web - based survey of sfa officials in 51 school districts that we initially identified as having erp programs . we received survey responses from officials in 44 districts , 35 of whom confirmed that their districts had erp programs . our questionnaire asked these officials to describe the erp programs ; the reasons they implemented these programs ; the effects of the programs on participation , errors , and costs ; and the factors that helped or hindered program implementation . while we did not validate specific information that sfa officials reported in our survey , we reviewed their responses and conducted follow - up as necessary to determine that the data were complete , reasonable , and sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .