offered ? ( yes or no ) five years ? in the next two years ? f. funds management / financial services 1 . account management & statements 2 . amortizing certificates ( acp ) 3 . asset / liability management 4 . brokerage services 5 . cds 6 . corporate checking accounts 7 . derivatives hedging 8. dividend earning accounts 9 . investment advisory 10 . loans / lending 11 . members' business accounts 12 . members' capital accounts 13 . money market accounts 14 . open - end and term credits 15 . overnight / cash management accounts 16 . savings bonds 17 . share certificates ( all kinds ) yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 1 . cash letter credit 2 . cu service settlement 3 . cuna service group settlement 4 . cuna mutual services 5 . reverse purchase program 6 . securities safekeeping h. other ( specify. ) yes yes yes yes yes yes 1 . yes 2 ) how are your member capital accounts structured ? 3 ) by size of assets , how many of your members are npcus , ccus , or others ? ( enter the number of your corporate members in each cell . if none , enter “0”. ) > $10m but < $100m > $100m but < $1 billion 4 ) what percentage of your various lines of business are from the following natural person ( or corporate ) credit union member size categories ? ( enter percent by size for each line of business . percentages should total to 100% ) 5 ) has your natural person ( or corporate ) credit union members' use of services increased ( i ) , stayed the same ( s ) , or decreased ( d ) since cy1992 , as broken out by member size ? ( select a letter for each cell in the table using the following indicators ; then enter it in the cell . i = increased use of the service s = same use of the service as before 1992 d= decreased use of the service na = not applicable ) 6 ) what do you think are the reasons for any changes in your members' use of your services ? 7 ) how many cusos does your corporate credit union have a stake in ? ( check one. ) 0 ( skip to question #8. ) 1 2 3 or more 7a ) if 1 or more , please complete the following table and continue to question 7b . 7b ) how do the services that these cusos provide differ from the services the corporate credit union provides ? 8 ) in what ways does your corporate credit union face competition from outside the corporate credit union network ? ( if no external competition , skip question 8a. ) 8a ) what are the sources of that competition , and which products services are most affected ? 8b ) to what extent do you expect competition to continue to increase in the next several years ? 9 ) in what ways have you felt competition from other corporate credit unions increase in the last five years ?