gao - 10-388sp . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2010 . climate change science program . first , npp will provide a continuation of global weather observations following the earth observing system missions terra and aqua . second , npp will function as an operational satellite and will provide data until the first npoess satellite launches . the rbsp mission will explore the sun's influence on the earth and near - earth space by studying the planet's radiation belts at various scales of space and time . this insight into the physical dynamics of the earth's radiation belts will provide scientists data with which to predict changes in this little understood region of space . understanding the radiation belt environment has practical applications in the areas of spacecraft system design , mission planning , spacecraft operations , and astronaut safety . the two spacecrafts will measure the particles , magnetic and electric fields , and waves that fill geospace and provide new knowledge on the dynamics and extremes of the radiation belts . the tdrs replenishment system consists of in - orbit communication satellites stationed at geosynchronous altitude coupled with two ground stations located in new mexico and guam . the satellite network and ground stations provide mission services for near - earth user satellites and orbiting vehicles . tdrs k and l are the 11th and 12th satellites , respectively , to be built for the tdrs replenishment system and will contribute to the existing network by providing high bandwidth digital voice , video , and mission payload data , as well as health and safety data relay services to earth - orbiting spacecraft , such as the international space station . in addition to the contact named above , david b . best , assistant director ; maricela cherveny ; heather l. jensen ; angie nichols - friedman ; william k. roberts ; roxanna t. sun ; robert s. swierczek ; and alyssa b. weir made key contributions to this report . defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs . best practices: increased focus on requirements and oversight needed to improve dod's acquisition environment and weapon system quality . gao - 08-294 . washington , d.c.: february 1 , 2008 . nasa also concurred with our recommendations . nasa stated that enhanced cross - agency communication , coordination , and sharing of parts quality information will help mitigate threats poses by defective and nonconforming parts . furthermore , nasa plans to engage other u.s. space agencies to further develop and integrate agency mechanisms for reporting , assessing , tracking , and trending common parts quality problems , including validation of effective cross - agency solutions . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the administrator of the national aeronautics and space administration , and other interested parties . the report also will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .