testing . complete and thorough testing is essential to provide reasonable assurance that new or modified systems will provide the capabilities in the requirements . testing is the process of executing a program with the intent of finding errors . how can dhs obtain reliable information on the costs of its financial management systems investments ? business process models provide a way of expressing the procedures , activities , and behaviors needed to accomplish an organization's mission and are helpful tools to document and understand complex systems . business processes are the various steps that must be followed to perform a certain activity . for example , the procurement process would start when the agency defines its needs , and issues a solicitation for goods or services , and would continue through contract award , receipt of goods and services , and would end when the vendor properly receives payment . the identification of preferred business processes would be critical for standardization of applications and training and portability of staff . to maximize the success of a new system acquisition , organizations need to consider the redesign of current business processes . as we noted in our executive guide: creating value through world - class financial management , leading finance organizations have found that productivity gains typically result from more efficient processes , not from simply automating old processes . moreover , the clinger - cohen act of 1996 requires agencies to analyze the missions of the agency and , based on the analysis , revise mission - related and administrative processes , as appropriate , before making significant investments in it used to support those missions . another benefit of what is often called business process modeling is that it generates better system requirements , since the business process models drive the creation of information systems that fit in the organization and will be used by end users . other benefits include providing a foundation for agency efforts to describe the business processes needed for unique missions , or developing subprocesses to support those at the departmentwide level . key issues for dhs to consider who will be responsible for developing dhs - wide standard business processes that meet the needs of its component agencies ? how will the component agencies be encouraged to adopt new processes , rather than selecting other methods that result in simply automating old ways of doing business ? how will the standard business processes be implemented by the shared service providers to provide consistency across dhs ? what process will be used to determine and validate the processes needed for dhs agencies that have unique needs ? although dhs has a goal of migrating agencies to a limited number of shared service providers , it has not yet articulated a clear and measurable strategy for achieving this goal .