gao - 07-1245t . washington , d.c.: sept. 25 , 2007 ) . these approaches each have potential costs and benefits . on the one hand , they could expand competitive options , reduce rail rates , and decrease the number of captive shippers as well as reduce the need for both federal regulation and a rate relief process . on the other hand , reductions in rail rates could affect railroad revenues and limit the railroads' ability and potential willingness to invest in their infrastructure . in addition , some markets may not have the level of demand needed to support competition among railroads . it will be important for policymakers , in evaluating these alternative approaches , to carefully consider the impact of each approach on the balance set out in the staggers act . the targeted approaches frequently proposed by shipper groups and others include the following: reciprocal switching: this approach would allow stb to require railroads serving shippers that are close to another railroad to transport cars of a competing railroad for a fee . the shippers would then have access to railroads that do not reach their facilities . this approach is similar to the mandatory interswitching in canada , which enables a shipper to request a second railroad's service if that second railroad is within approximately 18 miles . some class i railroads already interchange traffic using these agreements , but they oppose being required to do so . under this approach , stb would oversee the pricing of switching agreements . this approach could also reduce the number of captive shippers by providing a competitive option to shippers with access to a proximate but previously inaccessible railroad and thereby reduce traffic eligible for the rate relief process ( see fig . terminal agreements: this approach would require one railroad to grant access to its terminal facilities or tracks to another railroad , enabling both railroads to interchange traffic or gain access to traffic coming from shippers off the other railroad's lines for a fee . current regulation requires a shipper to demonstrate anticompetitive conduct by a railroad before stb will grant access to a terminal by a nonowning railroad unless there is an emergency or when a shipper can demonstrate poor service and a second railroad is willing and able to provide the service requested . this approach would require revisiting the current requirement that railroads or shippers demonstrate anticompetitive conduct in making a case to gain access to a railroad terminal in areas where there is inadequate competition . the approach would also make it easier for competing railroads to gain access to the terminal areas of other railroads and could increase competition between railroads . however , it could also reduce revenues to all railroads involved and adversely affect the financial condition of the rail industry . also , shippers could benefit from increased competition but might see service decline ( see fig . to its tracks to another railroad , enabling railroads to interchange traffic beyond terminal facilities for a fee . in the past , stb has imposed conditions requiring that a merging railroad must grant another railroad trackage rights to preserve competition when a merger would reduce a shipper's access to railroads from two to one .