overpayment assignments . dcaa performs overpayment assignments to verify that contractors have billing procedures and internal controls in place to identify and resolve contractor billing errors and overpayments in a timely manner . dcaa guidance states that these engagements should be conducted in accordance with gagas to the extent applicable under the circumstances . however , none of the 10 overpayment assignments we reviewed were performed or reported as gagas engagements . we found that auditor judgments about the population and selection of transactions for these assignments did not provide a representative universe for testing and concluding on contractor controls over billings and payments received . for example , for the 10 assignments we assessed , the auditors selectively reviewed an accounts receivable aging report to identify overpayments and determine if they had been resolved . as a result , this work does not provide reasonable assurance that contractors have adequate controls in place to identify and correct overpayments and billing errors and make appropriate , timely refunds and adjustments . incurred cost audits . the purpose of incurred cost audits is to examine contractors' cost representations and opine on whether the costs are allowable , allocable to government contracts , and reasonable in accordance with the contract and applicable government acquisition regulations . dcaa performs these audits as gagas attestation engagements . for the four incurred cost audits we reviewed , we found that the auditors did not adequately document their judgments about control risk or the sampling and test methodologies used . in addition , we found that the auditors traced claimed pool and base costs ( indirect costs ) to the contractors' accounting books and records to determine their accuracy and allowability . however , the auditors did not perform sufficient , detailed testing of claimed indirect and direct costs . for example , the auditors traced and reconciled indirect costs to contractor accounting system data , but did not test a representative selection of direct costs . as a result , the scope of work performed was not sufficient to identify claimed costs , if any , that were not adequately supported or unallowable costs , if any , that should have been questioned . production environment and audit quality issues . dcaa's mission statement , strategic plan , and metrics all focused on producing a large number of audit reports and provided little focus on assuring quality audits . for example , dcaa's current approach of performing 30,000 to 35,000 audits and issuing over 22,000 audit reports with 3,600 auditors substantially contributed to the widespread audit quality problems we identified . within this environment , dcaa's audit quality assurance program was not properly implemented , resulting in an ineffective quality control process that accepted audits with significant deficiencies and noncompliance with gagas and dcaa policy . moreover , even when dcaa's quality assurance documentation showed evidence of serious deficiencies within individual offices , those offices were given satisfactory ratings . considering the large number of dcaa audit reports issued annually and the reliance the contracting and finance communities have placed on dcaa audit conclusions and opinions , an effective quality assurance program is key to protecting the public interest .