disambiguation tools have been developed for other applications . additionally , although the advise tool includes a feature that allows analysts to designate confidence levels for individual pieces of data , no mechanism has been developed to assess the confidence of relationships identified by the tool . while software specifically to determine data quality would be difficult to develop , other controls exist that could be readily used as part of a strategy for mitigating this risk . for example , anonymization could be used to minimize the exposure of personal data , and operational procedures could be developed to restrict the use of analytical results containing personal information that could have data quality concerns . to implement anonymization , the tool would need the software capability to handle anonymized data or have a built - in data anonymizer . dhs currently does not have plans to build anonymization into the advise tool . until a pia that identifies the privacy risks of advise is conducted and privacy controls to mitigate those risks are implemented , dhs faces the risk that privacy concerns will arise during implementation of systems based on advise that may be more difficult to address at that stage and possibly require costly retrofitting . each data source has a predefined confidence attribute . analysts can change the confidence attribute of specific data , but changes to confidence levels are tracked and linked to the analysts making the changes . at the knowledge layer , facts and relationships from the information layer are consolidated into a large - scale semantic graph and various subgraphs . semantic graphing is a data modeling technique that uses a combination of “nodes,” representing specific entities , and connecting lines , representing the relationships among them . because they are well - suited to representing data relationships and linkages , semantic graphs have emerged as a key technology for consolidating and organizing disparate data . figure 3 represents the format that a typical semantic graph could take . the knowledge layer contains the semantic graph of all facts reported through the information layer interface and organized according to the ontology . the knowledge layer also includes the capability to provide automatic alerts to analysts when patterns of interest ( or partial patterns ) are matched by new incoming information . at the application layer , analysts are able to interact with the data that reside in the knowledge layer . the application layer contains tools that allow analysts to perform both pattern - based and subject - based queries and to search for data that match a specific pattern , as well as data that are connected with a specific entity . for example , analysts could search for all of the individuals who have traveled to a certain destination within a given period of time , or they could search for all information connected with a particular person , place , or organization . the resulting output of these searches is then graphically displayed via semantic graphs . advise's application layer also provides several other capabilities that allow for the further examination and adjustment of its output .