postal service . a comprehensive transformation of the postal service is needed to ensure its financial viability and fulfill its mission in the 21st century in the dynamic communications and delivery sectors . legal requirements and practical constraints have contributed to continuing deficits , rate increases , rising costs , and growing debt . usps has attempted to reduce the size of rate increases by cutting costs and increasing its productivity , but it has been able to achieve only limited progress . this process has led to proceedings that are often lengthy and adversarial . although the current system was designed to enable usps to break even over time , in practice usps has accumulated significant prior years' losses and debt . under cost - based rate regulation , limited incentives exist for usps to control costs because postal rates must be raised to cover expected costs . when cost savings are achieved , these are passed along to customers in the next rate case . consensus on these issues has been difficult to achieve , but improvements in the rate - setting area are a fundamental component of a comprehensive transformation . transformation will also require consideration of legal requirements and practical constraints relating to usps's physical infrastructure of post offices and mail - processing facilities and to usps's workforce . currently , changes to usps's retail infrastructure are limited by both legal requirements and practical constraints . usps is required to render postal services to all communities , including providing regular postal services to rural areas , communities , and small towns where post offices are not self - sustaining . usps must follow specific criteria and procedures set forth in law or regulations for closing or consolidating post offices . for example , it cannot close a small post office solely because it is operating at a deficit . usps also has a self - imposed moratorium on closing post offices . the current legal framework , which was designed to help usps fulfill universal service mandates , does not provide the same types of incentives that apply to the private sector . usps's break - even mandate removes the profit motive , and the rate - setting structure allows usps to cover rising costs by increasing rates . the postal monopoly shields usps's core business of letter mail from direct competition , which could provide additional incentives for innovation , efficiency , and competitive prices and quality of service . as part of their postal transformation efforts , a number of foreign countries have made changes to their legal frameworks , including reducing the postal monopoly , that have increased incentives . although it is difficult to make direct comparisons , their experiences are relevant to consideration of structural change in usps . specific structural issues relating to incentives that need to be addressed include the following: the postal monopoly: should the postal monopoly be narrowed or eliminated ? congress created the statutory monopoly on letter mail to enable the postal system to fulfill its universal service mandates . usps has further defined its letter mail monopoly through regulations . narrowing or eliminating the monopoly could provide incentives for efficiency and innovation for usps and its competitors and could lead to greater choices for consumers .