other enumerator workload . this effort offset the above budget variances by about $86 million in framework 3 due primarily to the following . service - based enumeration was conducted in soup kitchens , homeless shelters , and areas frequented by persons with no fixed addresses . this effort resulted in about $32 million of budget variances . according to the bureau , about 69,000 sites were estimated for this project based upon national and local data . however , only about 14,000 actual sites , or about 20 percent of the planned workload , were actually identified and counted . according to the bureau , this occurred because the majority of sites estimated did not exist based upon enumerator visits . group quarters enumeration was conducted in places like prisons , nursing homes , military barracks , and school dormitories . this effort resulted in about $31 million of budget variances . according to the bureau , about 519,000 units were estimated for this project . however , only about 172,000 actual units , or one - third of the expected amount , were actually identified and counted . according to the bureau , this occurred because addresses for estimated sites erroneously included businesses , commercial establishments , and duplications , or simply did not exist . list enumeration was conducted in areas where households do not receive direct mail delivery , such as rural areas where mail is sent to a local post office box . this effort resulted in about $8 million of budget variances . according to the bureau , about 500,000 housing units were estimated for this project . however , only about 372,000 actual units , or about 75 percent of the planned workload , were actually identified and counted . according to the bureau , this occurred due to inaccurate address lists . further details and explanations for 27 project budget variances with a minimum threshold of $5 million or more are presented in appendix ii . these 27 variances represented over 90 percent of the budget variance of $415 million for fiscal year 2000 . historically , enumerator productivity has been a factor affecting decennial census costs . although the bureau has been trying to improve productivity , data from past decennial censuses has been largely unavailable , incomplete , or not comparable . according to recent bureau data , enumerator productivity did not have a significant impact on budget variances for the 2000 decennial census because the actual national average time to visit a household and complete a census questionnaire was about the 1 hour estimated by the bureau . information on enumerator productivity rates by type of local census office , the bureau's methodology for refining the productivity data , and lessons learned to assist the planning effort for the 2010 census is presented in a recent gao report . for fiscal year 2000 , the u.s. census bureau had significant internal control weaknesses that resulted in an inability to develop and report complete , accurate , and timely information for management decision - making . this was due to specific internal control weaknesses as well as the bureau's overall internal control environment being assessed as high risk by its independent auditor .