rp . to strengthen the management of navy erp's change control process , recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the navy , through the appropriate chain of command , to ( 1 ) revise the navy erp procedures for controlling system changes to explicitly require that a proposed change's life - cycle cost impact be estimated and considered in making change request decisions and ( 2 ) capture the cost and schedule impacts of each proposed change in the navy erp automated change c ontrol tracking tool . to increase the value of navy erp iv&v , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the navy , through the appropriate chain of command , to ( 1 ) stop performance of the iv&v function under the existing contract and ( 2 ) engage the services of a n iv&v agent that is independent of all navy erp management , development , testing , and deployment activities that it may review . in addition , we reiterate our prior recommendation relative to ensur the navy erp iv&v agent report directly to program oversight officials , while concurrently sharing iv&v results with the program office . in written comments on a draft of this report , signed by the assistan deputy chief management officer and reprinted in appendix ii , the department concurred with our recommendations , and stated that it will take the appropriate corrective actions within the next 7 months . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the director , office of management and budget ; the congressional budget office ; and the secretary of defense . the report also is available at no charge on our web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3439 or hiter@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major c ontributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to determine whether ( 1 ) system testing is being effectively managed , ( 2 ) system changes are being effectively con and ( 3 ) independent verification and validation ( iv&v ) activities a effectively managed for the navy enterprise resource planning ( erp ) program . to determine if navy erp testing is being effectively managed , we reviewed relevant documentation , such as the test and evaluation mas plan and test reports and compared them with relevant federal and related res guidance . further , we reviewed development test plans and procedu for each test event and compared them with best practices to determine whether well - defined plans were developed . we also examined test results and reports , including test readiness review documentation and compared them against plans to determine whether they had been executed in accordance with the plans . moreover , to determine the extent to which test defect data were being captured , analyzed , and reported , we inspected 80 randomly selected defects from a sample of 2,258 def program's test management system .