attrition can also affect program management . for example , state has reported that experienced staffing in grants management is needed to ensure accountability and proper oversight . likewise , usaid officials said that the ability of american staff to perform some aspects of the agency's work , such as program monitoring and evaluation , can be affected by increased demands on their time caused by local staff attrition . attrition can lead to american supervisors' taking on additional responsibilities that they would not be expected to perform at other posts . for example , state and usaid officials said that american personnel spend significant amounts of time training and bringing replacement staff up to speed on embassy processes and operations as a result of attrition . these officials stated that these additional responsibilities can present challenges for maintaining adequate management controls and program oversight in some areas . attrition , including siv - related attrition , may also affect the training and productivity of afghan local staff . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , hynek kalkus ( assistant director ) , jon fremont , farhanaz kermalli , and owen starlin made key contributions to this report . ashley alley , tina cheng , martin de alteriis , katie bernet , karen deans , thomas gilbert , and michael silver provided additional support . see appendix i for more information about our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from january 2015 to december 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . all local staff who work for u.s. diplomatic missions overseas are eligible to apply for an siv that allows them to immigrate to the united states , provided they meet certain conditions , such as having 15 years of employment with the u.s. government abroad . congress has enacted a series of laws since 2006 to enable certain afghan nationals who have worked as translators or interpreters for the u.s. government in afghanistan to be eligible for sivs . in 2009 , congress authorized afghan employees of the u.s. government in afghanistan who meet certain criteria to be eligible for sivs . the first of these siv programs is permanent and provides sivs to eligible afghans who have worked directly with the u.s. armed forces or under chief of mission authority for at least 1 year as translators or interpreters . a maximum of 50 sivs are currently granted annually for principal applicants , excluding their dependents , under this program .