counselor experience . although all counselors have at least a master's degree in rehabilitation counseling or a related field , differences in counselors' levels of vr&e experience may affect their approach to plan development . counselors at two regional offices noted that the focus of the vr&e program has oscillated between education and employment , with employment being the current primary focus . they said , as a result , a counselor's general approach to plan development could be influenced by the prevailing focus that existed at the time he or she was hired . counselors also said that , in general , counselors with more experience will tend to approach plan development differently than a less seasoned counselor because they will apply lessons learned from serving many other veterans . for example , one counselor said that , based on years of prior experience and observation , he has developed a better understanding of which local educational programs offer veterans the best chance for success and which do not . he said while he is able to apply his institutional knowledge and experience to do what is best for veterans , a less experienced counselor may not have the same level of knowledge , which could lead to inconsistent plans for veterans with similar circumstances . according to counselors we interviewed , because of the recent hiring of new counselors to meet caseload targets , differences in vr&e experience among counselors may be more pronounced at this time . regional office variation . differences in administrative policies specific to individual regional offices may also contribute to inconsistent plan development . for example , according to program officials , to ensure the soundness of employment plans in the local labor market , some regional offices require management to approve plans involving a master's degree , while others do not . counselors in one region told us that requiring management approval might dissuade a counselor from developing a plan focused on a master's degree because of the time the extra step would require . they acknowledged that this sort of approval policy could cause inconsistency across counselors' plans and also cause a discrepancy in the number of master's degree programs being approved at one regional office versus another . in general , the large number of variables involved in the development of employment plans may complicate the ability to determine the extent to which differences among counselors lead to inconsistent plans among veterans . judgment and bias . the counseling role is inherently subjective and requires counselors to use their professional judgment in each case . the vr&e operations manual describes counselors' responsibilities in broad terms , stating that counselors are to guide and assist the veteran in making an informed decision on an appropriate plan based on the veteran's abilities , aptitudes , and interests . according to counselors we interviewed , professional judgment enables them to develop a plan that is best suited for the veteran's unique needs , although it also introduces the potential for personal bias and inconsistent plans for veterans with similar circumstances .