this occurred in several cases that we reviewed . in other cases , contracting officers employed pricing experts from the defense contract management agency and the defense contract audit agency to help them analyze costs and / or prices . such officials lent substantial expertise and experience to the negotiation process by performing audits and reviews of the contractor's purchasing systems , estimating systems , overhead rates , and operations in general . in some cases , government and contractor personnel worked collaboratively and effectively within integrated product teams to analyze costs and prices . in doing so , they shared and used the same data to come to a consensus on issues affecting contract price . this arrangement also served to minimize the development of adversarial relationships between the contractor and the government . another factor that could lower risk is the contractor's having sound estimating and purchasing systems — ones approved by government organizations . such systems are integral to producing credible proposals . nearly all of the contractors in the cases that we reviewed had such systems , and in a few cases , allowed government representatives direct access to the data within the systems . specific examples highlighting risk factors are provided in the figure below . dod's guidance on the waiver process is not adequate . our scope and methodology are discussed in appendix i . historically , a principal concern in noncompetitive contracting situations has been how to ensure that the prices proposed by contractors are fair and reasonable . recognizing this risk , the congress enacted the truth in negotiations act in 1962 . the act represents the government's key safeguard against inflated contract prices on noncompetitive contracts . the act requires contractors and subcontractors to provide the government with cost or pricing data supporting their proposed prices and to certify that the data are accurate , complete , and current . if the government later discovers that the contractor submitted data that were not accurate , complete , and current , the act allows the government to pursue remedies , such as a reduction in the contract price . interest and penalties can also be assessed under certain conditions . these provisions are designed to give the government the information it needs to ensure fair and reasonable contract prices . the negotiation process with certified cost or pricing data can be lengthy , and the documentation requirements for both sides can be extensive . the process starts when the contractor provides estimated costs for subcontracts and materials along with a detailed breakdown of the work to be performed , including estimated manufacturing labor costs , engineering costs , tooling costs , and other direct costs for each segment of the work . as figure 1 shows , dod contracting officers then review these data along with price analysts from the defense contract management agency and auditors from the defense contract audit agency . the government and the contractor then negotiate cost elements to settle on a price . once this is done , the contractor certifies the data as accurate , complete , and current . dod may conduct an audit after the contract's award .