data . consistent with best practices , cs used historical data to estimate key operational costs . cs performed cross - checks on its data by having program staff verify assumptions in new estimates against historical data , and developed a computer program to check for common errors . however , salaries for locally employed staff ( les ) vary widely , which causes uncertainty in the cost estimate . documentation . in some cases , we required the guidance of cs budget analysts to identify backup support because the documentation was insufficient to allow someone unfamiliar with the budget to locate detailed corroborating data . the budget documentation did not provide a step - by - step description of the budgeting process , methods , or sources . ita staff said that documenting and chronicling the information that was used to create it would be a best practice they aspire to but is not something they currently do . presenting to management for approval . cs presented the budget to department - level officials in the department of commerce as well as to omb and the house appropriations committee . however , we were unable to obtain any documentation of what was presented at the briefings , so we could not determine whether it contained enough detail for management to understand the level of accuracy , completeness , and quality of the estimate . best practices for accuracy include appropriate methodology for developing the point estimate , and updating the estimate to reflect actual costs and changes . point estimate . cs officials used relevant historical cost data and considered adjustments for general inflation when estimating costs . they varied their estimation methodologies as appropriate for different situations . however , although they were aware that salaries were their largest cost driver , they used an overly simplistic averaging approach to reflect likely new staff salaries at hiring . additionally , since cs did not perform a risk analysis , it is not possible to know whether its point estimate was the most likely actual reflection of costs , or was overly optimistic or conservative . we found no mathematical mistakes in the request , and cs validated the request by looking for errors . however , cs did not share changes to the cost estimate with us , so we were unable to assess whether changes were properly updated . best practices for credibility include conducting a sensitivity analysis and conducting a risk analysis . sensitivity analysis . matchmaking . cs organizes and participates in trade events and forums , and introduces u.s. businesses to qualified overseas agents , distributors , end users , and other partners . advocacy services . cs alerts u.s. firms to major overseas projects and procurement , and advocates on behalf of u.s. firms bidding on projects . cs has about 300 staff members in u.s . export assistance centers ( useac ) located throughout the united states who work with firms that are new to exporting or want to expand their exporting efforts . useacs provide counseling and planning services , such as working with firms to select target markets and develop marketing plans .