all states and the district have submitted their certifications . according to dot officials , the department has concluded that the form of each certification is consistent with the additional guidance . while dot has concluded that the form of the revised certifications is consistent with the additional guidance , it is evaluating the states' method of calculating the amounts they planned to expend for the covered programs and the reasonableness of these numbers . recipients are not expected to report on the employment impact on materials suppliers ( “indirect” jobs ) or on the local community ( “induced” jobs ) . the omb guidance also provides additional instruction on estimating the number of jobs created and retained by recovery act funding . omb's guidance on the implementation of recipient reporting should be helpful in addressing answers to many of the questions and concerns raised by state and local program officials . however , federal agencies may need to do a better job of communicating the omb guidance in a timely manner to their state counterparts and , as appropriate , issue clarifying guidance on required performance measurement . the new compliance supplement is intended to focus auditor risk assessment on recovery act funding by , among things ( 1 ) requiring that auditors specifically ask auditees about and be alert to expenditure of funds provided by the recovery act , and ( 2 ) providing an appendix that highlights some areas of the recovery act impacting single audits . the appendix adds a requirement that large programs and program clusters with recovery act funding cannot be assessed as low - risk for the purposes of program selection without clear documentation of the reasons they are considered low risk . it also calls for recipients to separately identify expenditures for recovery act programs on the schedule of expenditures of federal awards . omb issued compliance supplement addendum no . 1 on august 6 , 2009 to provide additional guidance for programs ( including clusters of programs with expenditures of recovery act funds ) . this addendum modifies the 2009 compliance supplement by indicating the new recovery act programs and new program clusters , providing new cross - cutting provisions related to the recovery act programs , and adding additional compliance requirements for existing programs as a result of recovery act funding . omb circular a - 133 relies heavily on the amount of federal expenditures in a program during a fiscal year and whether findings were reported in the previous period to determine whether detailed compliance testing is required for that year . although omb is using clusters for single audit selection to make it more likely that recovery act programs would be selected as major programs subject to internal control and compliance testing , the dollar formulas for determining major programs have not changed . this approach may not provide sufficient assurance that smaller , but nonetheless significant , recovery act - funded programs would be selected for audit . the objective is to provide onsite assistance and to direct questions to the appropriate federal official . omb is also establishing a call center for entities that do not have an on - site federal liaison .