( recommendation 2 ) . we refer to these bands as licensed spectrum . in some frequency bands , fcc authorizes unlicensed use of spectrum bands — generally referred to as unlicensed spectrum — that is , users do not need to obtain a license to use spectrum . rather , users of unlicensed devices can share frequencies on a non - interference basis , such as with home wireless networks , cordless phones , and garage door openers . in addition , fcc supports federal emergency - communications activities . ntia is responsible for establishing policy on regulating federal spectrum use , assigning spectrum bands to government agencies , and maintaining spectrum use databases . additionally , like fcc , ntia participates in federal emergency communications activities . officials in each of these countries told us that european spectrum planning is complicated by the number of countries that share borders . germany , for example , borders nine other countries . as each country is responsible for its own spectrum planning , if their plans are not closely coordinated , there is a potential for cross - border interference . ntia also determines what spectrum bands reserved for the federal government can be made available for commercial use . in managing spectrum , one factor that fcc and ntia consider is the potential for interference . see appendix i for completed scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from august 2016 to november 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . spectrum is a natural resource used to provide a variety of communication services to businesses and consumers , as well as federal , state , and local governments . businesses and consumers use spectrum for a variety of wireless services including mobile voice and data , wifi - and bluetooth - enabled devices , broadcast television , radio , and satellite services . federal , state , and local governments' uses of spectrum include national defense , law enforcement communication , air - traffic control , weather services , military radar , and first responder communications . iot applications that rely on spectrum are highly diverse and include connected vehicles , devices in the home , and personal mobile devices . iot devices communicate using wireless networks , including wide area networks that use cellular networks to cover large areas ( eg , cellular transmission ) , local area networks that cover about 100 meters ( eg , wi - fi within a house ) , and personal networks covering about 10 meters ( eg , bluetooth inside a room ) ( see fig . each of these wireless devices , like other wireless iot devices , communicates using spectrum , and the number of connected devices is expected to increase . in 2013 , the number of devices connected to the internet globally was estimated to be over 9 billion .