aoc agreed with our recommendations and initiated corrective actions . however , follow - up work that we did in early 2005 at aoc's request indicated the corrective actions had not yet fully eliminated errors in reporting . aoc agreed that continued action on our recommendations was essential . both aoc and its construction management contractor prepare monthly progress reports on cvc . aoc relies heavily on its contractor for the information it puts into its own reports , which it sends to congress . we have found that aoc's reports have sometimes failed to identify problems , such as cost increases and schedule delays . this has resulted in certain “expectation gaps” within congress . we have suggested to aoc that its reports could be more helpful to congress if , for example , they discussed critical issues facing the project and important upcoming decisions . these inaccuracies resulted in both overstatements and understatements of rates . for instance , the contractor reported a rate of 6.3 injuries and illnesses for april 2004 , whereas our analysis identified 12.5 . the construction management contractor attributed the inaccuracies to key data missing from its calculations , unawareness of a formula change that began in 2002 , mathematical errors , and poor communication with the major construction contractors . according to our analysis , the rates for injuries and illnesses and for lost time were higher for cvc than for comparable construction sites . for 2003 , the injury and illness rate was about 50 percent higher , and the lost - time rate was about 160 percent higher . additionally , both the numbers and the rates for injuries and illnesses and for lost time worsened from 2003 to 2004 . for example , the injury and illness rate increased from 9.1 in 2003 to 12.2 in 2004 , and the lost - time rate increased from 8.1 to 10.4 . aoc and its contractors have taken some actions to promote and manage safety on the site , such as conducting monthly safety audits and making recommendations to improve safety . however , at the time of our review , neither aoc nor its construction management contractor had analyzed the results of the monthly safety audits to identify trends or concerns , and neither had reviewed the safety audit findings in conjunction with the injury and illness data . our analysis of key safety audit data for the first 10 months of 2004 identified about 700 safety concerns , the most frequent of which was inadequate protection against falls . furthermore , aoc had not fully exercised its authority to have the contractors take corrective actions to address recurring safety concerns . we recommended that , to improve safety and reporting , aoc ensure the collection and reporting of accurate injury and illness and lost - time data , work with its contractors to develop a mechanism for analyzing the data and identifying corrective actions , and more fully exercise its authority to take appropriate enforcement actions when warranted . aoc has been making improvements to its monthly reports and has agreed to continue doing so . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . we would be happy to answer questions that you and other subcommittee members may have .