we support this approach . in previous gao products , we have observed that doing compliance studies once every few years does not give irs or others information about what is happening in the intervening years , and that a rolling sample should reduce costs by eliminating the need to plan entirely new studies every few years or more and train examiners to carry them out . compliance research in this way will also give congress , irs , and other stakeholders more frequent and more current information about irs's progress towards its long term compliance goals . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . we would be happy to respond to questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact james r. white , director , strategic issues , at 202-512-9910 or whitej@gao.gov or david a. powner , director , information technology management issues at 202-512-9296 or powenrd@gao.gov . contacts for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include joanna stamatiades , assistant director ; amy dingler ; timothy d. hopkins ; robyn howard ; matthew kalmuk ; david l. lewis ; frederick lyles ; jennifer mcdonald ; signora may ; veronica mayhand ; paul b. middleton ; sabine r. paul ; cheryl peterson ; neil pinney ; shellee soliday ; and tina l. younger . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . other preparers vary in their backgrounds . some have extensive training and experience and others do not . in 2003 we reported to this committee that while many taxpayers who used paid preparers believed they benefited from doing so , some were poorly served . last year we reported to this committee on errors made by commercial chain preparers , including the results of undercover visits to 19 locations . in our visits to 19 outlets of several commercial chain preparers , we found that paid preparers made mistakes in every one of our visits , with tax consequences that were sometimes significant . the errors resulted in unwarranted extra refunds of up to almost $2,000 in five instances , while in two cases they cost the taxpayer over $1,500 . some of the most serious problems involved preparers not reporting business income in 10 of 19 cases ; not asking about where a child lived or ignoring our answer to the question and , therefore , claiming an ineligible child for the earned income tax credit in 5 out of the 10 applicable cases ; failing to take the most advantageous postsecondary education tax benefit in 3 out of the 9 applicable cases ; and failing to itemize deductions at all or failing to claim all available deductions in 7 out of the 9 applicable cases .