this guidance was designed to help ensure inclusivity . a broad list of identified risks can help provide a solid basis for assessing and mitigating the susceptibility of project implementation to uncertain conditions facing the decennial program . this can help the bureau make informed decisions to help control cost . standards for internal controls in the federal government call for management to document in its policies or day - to - day procedures the responsibilities needed to attain its objectives . clear guidance on what risks are being accounted for and how those are communicated through the cost estimation process will help ensure that resulting cost estimates reflect the best information available . one of the objectives of a robust cost estimation process is to determine the uncertainty of the cost estimate with an understanding of how much of that uncertainty is introduced by significant risks . this includes knowing what risks , if any , have been accounted for as part of any supporting sensitivity analysis or later management evaluation of risk and uncertainty . however , we found the bureau had no guidance , policies , or procedures in place on how to account for risk , develop boundaries around key assumptions , or determine contingencies . furthermore , subject matter specialists did not receive training or other guidance on what risks , if any , they were to consider as part of their support of the cost estimation process ; how to incorporate , document , or communicate what they had accounted for ; or how they would account for uncertainty within the assumptions . in addition , specialists used a variety of methods to account for risk and uncertainty in the cost assumptions they were responsible for , but there was no standard methodology for doing this . more information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from november 2015 to june 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . our work on the bureau's 2010 census life - cycle cost estimate found that it was not reliable , because it lacked adequate documentation and was not comprehensive , accurate , or credible . for example , in our 2008 report on the bureau's cost estimation process , bureau officials were unable to provide documentation that supported the assumptions for the initial 2001 life - cycle cost estimate as well as the updates . we reported that without improvements to the cost estimation process , the bureau's ability to effectively manage operations would be hampered and congress's ability to oversee the 2010 census would be constrained . consequently , we recommended that the bureau establish guidance , policies , and procedures for conducting cost estimation that would meet best practices criteria . the bureau agreed with the recommendation and said at the time that it already had efforts underway to improve its future cost estimation methods and systems .