, gdufa i ) . while the primary objective of gdufa i was to restructure fda's generic drug program to improve the speed and predictability of reviews , the primary objective for gdufa ii , as outlined in the proposed commitment letter negotiated by fda and the generic drug industry , is to improve the completeness of drug application submissions and reduce the number of review cycles . other features include enhanced review pathways for complex drugs , enhanced accountability and reporting , and modifications to the user fee structure . fda officials said that the agency has plans to expand the use of the platform in the future to track additional incoming submissions , such as reports of drug shortages and applications for brand - name drugs . according to fda officials , the launch of the platform has provided the following benefits to fda and to stakeholders: ( 1 ) faster review times , ( 2 ) easier collaboration and communication with industry , ( 3 ) improved application review consistency , and ( 4 ) more predictable application review times and target completion dates due to having all pertinent information regarding an application in one location that is accessible to all fda reviewers . as part of fda's gdufa commitments to streamline the review process , the agency took steps to change how it communicates with generic drug applicants . according to fda officials , prior to gdufa , deficiency letters were sent to applicants by specific types of reviewers within cder — such as labeling reviewers or chemistry reviewers — in an uncoordinated fashion , making it difficult for applicants to obtain a comprehensive picture of their application's status . starting in fiscal year 2013 , fda committed to consolidating all application deficiencies into one letter to the applicant , called a complete response letter . according to fda officials , this systemic approach to provide a single deficiency letter was one of the biggest changes the agency made to the review process since the enactment of gdufa . additionally , in september 2013 , ogd issued guidance that established regulatory project managers as the central point of contact for each application throughout its lifecycle . fda officials said that regulatory project managers are also responsible for overseeing the review of each application across all disciplines . prior to gdufa , fda officials said that no one individual at the agency had responsibility for an application throughout its entire lifecycle . fda has also issued new and revised guidance documents to educate applicants about changes to the generic drug application review process made in response to gdufa . according to fda officials , since fiscal year 2013 fda has issued 31 new and revised draft or final guidance documents related to the application review process . additionally , officials said that fda has also issued almost 600 new or revised product - specific recommendations to assist the applicants with identifying the most appropriate methodology for developing generic drugs and generating evidence needed to support application approval . fda has made additional refinements to its application review program in response to applicant concerns about program changes .