omb's circular no . a - 11 guidance specifies that lease obligations be recorded when the contract is signed ; sufficient budget authority must be available at that time to cover the obligation . however , the obligated amount that is to be recorded differs by type of lease . for capital leases and lease purchases , omb circular a - 11 states that the amount obligated should equal the net present value of these lease payments over the full term of the lease . what have been the experiences of agencies using their eul authority ? va's leaseback costs are nearly $16 million annually ( see table 3 ) , but va and cbo disagree on the extent to which va should account for the budget impacts for euls that could include long - term government commitments . to answer these questions , we reviewed prior gao reports on enhanced - use leasing and capital financing and identified agencies as candidates for a detailed review of eul use . to identify candidate agencies , we used federal real property profile data ; the general services administration's ( gsa ) 2008 document real property authorities for federal agencies ; a prior gao report on enhanced use leasing ; and interviews with officials at the four agencies that indicated they use euls — the the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the department of state ( state ) , and the department of agriculture ( usda ) . we reviewed relevant documentation related to these agencies' enhanced use leasing , including laws providing agencies with eul authority , and agencies' eul guidance . we also interviewed agency officials involved with developing and managing euls . we chose a sample of 16 euls from among the four agencies to review as case studies . we selected this sample to represent a variety of ( 1 ) lease purposes ( eg , leasing vacant land for development and leasing unused office space ) ; ( 2 ) estimated financial benefits ( eg , cash benefits and in - kind consideration ) ; and ( 3 ) geographic locations . we conducted site visits at nine of the 16 case study locations to observe the properties.nasa's ames research center in moffett field , california ; va sites in maryland , new jersey , and washington ; and a usda agricultural research center in beltsville , maryland . we interviewed agency officials and lessees about their experiences with euls at these locations . in addition , we interviewed state officials about that department's euls for properties located in istanbul , turkey ; paris , france ; and singapore . see appendix ii for a list of case studies and descriptions of the properties and lessee uses . we reviewed the agreements between va and its lessees and the past work of the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the va's office of inspector general on va's euls in chicago , illinois ; north chicago , illinois ; and mountain home , tennessee .