( see app . u.s. support for lebanese forces has included a variety of assistance , including training , equipment , and sustainment , as shown in figure 2 . state and dod reported that they obligated nearly $1.5 billion in security assistance funding for lebanon in fiscal years 2013 through 2018 . the largest security assistance programs were state's foreign military financing program , which provides grants and loans to foreign governments for the acquisition of u.s. defense equipment , services , and training , and dod's global train and equip program , which funds training and equipment for foreign military forces to conduct counterterrorism operations and enhance maritime and border security . these two programs collectively accounted for nearly 80 percent of assistance . state provided about 56 percent of the overall funding and dod contributed 44 percent , as shown in figure 3 . dod and state are required to conduct end - use monitoring ( eum ) for some of the equipment provided to lebanon . we reviewed agency documentation , including a risk assessment , an interagency memo , and state memos requesting the release of funding . we reviewed what safeguards state and dod use to limit the risk of u.s. security assistance benefitting terrorist organizations , but did not analyze how the agencies made determinations when applying these safeguards . to evaluate to what extent state and dod conducted eum checks of equipment provided to lebanese security forces , we reviewed agency documentation and data and interviewed state and dod officials in washington , dc and beirut , lebanon . in 1996 , congress amended the arms export control act to require the president to establish a program for monitoring the end - use of defense articles and defense services sold , leased , or exported under the act , including through foreign military sales , foreign military financing , or the foreign assistance act of 1961 . the law requires that the program be designed to provide reasonable assurances that recipients are complying with restrictions imposed by the u.s. government on the use , transfer , and security of defense articles and defense services , and that such articles and services are being used for the purposes for which they are provided . dod's defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) is responsible for eum for foreign military sales . the president is also required to take all reasonable steps to ensure that equipment made available to foreign countries for international narcotics control under the foreign assistance act are used only in ways consistent with the purposes for which such equipment was made available . state's inl implements this requirement through its end - use monitoring program . dsca administers the golden sentry program , which dod uses to comply with requirements related to the end - use of defense articles and services transferred to foreign governments . dod officials at the office of defense cooperation - beirut conduct the eum activities established and overseen by dsca . dsca's policy manual for eum , the security assistance management manual , and the associated standard operating procedures for beirut require dod officials to , among other things , conduct two levels of monitoring: routine eum and enhanced eum .