on state decisions . as directed by ppaca , ffes must carry out the same functions as exchanges established and operated by a state . the federal government bears responsibility for establishing and operating ffes ; however , in establishing the framework within which an ffe in a particular state will be established and operated , cms has provided states the option to assist with certain ffe operations . cms refers to ffes in these states as partnership exchanges . states seeking to operate a state - based exchange were required to submit an application to cms containing attestations regarding when the state would complete specific required activities cms deemed essential to operating an exchange . states electing not to establish a state - based exchange , but seeking to participate in a partnership exchange were required to complete an abbreviated version of that application tailored to the particular activities that the state would assist the ffe to carry out . on the basis of this documentation , cms conditionally approved states to establish a state - based exchange or to participate in a partnership exchange on the basis that they complete the required activities by certain dates , among other steps necessary for the operation of an exchange . states electing not to establish a state - based exchange or participate in a partnership exchange were not required to submit an application to cms . as the required start of health plan enrollment draws near , an important question is whether cms will have ffes ready to begin accepting applications by october 1 , 2013 , and fully operational by january 1 , 2014 . you asked us to examine the federal government's role and preparedness to establish ffes and the data hub , and the sources and amounts of funding used by the federal government to carry out preparatory activities . in this report , we describe 1. the federal government's role in establishing ffes for operation in 2014 and state participation in that effort , 2. the status of federal and state actions taken and planned for ffes and the data hub , and 3 . cms spending to support establishment of ffes and the data hub . to describe the federal government's role in establishing ffes for operation in 2014 and state participation in that effort , we reviewed regulations and guidance issued by cms in preparation for establishing the ffes . we examined documentation from cms indicating the activities that the federal government and states are expected to carry out for these exchanges . we also interviewed cms officials to clarify these documents and obtain updated information on the evolving decisions related to federal and state activities in specific areas . to describe the status of federal and state actions taken and planned for ffes and the data hub , we examined planning documents used by cms to track the implementation of key activities to be conducted by the federal government to establish ffes and the data hub . in particular , we reviewed a february 22 , 2013 , timeline used by cms to track the activities that remained to be completed before the implementation of the exchanges .