the situation continues . dyncorp officials told us that it nearly suspended the eradication program because of a shortage of funds in 2002 . but because of delays in training colombian army helicopter mechanics and pilots , dyncorp used funds allocated for that program to continue the aerial eradication program . further , dyncorp officials told us they also have had to delay ordering needed parts because of the lack of funds . some of these parts — especially those for the older aircraft , such as the ov - 10 spray planes and uh - 1n helicopters that accompany the spray planes — are in short supply and could be difficult to acquire . if the parts are not available when needed , the aircraft cannot operate . office of aviation's funding comes from several state / inl sources , including the andean counterdrug initiative account , the international narcotics control and law enforcement account , and supplemental appropriations . however , although some of the andean counterdrug initiative funds are designated for the office of aviation , the funds are divided among multiple country budgets and managed by each country's nas . as a result , the office of aviation has to request those funds from the respective nas director , which may adversely affect those programs . in fiscal year 2003 , state / inl reprogrammed more than $5 million from programs in bolivia , peru , and pakistan to fund the office of aviation program in colombia . in addition , the nas director in colombia told us that sometimes other funding priorities — such as the narcotics interdiction program — conflicted with office of aviation program needs and delayed funding for the aerial eradication program . furthermore , state / inl often does not receive funds for its programs , including the aerial eradication program , until months after the start of the fiscal year . for instance , fiscal year 2004 funds were not available until mid - june 2004 because of the time needed to address congressional inquiries about how state / inl proposed to use the funding . state / inl officials said they have used prior year funds or moved funds from one project to another to satisfy the most critical needs until all funds are available . these officials stated that the safety of their operations has not been compromised but added that the uncertainty over funding availability has caused an administrative burden . in june 2004 , our report on federal aircraft fleet management also noted weaknesses in state / inl's planning process . we reported that state / inl had not developed a long - term fleet acquisition plan or performed a cost - benefit analysis that considered long - range aircraft replacement , mission support , and other related costs . in addition , inl had not performed a life - cycle cost analysis of its aircraft , estimated future long - term mission requirements , or identified the aircraft best - suited to meet those requirements . as a result , according to state / inl officials , state has delayed requesting funding for additional aircraft . finally , in october 2003 , a state / inl internal review team began examining the office of aviation's programs .