specifically , 10 u.s.c . in addition , dod agreed with two of the report's recommendations and partially agreed with the third , and indicated that it had begun or was planning on taking actions to address all of them . in response to our recommendation that dod follow through on its plans to develop and incorporate clear and specific guidance in the fuds program manual as to how , when , and to what extent coordination with regulators should take place , including during the preliminary assessment of eligibility phase and for ordnance and explosive waste projects , dod indicated that it is in the process of addressing this issue . specifically , the corps is revising the fuds program manual as an engineering regulation that will include step - by - step procedures for regulatory coordination at each phase of fuds cleanup , including the preliminary assessment of eligibility process , and for unexploded ordnance projects . dod also indicated that it is taking actions that should address our recommendations that dod assess the impact of recent corps' efforts to improve coordination through actions such as the management action plan pilot program and incorporate the successful components as requirements into its fuds guidance . dod is also assessing practices that individual corps districts have used to coordinate with regulators and developing a list of best practices for dissemination and use throughout the corps . ( see table 1. ) for additional survey results , such as the percent of cases where respondents felt there wasn't any coordination or gave “don't know” responses , see appendix ii . despite the greater coordination for projects addressing hazardous substances , the corps is not involving the states consistently . for example , for projects addressing hazardous substances , the corps is required by law to inform states before starting each phase of any action and to provide states an opportunity to review and comment on proposed cleanup actions . in the past , states were only notified after the fact about the results of preliminary assessments of eligibility ; however , the corps said that although not required in its current guidance , its current practice is to coordinate all new preliminary assessments of eligibility with states . subsequently , according to fuds program officials in 12 of the 27 states we contacted , there has been some improvement in overall corps coordination during the preliminary assessment of eligibility over the last 3 years . in particular , those states told us that while the corps is still not required to coordinate with them during its preliminary assessments of eligibility , it has been doing a better job of providing them with draft and final reports on the outcomes of preliminary assessments of eligibility . over approximately the last 3 years , states have noted an overall improvement in the corps' coordination with them . for example , fuds program officials in 20 of the 27 states we contacted reported that , overall , corps coordination with them has improved during this time .