correcting the data . for example , officials from california explained that spra changed some of the numbers entered by local areas for wiasrd variable 325 — employment and training programs related to food stamps — to zeros because the numbers entered seemed too high . according to the state officials , the numbers for that variable entered by the local areas were correct . states , however , are generally not provided an opportunity to review and verify spra's changes before they are made , as they only receive copies of the data issues reports after they are published . what actions has dol taken to improve the quality of participant data ? gao - 07-1051t ; gao - 06-82 . inspector general and representatives of two national workforce - related organizations . to better understand the challenges faced by states in reporting data on these wia programs , we visited or telephoned dol's employment and training administration's ( eta ) six regional offices and a nongeneralizable sample of eight states . within each state , we visited or contacted at least one comprehensive american job center — formerly known as a one - stop center — or a local workforce board . we selected the states to provide diversity on the basis of: ( 1 ) geographic location , ( 2 ) total federal spending on the adult and dislocated worker programs in program year 2010 , ( 3 ) the extent of data issues identified by dol's data contractor in the fourth quarter of program year 2010 , ( 4 ) whether the state reported participants who received only core “self - service,” and ( 5 ) the number of local areas within the state . we analyzed data for program year 2011 because they were the most recent full year of wiasrd data available when we conducted our review . program year 2011 ran from july 1 2011 through june 30 2012. estimates for the number of , characteristics of , and services provided to participants whose information is recorded by dol as having been served by the wia adult or dislocated worker program . however , we did not find those data to be reliable for other purposes such as making state - to - state comparisons because of variations in how states collect and report participant data for the wia adult and dislocated worker programs . see appendix i for additional information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from august 2012 through november 2013 in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit work to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . wia requires states and local areas to bring together a number of federally funded employment and training programs into a comprehensive workforce investment system , the american job center network . these programs — including the adult and dislocated worker programs — are known as mandatory partners , and must provide services through this network ( see tab .