tooling . the jsf program recently increased its estimate of tooling costs due to the inclusion of additional tooling requirements and estimating methodology changes . this change is ongoing , and has not yet been included in official program estimates . according to a recent press report , a lockheed martin official stated that the full requirement to support procurement by our allies was not adequately factored into prior tooling estimates . the program estimates the additional cost through 2015 at about $2.1 billion . deferred capabilities . cost and performance trade - offs during development have resulted in some requirements being deleted from the program cost estimate and deferred until later years . this includes a number of planned capabilities dropped from the final block of development software . the program office has not quantified the cost of these deferred capabilities , and the costs are not reflected anywhere in the program office's life - cycle cost estimate . naval air systems command ( navair ) officials told us that the total deferred amount could be in the billions of dollars . we note that prior acquisitions such as the global hawk and f - 22a programs also deferred requirements that would later need additional funding . for example , we reported in 2005 that the global hawk program costs did not include $400.6 million in known additional procurement costs for sensors , ground station enhancements , and other items required to achieve the system's initial full - up capability . these costs had been in the program baseline but were later deferred and reclassified because of cost pressures and schedule changes . similarly , the air force's $5.9 billion modernization and reliability improvement program includes capabilities deferred from the acquisition program and reliability enhancements needed to correct deficiencies and achieve the level of reliability that was supposed to be accomplished during acquisition . estimates are accurate when they are based on an assessment of the costs most likely to be incurred . therefore , when costs change , best practices require that the estimate be updated to reflect changes in technical or program assumptions and new phases or milestones . dod's cost analysis improvement group found that the assumptions the jsf program office used for weight growth , staffing head counts , commonality savings for cousin ( similar ) parts , and outsourced labor rate savings could be too optimistic , given the program's complexity . with three variants and three engines ( cruise , alternate , and lift ) in development , multiple customers , and more than double the amount of operational flight software than the f - 22a and four times that of the f / a - 18e / f , the jsf acquisition program is substantially more complex than those contemporary systems , and therefore may not merit assumptions that are even as optimistic as the historical data for those programs . the following table shows some major differences in assumptions used by the program office and the caig in estimating jsf costs . jsf program officials told us that they use lockheed martin earned value management data in creating their estimate of jsf development costs .