activity . for example , a threat assessment of stored value cards by treasury stated the following: “the 9 / 11 hijackers opened u.s. bank accounts , had face - to - face dealings with bank employees , signed signature cards and received wire transfers , all of which left financial footprints . law enforcement was able to follow the trail , identify the hijackers and trace them back to their terror cells and confederates abroad . had the 9 / 11 terrorists used prepaid cards to cover their expenses , none of these financial footprints would have been available. while depository institutions are required to file suspicious activity reports ( sar ) for stored value transactions , fincen does not require msbs to do so.82,,83 84 although some msbs may file sars related to stored value as part of their anti - money laundering programs or on a voluntary basis , the fact that suspicious activity involving stored value does not have to be reported by all financial institutions heightens the risk that cross - border currency smuggling or the illegal use of stored value may go undetected or unreported . the usa patriot act of 2001 , pub . 107-56 , 115 stat . 272 ( oct. 26 , 2001 ) , expanded sar reporting requirements to include nondepository institutions . however , under 31 c.f.r . § 103.20 ( a ) ( 5 ) , money services businesses are not required to file suspicious activity reports for transactions that involve solely the issuance , or facilitation of the transfer of stored value , or the issuance , sale , or redemption of stored value . § 103.18 , which discusses the filing of suspicious activity reports by banks , there is no exemption for stored value transactions . for transactions other than stored value , msbs are generally required to file a suspicious activity report when a transaction is conducted or attempted by , at , or through a msb , involves or aggregates funds or other assets of at least $2,000 , and the msb knows , suspects , or has reason to suspect that the transactions or pattern of transactions: involves funds derived from illegal activities or is intended or conducted in order to hide or disguise funds or assets derived from illegal activity as part of a plan to violate or evade any federal law , regulation or reporting requirement under federal law or regulation ; are designed to evade bsa requirements or other financial reporting requirements ; have no business or apparent lawful purpose ; or involve the use of the msb to facilitate criminal activity . criminals . for example , in february 2009 , we reported that law enforcement agencies in the department of justice and dhs use sars in their investigations of money laundering , terrorist financing , and other financial crimes . in one example , a bank - filed sar began an investigation that resulted in the discovery of a predatory certificate of deposit fraud scheme . the sar narrative described critical elements of the crime in detail and law enforcement and prosecutors in this case noted that the sar proved instrumental in ending the scheme .