faa . obtaining port authority funding for itws establishing an ongoing capacity are under way . new approach procedures are under development . new york to reduce operating restrictions and conflicts with other area airports prototype itws while faa develops a production system that is planned for installation in 2002 . what effect are these initiatives likely to have on reducing delays ? what other options are available to address delay problems ? our work involved extensive consultation with various stakeholder groups in the aviation community , including airlines , airports , local governments , industry associations , employee organizations , federal regulatory agencies , and aviation researchers . we contacted officials from dot , faa , 8 major airlines , and 18 large airports that experience major congestion and delays to identify the main initiatives planned or under way to address congestion and delay problems . as we were conducting our work , faa released a plan , called the operational evolution plan , incorporating many of these initiatives , and we focused much of our remaining efforts on analyzing this plan . our gathering of information and faa's issuance of the operational evolution plan both occurred before the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , and the initiatives that actually move forward as well as the plan itself are subject to change . to assess the likely impact that current and planned initiatives will have on reducing delays , we relied on the extensive body of work we have conducted on aviation over the past decade , the views of faa and other stakeholders , and evaluations and studies conducted by other researchers . we used these same types of sources in identifying other measures for addressing delay problems . appendix i explains our scope and methodology in more detail . in 2000 , an unprecedented number of delays and cancellations in commercial airline flights occurred . at 31 of the nation's busiest airports , 28 percent of the domestic flights arrived late . certain flights were almost always late ; for example , in december 2000 , 146 regularly scheduled flights were late 80 percent or more of the time . the percentage of delayed flights declined to 24 percent in the first 6 months of 2001 . according to faa and others , the decline likely reflected various factors , such as better weather , fewer flying passengers because of the economic slowdown , a strike that idled one carrier's aircraft for several months , a reduced demand on the system , and actions taken to better manage the nation's airways . the september 11 terrorist hijacking of four commercial airliners has further contributed to a drop in air passengers and scheduled flights , with major airlines cutting the number of flights by 20 percent or more and one carrier , midway airlines , ceasing operations entirely . although recent events may have moved airport congestion off center stage as a major national issue , delays remain a pervasive problem , in part because of the interdependence of the nation's airports . the effect of delays can quickly spread beyond those airports where delays tend to occur most often , such as new york's la guardia , chicago o'hare , newark , and atlanta hartsfield .