noting this issue , we are undertaking work for the congress . we are continuing to monitor the agency's efforts to address these shortcomings . interior oversees and manages the nation's publicly owned natural resources , including parks , wildlife habitat , and crude oil and natural gas resources on over 500 million acres onshore and in the waters of the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) . in this capacity , interior is authorized to lease federal fossil and renewable energy resources and to collect the royalties associated with their production . these substantial revenues are disbursed to 38 states , 41 indian tribes , interior's office of trust funds management on behalf of some 30,000 individual indian royalty owners , and to u.s. treasury accounts . royalties paid for fossil and renewable resources extracted from leased lands represent the principal source of the $12.6 billion in revenues managed by mms — $10.7 billion , more than 85 percent of revenues received in fiscal year 2006 . of these , oil and natural gas leases are the most significant component of royalties , composing on average nearly 90 percent of the royalties received over the past five years . for oil and gas , production royalties are paid either in value or in kind . the ocs lands act of 1953 , as amended , and the mineral leasing act of 1920 , as amended , authorize the collection of production royalties either in value or in kind for federal lands leased for development onshore and on the ocs . furthermore , according to mms , the terms of virtually all federal oil and gas leases provide for royalties to be paid in value or in kind at the discretion of the lessor . the energy policy act of 2005 provides additional statutory requirements to support the operation and funding of a program for managing federal oil and gas royalties in kind . additionally , mms also collects revenue generated by exploration and development of geothermal energy resources commonly used to generate electricity . until recently , the geothermal steam act of 1970 , as amended , directed mms to disburse royalties collected from geothermal energy development such that 50 percent of geothermal royalties be retained by the federal government and the other 50 percent be disbursed to the states in which the federal leases are located . a provision of the energy policy act of 2005 changed the distribution of the royalties collected from geothermal resources . while 50 percent of federal geothermal royalties must still be disbursed to the states in which the federal leases are located , an additional 25 percent must be disbursed to the counties in which the leases are located , leaving only 25 percent to the federal government . as assistant secretary allred of interior recently testified before the congress , the absence of price thresholds in leases issued in 1998 and 1999 has already cost the government almost $1 billion and mms has estimated a range of potential future foregone revenue for these leases of between $6.4 billion and $9.8 billion . mms calculated these estimates under a range of assumptions about oil and natural gas prices and future production levels . these deep water regions are particularly costly to explore and develop .