so a variety of measures should be considered . in addition , all adequacy measures depend significantly on what types of income are counted . in particular , noncash benefits such as medicare play a major role in sustaining standards of living for their beneficiaries . any examination of income adequacy should acknowledge the major role of noncash benefits and the needs they help support . second , given the currently projected long - term financial shortfall of the program , it is important to compare proposals to both benefits at currently promised levels and benefits funded at current tax levels . we have developed benchmark policy scenarios to illustrate the range of possible outcomes and used these benchmarks to examine the outlook for income adequacy . however , since our report was focused on income adequacy , it did not examine measures of individual equity , which should be balanced against adequacy measures . third , various approaches to benefit reductions , in particular , would have differing effects on adequacy . more progressive approaches to reducing monthly benefits would have a smaller effect on poverty rates , for example , than less progressive approaches . also , reductions that preserve current law benefits for survivors , disabled workers , and the very old would help minimize reductions to income adequacy , though they could place other beneficiaries at greater risk of poverty . today the social security program does not face an immediate crisis but rather a long - range and more fundamental financing problem driven largely by known demographic trends . the lack of an immediate solvency crisis changes the challenge , but it does not eliminate the need for action . acting sooner rather than later would allow changes to be phased in so the individuals who are most likely to be affected , namely younger and future workers , will have time to adjust their retirement planning while helping to avoid related “expectation gaps.” it is also important to put the overall federal budget on a sustainable footing over the long term , thereby promoting higher economic growth and more fiscal flexibility to finance other priorities . since there is a great deal of confusion about social security's current financing arrangements and the nature of its long - term financing problem , i'd like to spend some time describing the nature , timing , and extent of the financing problem . since social security will constitute claims on real resources in the future when it redeems assets to pay benefits , taking action now to increase the future pool of resources is important . as federal reserve chairman greenspan has said , the crucial issue of saving in our economy relates to our ability to build an adequate capital stock to produce enough goods and services in the future to accommodate both retirees and workers in the future . the most direct way we can raise national saving is by increasing government saving . saving a good portion of the surpluses would allow the federal government to reduce the debt overhang from past deficit spending , provide a strong foundation for future economic growth and enhance future budgetary flexibility .