training is not addressed by the treasury policy . compliance with the ansi standard: treasury policy states that major investments are to comply with ansi standards . further , it outlines processes and guidelines to assist its bureau in achieving ansi - compliant processes . however , the policy lacks sufficient detail for addressing some of the criteria defined in the standard , including the use of standard methods for evm data collection across the department and cost performance reporting . for example , the policy does not discuss the use of templates or tools to help ensure that evm data are collected consistently and reliably . furthermore , the policy does not discuss what cost performance report formats are to be used . until treasury's policy includes a methodology that standardizes data collection and reporting , data integrity and reliability may be in jeopardy and management may not be able to make informed decisions regarding the investments and its next steps . standard structure for defining the work products: treasury's evm policy calls for a product - oriented work breakdown structure that identifies and documents all activities associated with the investment . however , it does not require the use of common elements in its development . according to the cpic director , treasury's evm working group plans to establish rule sets , processes , and procedures for the development of work breakdown structures . until treasury's policy provides more guidance on the systematic development and documentation of work breakdown structures including the incorporation of standardized common elements , it will be difficult to ensure that the entire effort is consistently included in the work structure and that investments will be planned and managed appropriately . system surveillance: according to treasury's policy , the contractor's evm system is to be validated using the industry surveillance approach identified by the national defense industrial association's surveillance guide . additionally , treasury is to require clear evidence that the system continues to remain compliant or that the contractor has brought the system back into compliance . however , the policy lacks guidance on conducting surveillance reviews on the government's ( i.e. , the department's ) evm system . until treasury's policy specifies reviews of the government's systems , treasury risks not being able to effectively manage cost , schedule , and technical performance of its major investments . training requirements: treasury's policy does not specify evm training requirements for program management team members or senior executives . furthermore , the policy does not require the agency to maintain training logs confirming that all relevant staff have been appropriately trained . differences in these values are measured in both cost and schedule variances . cost variances compare the earned value of the completed work with the actual cost of the work performed . for example , if a contractor completed $5 million worth of work and the work actually cost $6.7 million , there would be a – $1.7 million cost variance . schedule variances are also measured in dollars , but they compare the earned value of the work completed with the value of work that was expected to be completed .