( see app . iii for a list of the uses of miscellaneous obligations by visn , and app . rent , commniction , nd tilitie inclding gas , electricity , wter , ewer , nd phone . supplie inclding dr , medicine , hopitsupplie , lood prodct , nd prothetic supplie . service inclding fee - bas phyicin , ning , dentl , hopitliztion , rerch , nd prothetic repir . according to vha contracting and fiscal service officials , using miscellaneous obligations tends to reduce administrative workload and facilitates the payment for contracted goods and services , including drugs , medicines , and transportation , and for goods and services for which no preexisting contracts exist , such as fee - basis medical and dental services and utilities . vha officials stated that miscellaneous obligations facilitate the payment for contracted goods and services when the quantities and delivery dates are not known . a miscellaneous obligation can be created for an estimated amount and then modified as specific quantities are needed or specific delivery dates are set . when a purchase order is created , however , the obligated amount cannot be changed without a modification of the purchase order . according to vha officials , the need to prepare numerous modifications to purchase orders could place an undue burden on the limited contracting personnel available at individual centers and could also require additional work on the part of fiscal services personnel . vha officials stated that the use of miscellaneous obligations can simplify the procurement process when no preexisting contract or purchase order exists . for example , providing medical care on a fee - basis to veterans outside of vha medical centers may involve the services of thousands of private physicians nationwide . attempting to negotiate a separate agreement or contract with each of these individuals would be a difficult task for vha's contracting staff . under the policies and procedures in place during fiscal year 2007 , vha centers could use miscellaneous obligations as umbrella authorizations for fee - based medical services performed by a number of different physicians . in effect , in cases for which there is no preexisting contract , the miscellaneous obligation form becomes the record of an obligation . however , use of miscellaneous obligations may also increase the risk of fraud , waste , and abuse . consequently , mitigating controls must be designed to help compensate for the lack of a negotiated contract . absent contractual terms , one risk area is the authorized fee schedule for the medical services being provided . in this case , federal regulations call for payments to non - va physicians for services associated with outpatient and inpatient care provided at non - va facilities to be the lesser of the amount billed or the amount calculated using the formula developed by the department of health and human services under medicare's participating physician fee schedule for the period in which the service is provided . however , we did not verify that vha officials were properly following the fee schedule . va policies and procedures were not designed to provide adequate controls over the use of miscellaneous obligations .