( recommendation 2 ) . fra has developed extensive railroad safety regulations over decades . fra's railroad safety regulations include requirements governing track design and inspection , grade crossings , signal and train control , mechanical equipment including locomotives , and railroad - operating practices including worker protection rules . for example , fra's regulations for track and equipment include detailed , prescriptive minimum requirements , such as formulas that determine the maximum allowable speeds on curved track . many of fra's rail safety regulations establish minimum safety requirements , though railroads can apply for waivers . as fra updates its safety regulations , it has proposed more performance - based regulations in recent years . many of fra's current safety regulations specify the behavior or manner of compliance that railroads must adopt , such as inspecting each locomotive at least every 92 days . performance - based regulations , however , specify a desired outcome rather than a behavior or manner of compliance . for example , fra's recent rulemaking to amend its passenger equipment safety regulations proposes performance - based crashworthiness and occupant protection requirements , rather than explicit targets or tolerances . fra officials told us , as we have reported in the past , that it can be difficult to recruit , train , and certify qualified inspectors in a timely manner , especially in certain areas of expertise . fta officials stated that they view the national public transportation safety plan as iterative and more easily updated compared with official regulations . additional tools that fta officials stated the agency employs in its approach to safety oversight include general directives as well as the requirements associated with fta grants . based on our assessment and studies we reviewed , a strength of fra's safety oversight program is its risk - based approach to distributing inspection resources , which may serve as an example for fta and state safety agencies . according to ntsb , fra's qualified inspectors are a strength of its oversight program . to help target these inspectors to the areas of highest risk , fra developed the national inspection plan , which includes a quantitative model for allocating inspection resources in a way that tries to minimize railroad accidents . this model utilizes data including: ( 1 ) accident and incident data that railroads are required to report , ( 2 ) data from fra inspection activity , and ( 3 ) information on railroad activities such as train miles and other data . based on our assessment of fra's model , we believe that it can be an appropriate and useful tool for directing its inspection resources based on risk because it relies on statistical methods commonly used to predict the risk of a violation for regulated entities . while we did not review fra's entire modeling process , nor did we validate the results it generates , we do believe that fra's approach to using these statistical models as a key part of its inspection program is appropriate . however , a potential limitation of fra's inspection program is the flexibility granted to individual inspectors and whether the manner and extent to which inspectors implement this discretion may be inconsistent with the risk - based national inspection plan .