foster care . transitional foster care is short term care that is designed for children under the age of 13 , sibling groups with one sibling under the age of 13 , pregnant and parenting teens , and children with special needs . long - term foster care is designed for children who orr expects to be eligible for immigration relief and who are expected to have an extended stay within the orr system , for example trafficking victims or orphaned children . therapeutic foster care is for unaccompanied children whose exceptional needs cannot be met in regular family foster care homes and consists of intensive supportive and clinical services in the homes of specially trained foster parents . foster family homes must be licensed according to their state's licensing regulations . foster care placements are the least restrictive placement option in the orr continuum . in cases in which a child is considered to have mental health or other needs that could benefit from ongoing assistance from a social welfare agency , orr may arrange for post - release services . additionally , in cases in which a favorable home study was conducted , post - release services are automatically provided . post - release service providers refer sponsors and children to community resources , such as legal , psycho - social , or educational services . children released to sponsors may attend public schools and use other services they are eligible for , such as health care provided by state or local agencies or nonprofit organizations in the communities in which they reside . release to a sponsor does not grant legal immigration status to these children . children are scheduled for removal proceedings in eoir immigration courts to determine whether they will be ordered to be removed from the united states or granted immigration relief . orr requires sponsors to ensure that children attend their removal proceedings . immigration judges , who are located in courts around the country , hear children's cases and make determinations regarding whether they should be ordered removed from the united states or granted legal immigration status . children who wish to apply for asylum or special immigrant juvenile ( sij ) status do so through dhs's uscis . uscis has initial jurisdiction over all asylum applications filed by unaccompanied children , including those in removal proceedings . if uscis does not grant asylum , an immigration judge considers the asylum claim anew . when applicable , ice is responsible for the removal and repatriation of children . in response to an increased number of referrals of unaccompanied children from dhs in recent years , particularly in fiscal year 2014 , orr increased its shelter capacity ( the number of beds it has available ) and updated its policies and procedures to reduce the number of days children spend in orr custody . from fiscal years 2003 through 2011 , orr cared for less than 10,000 unaccompanied children per year ( see fig . beginning in fiscal year 2012 , the number of unaccompanied children apprehended at the southwest border by dhs and transferred to orr custody rose to unprecedented levels , and peaked in fiscal year 2014 at nearly 57,500 .