see table 1 . in fiscal year 2011 , the major dod components had varying competition rates for non - r&d services . the air force had the lowest overall competition rate ( 59 percent ) while other defense agencies had the highest ( 89 percent ) . effective competition — a subset of overall competition which dod defines as competed actions that received more than one offer in response to a solicitation — rates also varied across the major components ( 52 percent at the air force to 82 percent at other defense agencies ) . the navy had the highest percentage of competed actions with only one offer ( 16 percent ) . see figure 5 for competition percentages at each major dod component . in addition to the contact names above , michele mackin , acting director ; alexandra dew silva ; peter anderson ; georgeann higgins ; julia kennon ; jean mcsween ; cary russell ; kenneth patton ; sylvia schatz ; roxanna sun ; and andrea yohe made key contributions to this report . we recently reported on challenges with this initiative . in october 2009 , omb established initial guidelines to help chief acquisition officers and senior procurement executives evaluate the effectiveness of their agencies' competition practices and processes for selecting contract types . the office of federal procurement policy released new guidance with respect to competition in establishing gsa schedule blanket purchase agreements in december 2009 in response to our recommendation that omb take greater advantage of the opportunities that competition provides under schedule blanket purchase agreements . gao , contract management: agencies are not maximizing opportunities for competition or savings under blanket purchase agreements despite significant increase in usage , gao - 09-792 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 9 , 2009 ) . in march 2011 , the far council issued an interim rule ( effective may 16 , 2011 ) , amending the far to implement section 863 of the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 , pub . the interim rule establishes enhanced competition requirements for placing orders under multiple - award contracts , including schedule contracts , and competition requirements for the establishment and placement of orders under schedule blanket purchase agreements . it also restricts the circumstances when blanket purchase agreements may be established based on a limited - source justification . pursuing open systems architecture and establishing rules for the acquisition of technical data rights ; seeking opportunities to increase the role of small businesses in defense marketplace competition and opportunities to compete multiple award idiq service contracts among small businesses ; and presenting a competitive strategy at each program milestone for defense acquisition programs . five of these bridge contracts were due to bid protests . examples of bridge contracts due to unanticipated events include: dod's tricare program justified negotiating noncompetitive options that extended the performance on each of the two existing tricare contracts for 1 year valued at $6.6 billion under the “only one responsible source” competition exception to provide managed care support services . according to the j&a , these options were necessary after unexpected delays in the acquisition process were triggered by protests at the agency level and to gao of the prior competitive awards for these services .