concur . dod stated that it had already removed some installation - support functions from joint basing because they were not compelled for inclusion as part of the brac recommendation and otherwise did not offer opportunities for savings or consolidation . it further stated that in april 2014 , the senior joint base working group principals tasked their staffs to identify which installation support functions and performance standards were not providing value to the joint bases' various military missions and to explore whether these functions and standards should continue to be included in joint basing . dod did not provide time frames for completing such actions . pending . in july 2015 , an osd official stated that dod will not revise the 12 memorandums of agreement for the existing joint bases to show that some of the functions should not be consolidated but are using an abbreviated list of functions — excluding the functions we identified as poor candidates for consolidation — in evaluating the viability of new joint bases . gao recommendation take policy actions , as appropriate — such as issuing additional guidance — to address any challenges resulting in inefficiencies and inequities regarding efforts to consolidate installation - support functions — including , at a minimum , those identified in this report . original dod response partial concur . dod stated that it is mindful of challenges in implementing and operating joint bases and agreed that policy actions can address some challenges . however , dod stated that it does not agree that these challenges require office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) level policies , citing instead the existing responsibilities and authorities already assigned to the military departments and the joint management oversight structure . evaluate the purpose of the program and determine whether dod's current goals of achieving greater efficiencies and generating cost savings for the joint basing program , as stated in the 2005 brac commission recommendation , are still appropriate or whether goals should be revised , and communicate these goals to the military services and joint bases and then adjust program activities accordingly . subsequent to the evaluation above , provide direction to joint bases on their requirements for meeting the joint base program's goals . dod's leadership should work with the military services to determine what reporting requirements and milestones should be put in place to increase support and commitment for the program's goals . non - concur . dod stated that the goal of joint basing remains to increase the efficiency of delivering installation support at the 12 joint bases as described in the brac commission's recommendation number 146 . dod actions pending . in july 2015 , an osd official told us that dod is taking action on our recommendation to address any challenges resulting in inefficiencies and inequities regarding efforts to consolidate installation - support functions . dod has drafted a joint basing handbook , which has been signed by the air force and the navy , to address inconsistent service - level guidance . in addition , the senior installation management group now meets quarterly to handle conflicts and disputes between service policies and to address any challenges resulting in inefficiencies and inequities regarding efforts to consolidate installation - support functions . none planned .