correspondence . taxpayers may also use paper correspondence to communicate with irs , which includes responding to irs requests for information or data , providing additional information , or disputing a notice . irs assistors respond to taxpayer inquiries on a variety of tax law and procedural questions and handle complex account adjustments , such as amended returns and duplicate filings . irs tries to respond to paper correspondence within 45 days of receipt ; otherwise , such correspondence is considered overage . in fiscal year 2017 , about 35 percent of the nearly 17.5 million pieces of correspondence irs received was overage , down from approximately 47 percent of 20.8 million pieces of correspondence in fiscal year 2013 . minimizing overage correspondence is important because delayed responses may prompt taxpayers to write again , call , or visit irs taxpayer assistance centers ( tac ) ; each of which lead to additional costs . additionally , irs is required to pay interest on refunds owed to taxpayers if it did not process amended returns within 45 days . irs minimized the effects of these delays on overall processing by transferring returns initially sent to ogden to the kansas city location , which enabled irs to meet its overall processing goals . later in the filing season , processing at ogden had improved , but still had not reached irs's goal for the site . for example , as of may 11 , 2018 , ogden was at approximately 73 percent of schedule , having processed 716,000 out of 977,000 scheduled returns . irs officials said that responding to changes in work flows is a normal aspect of processing across all locations , but noted that the agency continued to monitor the situation in ogden and learn from the experience to guide future consolidation efforts . austin . this processing facility , slated for closure in 2024 , also experienced processing delays . as we reported in 2017 , and as irs officials told us again this year , irs was unable to hire enough personnel to process paper tax returns at this site , which may be due to low unemployment rates in the area . irs officials told us austin planned to hire 567 employees by early march to transfer data from paper returns to an electronic format , but had only been able to hire 142 people , or 25 percent of that target . irs officials told us the position was perceived as undesirable in a low - unemployment environment . the officials said they had addressed the issue by ( 1 ) moving resources as needed within the service center and ( 2 ) transferring returns to the kansas city facility for processing . irs identified more potential fraud and noncompliance through february 15 , 2018 , than it had by the same time last year . in its second year of receiving earlier w - 2 data from ssa to match against returns , irs identified a larger number of potentially fraudulent or noncompliant returns claiming the eitc or actc prior to issuing refunds — 340,000 compared to 162,000 at the same point in 2017 .