this condition persists . as part of our april 2013 annual report on reducing duplication , overlap , and fragmentation within the federal government , we reported that the administration has taken an initial step to improve interagency coordination , but has not fully addressed the issues of fragmented leadership and a lack of a single authority in overseeing the acquisition of space programs . lastly , the air force and other offices within dod are also considering different acquisition models for the future , including the use of hosted payloads as well as developing larger constellations of smaller , less - complex satellites that would require small , less - costly launch vehicles and offer more resilience in the face of growing threats to space assets . however , such a transition could also have risk and require significant changes in acquisition processes , requirements setting , organizational structures , and culture . the long - standing condition of fragmented leadership and the risk - averse culture of space could stand in the way of making such a change . in conclusion , dod has made credible progress in stabilizing space programs . however , there are challenges still to be dealt with , such as disconnects between the delivery of satellites and their corresponding ground control systems and user equipment and the rising cost of launch . the ultimate challenge , however , will be preparing for the future , as budget constraints will require dod to make tough tradeoff decisions in an environment where leadership is fragmented . we look forward to continuing to work with the congress and dod in assessing both today and tomorrow's challenges in space acquisition and identifying actions that can be taken to help meet these challenges . chairman udall , ranking member sessions , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you and members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information about this statement , please contact cristina chaplain at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this statement include art gallegos , assistant director ; erin cohen ; rich horiuchi ; jeff sanders ; roxanna sun ; bob swierczek ; and marie ahearn . satellite control: long - term planning and adoption of commercial practices could improve dod's operations . dod agreed with our recommendations . congress and dod continue to take steps towards reforming the defense acquisition system to increase the likelihood that acquisition programs will succeed in meeting planned cost and schedule objectives . for example , in december 2012 , we reported that the dod had taken steps to implement fundamental weapon systems acquisition reform act of 2009 ( the reform act ) provisions , including those for approving acquisition strategies and better monitoring weapon acquisition programs. , the offices established by the reform act are in the process of developing , issuing , and implementing policies in response to the reform act's provisions .