sandia . based on the problems found at the other two laboratories , an nnsa sandia field office official recently asked its m&o contractor's internal audit office at sandia to verify sandia's labor hour allocations . sandia's internal audit office reported in october 2012 that m&o contractor employees were not always accurately allocating their time in accordance with actual work performed . corrective actions in response to this audit are still being implemented . specifically , the m&o contractor agreed to improve guidance and training provided to all employees about proper time charging practices and policies , and to conduct periodic self - assessments to ensure compliance with these practices and policies . although nnsa's offm has responsibility for supporting contracting officers in the day - to - day oversight of m&o contractors' management of indirect costs , its role does not include conducting independent audits to assess compliance with cost accounting standards , according to offm officials . on a limited basis , however , offm reviews some summary m&o contractor data to determine whether actual cost allocation practices are consistent with disclosed practices and complies with applicable federal requirements , and conducts expanded reviews , as needed . specifically , m&o contractors must annually submit a formal statement documenting the total size of their indirect - cost pools and allocations , as well as the indirect rates used during the previous fiscal year . in addition to these steps , offm can request audit assistance from the oig — which has audit authority at nnsa laboratories . oig officials stated that the frequency and scope for conducting audits for contractors' compliance with cost accounting standards should be based on the level of risk . however , offm and oig officials and m&o contractors hold varying opinions regarding the level of risk of inaccurate indirect cost allocation practices at the laboratories . for example , some offm and oig officials and m&o contractors told us that they believe the risk is generally low compared with other federal agencies . specifically , because nnsa m&o contractor operations are federally funded , and the operations are not mixed with private activities , the risk is low that federal funds are being used to pay an inequitable and higher share of indirect costs for private , nonfederal activities . in contrast , senior nnsa field office official told us that he is concerned about the ongoing possibility that indirect costs could be manipulated — that is , allocated to other programs — to avoid exceeding program budgets and , therefore , believes the risk is high . this concern was echoed by an m&o contractor's internal audit office , which reported in april 2011 that , based on its audit findings the allocation of indirect costs posed a high risk . this contractor's internal audit office also confirmed that m&o contractor labor hours in at least one instance were transferred to another program to prevent a cost overrun . despite the uncertainty of the risk of noncompliance , nnsa's chief financial officer in offm does not conduct formal periodic risk assessments .