more than 1 million of these cards were issued to noncitizens . while ssa requires noncitizens applying for a replacement card to provide the same identity and immigration information as if they were applying for an original ssn , ssa's evidence requirements for citizens are much less stringent . citizens applying for a replacement card need not prove their citizenship ; they may use as proof of identity such documents as a driver's license , passport , employee identification card , school identification card , church membership or confirmation record , life insurance policy , or health insurance card . the ability to obtain numerous replacement ssn cards with less documentation creates a condition for requestors to obtain ssns for a wide range of illicit uses , including selling them to noncitizens . these cards can be sold to individuals seeking to hide or create a new identity , perhaps for the purpose of some illicit activity . ssa told us the agency is considering limiting the number of replacement cards with certain exceptions such as for name changes , administrative errors , and hardships . however , they cautioned that while support exists for this change within the agency , some advocacy groups oppose such a limit . one area is the assignment of ssns to children under age one . prior work by ssa's inspector general identified the assignment of ssns to children as an area prone to fraud because ssa did not independently verify the authenticity of various state birth certificates . despite the training and guidance provided to field office employees , the oig found that the quality of many counterfeit documents was often too good to detect simply by visual inspection . last year , ssa revised its policies to require that field staff obtain independent third party verification of the birth records for u.s. born individuals age one and older from the state or local bureau of vital statistics prior to issuing a ssn card . however , ssa left in place its policy for children under age one and continues to require only a visual inspection of documents , such as birth records . cras are also large private sector users of ssns . these entities often rely on ssns , as well as individuals' names and addresses to build and maintain credit histories . businesses routinely report consumers' financial transactions , such as charges , loans , and credit repayments to cras . cras use ssns to determine consumers' identities and ensure that incoming consumer account data is matched correctly with information already on file . certain laws such as the fair credit reporting act , the gramm - leach - bliley act , and the driver's privacy protection act have helped to limit the use of personal information , including ssns , by information resellers and cras . these laws limit the disclosure of information by these entities to specific circumstances . by posing as parents of newborns , they obtained the first ssn by applying in person at a ssa field office using a counterfeit birth certificate and baptismal certificate . using similar documents , a second ssn was obtained by our investigators who submitted all material via the mail .