see figure 1 . special assessment districts designate a formal boundary in which taxes or fees are assessed on properties expected to see a projected benefit due to the geographic proximity of a new transit facility or other unique amenity . the revenue collected is then used to help pay for such facility or amenity . see figure 2 . tax increment financing is a public financing technique used by local entities to encourage economic development . typically , a public - sector agency issues a special bond to finance the infrastructure necessary to support new development and then uses the incremental increase in property value within a formally designated tax increment financing district to fund repayment of the bonds for the development - related costs , including the costs of transit infrastructure improvements . what have stakeholders said about the effects of federal policies and programs on the use of joint development and other value capture strategies to fund or finance transit ? to address these questions , we reviewed relevant literature to determine the most commonly used value capture strategies and to help identify facilitators of , and hindrances to , using value capture strategies . we requested data from the 71 transit agencies that we identified as operating a fixed - guideway or large bus system on the extent to which value capture strategies were used to fund or finance transit on their system . to what extent do transit agencies and state and local governments use joint development and other value capture strategies to fund or finance transit ? we conducted site visits to the washington / baltimore metropolitan area ; atlanta , georgia ; los angeles , sacramento , san jose , and the san francisco bay metropolitan area in california ; portland , oregon ; and seattle , washington . we selected this nongeneralizable sample of cities and metropolitan areas based on criteria we established , including locations where value capture strategies had been used or were under formal consideration for use , and geographical diversity . during our site visits , we interviewed transit agency , state , and local government officials , and private developers about selected transit projects , as well as individuals with expertise in the area of value capture strategies , to determine the extent to which value capture strategies are used to fund or finance transit and to identify facilitators of , and hindrances to , using value capture strategies . we also interviewed federal , state , and local transit officials to identify ways federal policies and programs affect the use of value capture strategies . finally , we reviewed applicable state constitutions , statutes , and regulations to identify facilitators of , and hindrances to , using value capture strategies , and relevant federal statutes and regulations to determine federal requirements and program implications for joint development and other value capture strategies . we conducted this performance audit from august 2009 to july 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .