postal service for their review and comment . dhs provided comments in a letter dated september 6 , 2006 , which are summarized below and reprinted in appendix ii . dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report where appropriate . mathew j. scire ( 202 ) 512-2834 or sciremj@gao.gov . the postal service informed us that it had no comments on this report . the department of the interior did not provide comments on this report . dhs generally agreed with the report's findings and recommendations . dhs stated that fps and the u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) have undertaken a comprehensive review of the megacenters to identify , among other things , ways in which performance can be better measured . dhs noted that through this broad approach , fps personnel will be able to generate and track the kind of information necessary to assess the megacenters' performance . this one - time review may help fps identify information needed to assess the megacenters' performance and , therefore , develop appropriate performance measures . in order to reliably assess performance over time , fps should not only establish appropriate performance measures , but also routinely assess performance using these measures . we therefore clarified our recommendation to include the routine use of established performance measures to assess the megacenters' performance . the briefing slides are included in appendix i . fps megacenters provide federal agencies with three primary security services — alarm monitoring , radio monitoring , and dispatch — through four locations using a variety of it systems . megacenters monitor intrusion , panic , fire / smoke , and other alarms . they also monitor fps police officers' and contract guards' radio communication to ensure their safety and to provide information , such as criminal background or license plate histories , to officers upon request . in addition , they exercise command and control authority by dispatching fps police officers or contract guards . megacenters also provide a variety of other services . for example , they notify federal agencies regarding national emergencies and facility problems and remotely diagnose problems with federal agency alarms . they also receive and transcribe fps police officer incident reports . individual megacenters may also provide unique services not provided by other megacenters , such as facility - specific access control and remote programming of alarms via the internet . one megacenter also provides an after - hours telephone answering service for the drug enforcement administration and for gsa building maintenance emergencies . the megacenters are located in battle creek , denver , philadelphia , and suitland . each megacenter has a sister center with redundant capability as backup in case of a failure at that megacenter . suitland is paired with battle creek , and philadelphia is paired with denver . a force of 1,014 fps police officers and 6,842 contract guards is available for the megacenters to dispatch in response to alarms and other emergencies . in fiscal year 2006 , the megacenters were supported by a budget of $23.5 million , which accounts for about 5 percent of fps's total budget .