this action is rarely used . agency supplemental appropriations in 2001 included $3 million , of which no less than $1 million was to be used to enhance the agency's humane slaughter practices . usda used $1.25 million of these funds to hire 17 dvmss to serve as program coordinators for all humane handling issues . by march 2002 , a dvms was at work in each of the fsis district offices . the dvmss , who received extensive training on humane handling and slaughter techniques and related inspection procedures , are the primary contacts for inspectors in each fsis district office and the liaisons between the district offices and headquarters on humane handling and slaughter compliance . as of may 2003 , the 17 dvmss had visited 576 , or about 63 percent , of 918 plants covered by the hmsa . thirteen of the 16 dvmss we interviewed said that they had visited all or almost all of their assigned plants at least once . according to these 16 dvmss , when they came on board , all of them participated in a number of district activities that went beyond the scope of humane handling and slaughter of animals , such as biosecurity and food safety issues . for example , nine dvmss reported that these activities took 40 to 50 percent of their time . in march 2003 , however , an fsis memorandum directed all but five of the dvmss to only perform humane handling activities . as a result , the activities of 12 dvmss changed , and their current focus is solely the implementation of the hmsa . despite these actions , concerns about the treatment of animals at u.s. slaughterhouses persist . for example , two animal welfare groups , the humane society of the united states and the humane farming association , believe that enforcement of the act could be improved . these groups maintain that more continuous monitoring of compliance with the hmsa is necessary . also , according to the humane society , usda oversight is especially critical at facilities that specialize in disabled animals and old dairy cattle , as well as those with slaughter production lines that operate at high speeds . conversely , meat industry associations we contacted maintain that the way animals are handled and slaughtered has improved in response to pressure from customers of fast food restaurants and industry audits of slaughter establishments . when dr. temple grandin , a renowned animal science authority , conducted a survey of 24 slaughterhouses in 1996 at usda's request , she found that only 36 percent were able to stun 95 percent of the cattle on the first try . appendix i describes our methodology in more detail . the congress passed the humane slaughter act in 1958 in response to intense and broad - based public concerns about cruelty and abuse of livestock in meat - packing plants . at that time , the congress determined that using humane methods of slaughter prevented the needless suffering of livestock , resulted in safer and better working conditions for employees , and brought about improvements in products and economies of slaughter operations , among other benefits .