solar energy . multiple technologies exist for utility - scale solar power . solar photovoltaic technologies convert energy from sunlight directly into electricity , using arrays of solar panels . concentrating solar power technologies use mirrors to focus the sun's energy to heat water or other fluids ; these fluids in turn create steam that powers a conventional turbine generator to produce electricity . no such directives exist for solar projects , although agency officials told us they are drafting such provisions and expect to complete them in 2013 . in general , officials with the forest service told us that interest in utility - scale wind and solar development on their lands is considerably less than for blm - managed lands and that , as a result , the forest service has relied primarily on blm guidance when considering proposals for development . since epact 2005 , the federal land management agencies have taken steps intended to improve coordination as a way to streamline the permitting process and promote renewable energy development on federal lands in general . specifically , coordination has been formalized through regularly established meetings and memorandums of understanding across interior agencies , as well as with other federal agencies and state and local governments . to facilitate coordination on renewable energy activities among its component agencies , interior instituted weekly meetings among its component agency officials at the national level to discuss issues concerning individual renewable energy applications and projects , particularly those identified as priority projects . these “strike team” meetings were intended to formalize coordination to ensure that officials across component agencies are aware of concerns that could affect the development of projects — including critical habitat , cultural or tribal issues , conflicts with national park boundaries or interests , and other environmental issues — and have a recurring forum where such concerns may be aired and resolved . blm's national and state renewable energy coordination offices also hold weekly meetings to discuss the status of projects and other issues as they come up . in several cases , coordination between interior agencies within certain regions has been formalized through a memorandum of understanding . in january 2008 , for example , in recognition of the increase in renewable energy permit applications for projects in southern california , blm's california desert district and the fish and wildlife service's ventura and carlsbad offices signed a memorandum of understanding to help ensure efficient completion of required consultation under the endangered species act . this memorandum defines the process , products , actions , time frames , and expectations needed to complete the process . in addition , in june 2011 , a memorandum of understanding was signed between blm's california state office and the national park service's pacific west region . the memorandum generally documents coordination procedures the two agencies are to follow in instances where proposed renewable energy projects in the region may affect lands under the jurisdiction of the national park service . according to park service officials , a similar memorandum is being explored between the national park service's pacific west region and blm's nevada state office .