these examinations included some that had no changes to the taxpayer . the two examinations described below include one that took a relatively low number of days and one that took a longer than average number of days . the return is false or fraudulent . irs defines false or fraudulent as the preparation and filing of false income tax returns by claiming inflated personal or business expenses , false deductions , unallowable credits , or excessive exemptions . there is a sufficiently large omission of gross income ( in excess of 25 percent of the amount of gross income stated on the return ) under irc 6501 ( e ) , in which case the tax may be assessed at any time within 6 years after the return is filed . the taxpayer failed to notify the secretary of the treasury of certain foreign transfers under irc 6501 ( c ) ( 8 ) , in which case the statute of limitations is 3 years from the date irs receives the required information . a conclusion to continue an examination beyond the statute must be approved in writing by irs managers , based on the revenue agent's documentation of the rationale and calculations to support this conclusion . in addition , irs must have made a timely and proper request to the taxpayer to obtain a consent agreement to extend the statute . the taxpayer's refusal to extend the statute or lack of response must be documented . if this guidance is followed , no disciplinary action will be taken against the irs managers and agents if the examination ultimately does not prove to meet one of the three conditions for making an assessment after 3 years . the irs guidance allowing some examinations to go past the normal statute period based on the revenue agent's judgment that an assessment will be possible after the 3-year point recognizes the limited time available to agents to finalize case - specific facts when the 3-year statute is about to expire . the irs guidance also notes that the credit card summons project examinations are generally likely to involve unreported income or fraud as well as failure to file information returns reporting foreign transfers . the guidance also states that other offshore examinations share many of the same challenges as credit card summons project examinations including complex examinations and securing documents located outside the united states . irs managers told us that this procedure for continuing examinations beyond the statute is cumbersome , time - consuming , and some agents are reluctant to use the procedure because of concerns about barred statutes . revenue agents told us that this reluctance stems from the culture of irs examiners where agents are instructed from the time they are hired to never let an examination go past the statute of limitations for any reason . despite subsequent assurances from irs guidance , however , revenue agents told us that ingrained reluctance to letting the statute of limitations pass is still paramount . all of the examinations allowed to extend past the statute date under this guidance represent a gamble on the part of irs that the examination will ultimately meet one of the exceptions to the statute and an assessment will be allowed under the law .