id. , § 3007 ( c ) . id. thresholdbenefits ( known as snap benefits ) issued within the district . the student must also be at least 5 years old by september 30th of the school year . or that receive supplemental nutrition assistance program in the 2011-2012 school year , there were 53 participating schools in osp ( see fig . these schools represent a wide range of grades , sizes , sectors , and tuition levels . these schools are located throughout all eight wards of the district , with the greatest number of schools located in ward 3 . in accordance with district regulations for all private schools operating in the district , these schools must be accredited by , or be in the process of being accredited by , at least one of seven recognized accrediting organizations or any other approved accrediting body . schools that are unaccredited must submit documentation to demonstrate satisfactory evidence of instruction . internal control is broadly defined as a process — affected by an entity's board of directors , management , and other personnel — designed to provide reasonable assurance that the following objectives are being achieved: ( 1 ) effectiveness and efficiency of operations , ( 2 ) reliability of financial reporting , and ( 3 ) compliance with applicable laws and regulations . internal controls include management and program policies , procedures , and guidance that help ensure effective and efficient use of resources ; compliance with laws and regulations ; prevention and detection of fraud , waste , and abuse ; and the reliability of financial reporting . effective internal control is a major part of managing any organization to achieve desired outcomes and manage risk . standards for internal control in the federal government presents five standards that define the minimum level of quality acceptable for internal control in government and provide the basis against which internal control is to be evaluated . these standards — control environment , risk assessment , control activities , information and communication , and monitoring — apply to all aspects of an agency's operations and should be an integral part of a system that managers use to regulate and guide an agency's operations . the private sector also recognizes the importance of internal controls for executives to better manage their business enterprises . the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission's ( coso ) the same five key elements stated previously , which are intended to promote efficiency , reduce risk of asset loss , and help ensure the reliability of financial reports and compliance with laws and regulations . the trust provides program information to prospective and current osp families through a variety of outreach activities . to reach prospective osp families , the trust advertises through print , radio , and bus ads , as well as in newspapers and flyers posted in neighborhood libraries , recreation centers , and local government service centers . for example , one osp parent told us she found out about osp through a local spanish - language newspaper . the trust conducts several application events throughout the district where interested families can apply for the program .