( see app . ii for additional data on changes in quota holdings. ) surfclam and ocean quahog quota consolidation is greater than nmfs data indicate . according to nmfs officials and others knowledgeable about the fishery , the quota holder of record ( i.e. , the individual or entity under whose name the quota is listed ) is often not the entity that controls the use of the quota . some families hold quota under the names of more than one family member ; some parent corporations hold quota under the names of one or more subsidiaries ; some entities hold quota under the name of one or more incorporated vessels ; and some financial institutions serve as transfer agents and hold quota on behalf of others or in lieu of collateral for loans . after aggregating quota controlled by the same individual or entities , we determined that consolidation of surfclam quota holders was about twice that indicated by nmfs data . as shown in figure 6 , no more than 59 and 42 individuals or entities controlled surfclam quota in 1990 and 2002 , respectively . one entity controlled quota held in 12 different names , accounting for 27 percent of the 2002 total surfclam quota allocated . similarly , consolidation of ocean quahog quota holders was about twice that indicated by nmfs data . as shown in figure 7 , no more than 48 and 29 individuals or entities controlled ocean quahog quota in 1990 and 2002 , respectively . one entity controlled quota held in 2 different names , representing 22 percent of the 2002 total ocean quahog quota allocated . ( see app . iii for information on consolidation in the surfclam and ocean quahog processing sector. ) the consolidation of surfclam and ocean quahog quota may be even greater than our analysis indicates because we could not determine the individuals or entities for whom banks hold quota . according to nmfs data , banks hold about 21 percent of the 2002 surfclam quota and 27 percent of the 2002 ocean quahog quota . however , we could not determine for whom the banks hold the quota and thus who controls the use of the quota . nmfs officials stated that , in theory , they had the ability to identify the individuals or entities for whom the banks hold quota . they explained , however , that such an analysis would be extremely difficult and labor - intensive because their record system is not designed for this purpose . as such , nmfs did not provide us with this information . each program's governing rules may have affected the extent of consolidation and the information nmfs collects and monitors on quota holders . to help meet the magnuson - stevens act's prohibition of any individual or entity acquiring an excessive share of the fishery , the regional fishery management councils may establish limits on the amount of quota any individual or entity can hold . in the alaskan halibut and sablefish program , for example , the council set specific limits on individual holdings by , among others , species and area .