outreach . sba generally has not targeted its outreach for the program to disaster - prone areas . according to sba officials , to market the pilot program oca issued two federal register notices and a program guide , and encouraged district office staff to notify area lenders of the program . additionally , sba officials told us that before anticipated disasters , they have mentioned the program on quarterly telephone conferences attended by 1,000 – 1,500 7 ( a ) lenders , and referred to the pilot in press releases . one lender told us that it was notified of the pilot program through an sba policy notice with program guide attached , while another noted receiving an email promoting the program . according to sba officials , this same email was sent to oca field staff to be shared with all 7 ( a ) express lenders before the 2019 hurricane season . internally , according to sba officials , oca has made information on the express bridge loan pilot program available to all sba employees on an internal website . however , oca has not marketed the express bridge loan pilot program to oda . oca officials were unaware of any conversation with oda ( whose staff are on the ground after disasters and therefore most likely to interact with small business owners ) about the pilot program , but assumed that oda officials had high - level information about the pilot . however , staff we interviewed from both field operations centers were unaware of the program . oca also has not targeted its external marketing to partners , such as 7 ( a ) express lenders and sbdcs , in disaster - prone areas . although sba officials told us that they made presentations at a 2019 lender conference in florida , they did not point to similar outreach in other disaster - prone areas . the small business owners and sbdc officials with whom we spoke in florida , puerto rico , texas , and the u.s. virgin islands generally were unaware of the sba express bridge loan program . during our february 2019 interview with the florida department of economic opportunity ( which helps administer the state's bridge loan program ) , officials stated they were unaware of program specifics and asked if it had started . evaluation . sba officials do not currently plan to evaluate the program or determine why so few loans have been issued . sba officials explained that the express bridge loan pilot program's performance during the 2019 hurricane season would determine whether sba would continue or terminate the program after its pilot period . when sba announced the pilot , sba stated it planned to evaluate the program using three principal measures: ( 1 ) the number of small businesses served , ( 2 ) the percentage of loans made that were paid off or down using lower fixed - rate disaster loans versus those held to term , and ( 3 ) the default rate on express bridge loans compared to regular sba express loans of similar size in the 7 ( a ) portfolio .