we disagree . with regard to waste reduction , our report accurately states that the gnep strategic plan specifically rules out using mox in light water reactors because it would offer a minor waste reduction benefit but not meet gnep's objectives . now that the department is considering evolutionary mox technologies , doe cited the substantial reduction in the quantity of spent nuclear fuel in storage as a significant near - term benefit of recycling in light water reactors . our report acknowledges that such a mox program could allow doe to begin recycling spent fuel sooner and on a larger scale than more advanced but less mature technologies . furthermore , we have clarified the report to show that doe has indicated it would only pursue evolutionary mox technologies as part of a plan to later transition to more advanced technologies for recycling in fast reactors , which are anticipated to provide a much greater waste reduction benefit than evolutionary mox technologies from the standpoint of extending the capacity of a geologic repository . the question , in our view , is whether the intermediate benefit of reducing the quantity of spent nuclear fuel in storage would be worth the investment in evolutionary mox technologies . on this point , doe stated that facilities for recycling spent fuel in light water reactors would be funded and constructed by industry only when justified by a sound business case , without impacting government funding for r&d on more advanced recycling technologies . in contrast , our report points out that industry does not expect the evolutionary mox technologies to be profitable — at least under current conditions — without some form of government support and r&d assistance . thus , while it is conceivable that the government could provide the necessary support and r&d assistance while also continuing to fund r&d on more advanced technologies , the evolutionary technologies could also draw resources away from the more advanced technologies . with regard to nonproliferation , doe called into question our finding that evolutionary mox technologies would mitigate proliferation risks to a lesser degree than anticipated from the advanced technologies envisioned under the engineering - scale approach to gnep . rather than differentiating between the proliferation resistance of alternative reprocessing technologies , doe stated that any reprocessing plant , if misused , could be modified to create weapons usable material . thus , it is the department's view that its nonproliferation objectives would be largely accomplished through international policies that seek to avoid the spread of enrichment and reprocessing technologies while eliminating existing plutonium inventories and production of material mixes that are attractive for use in creating a nuclear explosive . we recognize that the degree of proliferation resistance of reprocessing technologies is only one aspect of gnep's nonproliferation objective . nonetheless , our report is consistent with the gnep technology development plan , which states that the reprocessing technology preferred under the original approach to gnep ( urex+1a ) provides an additional degree of proliferation resistance compared with other processes precisely because it would not separate plutonium from any of the transuranics .