these common challenges were presented in the report . each agency's comments are discussed in more detail below . in written comments , usda's acting cio stated that the department concurred with the content of the report and had no comments . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . this appendix provides information on the services the selected federal agencies chose to migrate to cloud solutions . specifically , this appendix includes a brief description of the three cloud services , as well as the service model , deployment model , and federal information security management act of 2002 ( fisma ) security level . data center services: dhs is implementing a private cloud within two of its data centers to enhance sharing sensitive information across the department . the private cloud encompasses multiple services ( dhs committed to omb to move eight data center services to a cloud environment ) to improve collaboration and information sharing within the department . employment verification: this is a free service that workers can use to confirm employment eligibility in the united states . this service is to provide a mechanism by which dhs can validate identity , and control secure access to employment information . website hosting: this service is intended to host dhs public - facing websites and offer an enterprise content delivery capability with 100 percent availability and provide a web content management capability to manage the content across all of the public - facing websites that reside within the public cloud offering . correspondence tracking: this service is to allow the federal acquisition service to track communication with congress from when correspondence is received to the final processing of a response . gsa's e - mail and collaboration solution: this cloud solution is to replace gsa's legacy e - mail system , and is to provide faster upgrades and improved customer service to approximately 17,000 users . in addition , this service is a critical component of gsa's mobile technology strategy . it power management services: this new functionality manages the power settings for more than 17,000 gsa workstations and the office of the chief information officer's infrastructure servers . gsa estimates that it will reduce the carbon footprint by over 4.8 million carbon pounds a year by turning off computers every evening . medwatch+: this service is to provide a web portal for reporting public safety information , as well as information by drug and biological product . this effort is comprised of three private cloud services: safety reporting , device adverse reporting , and drugs and biologics adverse reporting . the first two services are already in cloud environments and the third is being migrated . grants solutions: this suite of services is available to federal agencies and grantee / applicant organizations . specifically , we recommended that omb establish milestones to complete a strategy for federal cloud computing and ensure it addressed information security challenges .