this happens for two reasons . first , although states have 6 weeks following the completion of a quarter to report their claims data , their reporting can be delayed as a result of providers and managed care plans not submitting data in a timely manner , according to the cms contractor responsible for compiling data files of medicaid claims and encounters . for example , providers may submit claims for fee - for - service payments to the state late and providers may need to resubmit claims to make adjustments or corrections before they can be paid by the state . second , the contractor analyzes the msis data submitted by the states and compiles annual person - level claims files that are in an accessible format . the contractor also conducts quality - control checks and corrects data errors and consolidates multiple records that may exist for one claim . this process , for one year of data , can take several years and , as a result , when information from claims and encounters becomes available for use by cms for purposes of program management and oversight , it can be several years old . information cms collects from states through msis is also incomplete in two ways . first , specific data on beneficiaries' personal care services were not included in the calendar year 2012 msis data for 16 states . nevertheless , these 16 states received federal matching funds for the $4.2 billion in total fee - for - service payments for personal care services that year — about 33 percent of total expenditures for personal care services reported by all states ( see figure 9 ) . second , even for the 35 states for which 2012 msis claims and encounter data were available , certain data elements collected by cms were incomplete . for example , for the records we analyzed , 20 percent included no payment information , 15 percent included no provider identification number to identify the provider of service , and 34 percent did not identify the quantity of services provided ( see figure 10 ) . incomplete data limit cms's ability to track spending changes and corroborate spending with reported expenditures because they lack important information on a significant amount of medicaid payments for personal care services . individual states can and do have multiple programs operating under different authorities . some requirements , such as cost neutrality and maintenance of expenditures , are applicable only to specific program options . in addition , under community first choice programs , states receive a 6 percentage point increase in their federal matching rate for personal care and other home - and community - based services . federal law requires that all data submitted be consistent with the standardized msis format and data elements as a condition of receiving federal reimbursement for mechanized claims processing systems . cms reviews these msis files for initial quality and proper formatting and returns any files that do not pass its quality tests back to states for correction and resubmission . state msis submissions are compiled into calendar year data sets that provide beneficiary - level data on eligibility , service utilization , and payments for every state medicaid program .