not met . few , if any , actions toward meeting the criterion have been taken . officials from indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs expressed their commitment to addressing the issues that led to the high - risk designation for federal management of programs that serve tribes and their members . since we last testified before this committee on september 13 , 2017 , we met with agency leaders and worked with each agency to identify actions the agencies took or plan to take to address the concerns that contributed to the designation . we determined that indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs demonstrated varying levels of progress to partially meet most or all of the criteria for removing a high - risk designation . however , additional progress is needed for the agencies to fully address the criteria and related management weaknesses , particularly in the areas of leadership commitment and capacity . to meet the leadership commitment criterion for removal of a high - risk designation , an agency needs to have demonstrated strong commitment and top leadership support to address management weaknesses . the following examples show actions indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs took to partially meet the leadership commitment criterion . education . indian affairs' leaders have demonstrated commitment to addressing key weaknesses in the management of bie schools in several ways . for example , the bie director formed an internal working group , convened meetings with other senior leaders within indian affairs , and publicly stated that his agency is committed to ensuring implementation of our recommendations on indian education . in addition , the bie director and other indian affairs leaders and senior managers have met with us frequently to discuss outstanding recommendations , actions they have taken to address these recommendations , and additional actions they could take . in particular , the bie director met with us on nine occasions over the past year to discuss our recommendations and instructed his staff to provide us draft policies and procedures related to our recommendations . however , it is important that indian affairs leaders be able to sustain this level of commitment to solving problems in indian education . since 2012 , there have been six assistant - secretaries of indian affairs and five bie directors . there has also been leadership turnover in other key offices responsible for implementing our recommendations on indian education . we have previously reported that leadership turnover hampered indian affairs' efforts to make improvements to indian education . we believe that ensuring stable leadership and a sustained focus on needed changes is vital to the successful management of bie schools . energy . indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs each made some progress in identifying capacity and resources to implement some of our recommendations , but bia officials reported to us that the agency does not have the people and resources needed to fully implement other recommendations . the following examples show actions indian affairs , bie , bia , and ihs took to partially meet the capacity criterion . education .