iv ) . for each work - related injury and illness that requires medical treatment other than first aid , the employer is required to record the worker's name ; the date ; a brief description of the injury or illness ; and the number of days the worker was away from work , assigned to restricted duties , or transferred to another job as a result of the injury or illness . employers are also required to describe each injury and illness on the injuries and illnesses incident report ( osha's form 301 ) . about 1.5 million employers with more than 10 employees — representing about 17 percent of the approximately 8.6 million private sector worksites and an estimated 53 million employees covered by osha — must keep such records . osha has established definitions and recordkeeping guidelines to assist employers in determining which injuries and illnesses must be recorded in their injury and illness logs . injuries and illnesses serious enough to be recorded include those that result in lost work time , medical treatment other than first aid , restriction of work , loss of consciousness , or transfer to another job . osha requires employers to post summaries of their logs annually at each worksite and to provide them to osha and bls if requested . osha's recordkeeping standards , which took effect in january 2002 , were intended to simplify the recordkeeping rules and forms used to record injuries and illnesses . osha also promotes workplace safety and health by targeting industries and employers with the highest number of workplace injuries and illnesses for inspection . osha does this through both programmed ( scheduled ) inspections and unprogrammed ( unscheduled ) inspections conducted by inspectors in area offices throughout its 10 u.s. regions . osha places the highest priority on unprogrammed inspections initiated in response to fatality investigations , formal complaints , referrals , and other situations that could pose a risk to the safety and health of workers . osha gives a lower priority to programmed inspections , which include those selected by osha through its site - specific targeting program , which it uses to target high hazard worksites for inspection . table 1 shows the number of programmed and unprogrammed inspections osha conducted from fiscal years 2003 through 2007 . bls's soii includes injury and illness data from employers' logs for about 241,000 worksites ; the odi survey includes data from about 80,000 worksites in high hazard industries . the soii is a coordinated federal - state effort that estimates the number of workplace injuries and illnesses that occur at worksites in most industries in the united states . because the data come from osha logs , the injuries and illnesses counted by the survey are only those required by osha to be recorded . as such , the data differ from those collected by other systems , such as data collected using workers' compensation claims . while bls and osha collect the same basic information , they largely collect data from different employers . however , bls estimates a potential overlap of less than 10 percent of employers who must complete both the bls soii and osha odi surveys in a given year .