these variables are described below . we included an additional set of variables in our regressions related to equity: the initial ltv ratio . we entered ltv as a series of dummy variables , depending on its size . loans fit into eight discrete ltv categories . in some years , fha measured ltv as the loan amount less mortgage insurance premium financed in the numerator of the ratio , and appraised value plus closing costs in the denominator . to reflect true economic ltv , we adjusted fha's measure by removing closing costs from the denominator and including financed premiums in the numerator . a borrower's initial equity can be expressed as a function of ltv , so we anticipated that if ltv was an important predictor in an equation that also includes a variable measuring current equity , it would probably be positively related to the probability of foreclosure . one reason for including ltv is that it measures initial equity accurately . our measures of current equity are less accurate because we do not have data on the actual rate of change in the mortgage loan balance or the actual rate of house price change for a specific house . loans with higher ltvs are more likely to foreclose . we used the lowest ltv category as the omitted category . we expected ltv to have a positive sign in the foreclosure equations at higher levels of ltv . ltv in our foreclosure equations may capture the effects of income constraints . we were unable to include borrowers' income or payment to income ratio directly because data on borrowers' income were not available . however , it seems likely that borrowers with little or no down payment ( high ltv ) are more likely to be financially stretched in meeting their payments and , therefore , more likely to default . the anticipated relationship between ltv and the probability of prepayment is uncertain . for two equations — long - term refinanced loans and investor - refinanced loans — we used down payment information directly , rather than the series of ltv variables . we defined down payment to ensure that closing costs were included in the loan amount and excluded from the house price . we used the annual unemployment rates for each state for the period from fiscal years 1975 through 1995 to measure the relative condition of the economy in the state where a loan was made . we anticipated that foreclosures would be higher in years and states with higher unemployment rates , and that prepayments would be lower because property sales slow down during recessions . the actual variable we used in our regressions , lagunemp , is defined as the logarithm of the preceding year's unemployment rate in that state . we included the logarithm of the interest rate on the mortgage as an explanatory variable in the foreclosure equation . we expected a higher interest rate to be associated with a higher probability of foreclosure because higher interest rates cause higher monthly payments . however , in explaining the likelihood of prepayment , our model uses information on the level of current mortgage rates relative to the contract rate on the borrower's mortgage .