gao - 14-186t . washington , d.c.: november 13 , 2013 . personnel security clearances: full development and implementation of metrics needed to measure quality of process . gao - 14-157t . washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2013 . conducting background investigations is costly . the federal government spent over $1 billion to conduct background investigations in fiscal year 2011 . furthermore , this does not include the costs for the adjudication or other phases of the personnel security clearances process . dod and dhs officials acknowledged that overdesignating a position can result in expenses for unnecessary investigations . when a position is overdesignated , additional resources are unnecessarily spent conducting the investigation and adjudication of a background investigation that exceeds agency requirements . specifically , the investigative workload for a top secret clearance is about 20 times greater than that of a secret clearance because it must be periodically reinvestigated twice as often as secret clearance investigations ( every 5 years versus every 10 years ) and requires 10 times as many investigative staff hours . the fiscal year 2014 base price for an initial top secret clearance investigation conducted by opm is $3,959 and the cost of a periodic reinvestigation is $2,768 . the base price of an investigation for a secret clearance is $272 . if issues are identified during the course of an investigation for a secret clearance , additional costs may be incurred . agencies employ varying practices because the dni has not established a requirement that executive branch agencies consistently review and revise or validate existing position designations on a recurring basis . such a recurring basis could include reviewing position designations during the periodic reinvestigation process . without a requirement to consistently review , revise , or validate existing security clearance position designations , executive branch agencies — such as dod and dhs — may be hiring and budgeting for both initial and periodic security clearance investigations using position descriptions and security clearance requirements that do not reflect national security needs . finally , since reviews are not being done consistently , dod , dhs , and other executive branch agencies cannot have reasonable assurance that they are keeping to a minimum the number of positions that require security clearances on the basis of a demonstrated and foreseeable need for access . therefore , we recommended in july 2012 that the dni , in coordination with the director of opm and other executive branch agencies as appropriate , issue guidance to require executive branch agencies to periodically review and revise or validate the designation of all federal civilian positions . in written comments on that report , the odni concurred with this recommendation and stated that as duties and responsibilities of federal positions may be subject to change , it planned to work with opm and other executive branch agencies to ensure that position designation policies and procedures include a provision for periodic reviews . opm stated in its written comments to our report that it would work with the dni on guidance concerning periodic reviews of existing designations , once pending proposed regulations are finalized . odni and opm are currently in the process of finalizing revisions to the position designation federal regulation .