doe agreed with both recommendations . since 1994 , we have made at least 28 recommendations related to addressing the federal government's environmental liability and 4 recommendations to congress to consider changes to the laws governing cleanup activities . of these , 13 recommendations remain unimplemented . if implemented , these steps would improve the completeness and reliability of the estimated costs of doe's future cleanup responsibilities and lead to more risk - based management of the cleanup work . we believe these recommendations are as relevant , if not more so , today . nnsa also faces challenges implementing its nonproliferation programs under its office of defense nuclear nonproliferation ( dnn ) . nnsa agreed with our recommendation . in addition , quality data is needed for doe to manage its risk of fraud . the fraud reduction and data analytics act of 2015 establishes requirements aimed at improving federal agencies' controls and procedures for assessing and mitigating fraud risks through the use of data analytics . w80-4 lep . officials from nnsa's office of cost policy and analysis told us that this program may be underfunded by at least $1 billion to meet the program's existing schedule . w88 alteration 370 . according to officials from nnsa's office of cost policy and analysis , this program's expanded scope of work may result in about $1 billion in additional costs . to help nnsa put forth more credible modernization plans , we recommended in our april 2017 report that the nnsa administrator include an assessment of the affordability of nnsa's portfolio of modernization programs in future versions of the stockpile stewardship and management plan , such as by presenting options ( eg , potentially deferring the start of or canceling specific modernization programs ) that nnsa could consider taking to bring its estimates of modernization funding needs into alignment with potential future budgets . in commenting on our report , nnsa neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendation . the secretary of energy has taken several important steps that demonstrate doe's commitment to improving contract and project management . in our recent reports , we have noted progress as doe has developed and implemented corrective actions to identify and address root causes of persistent project management challenges , as well as progress in the department's monitoring of the effectiveness and sustainability of corrective actions . however , doe's recent efforts have not fully addressed several areas where the department continues to have shortcomings . as we noted in our 2017 high risk report , doe has taken several important steps that demonstrate its commitment to improving project management — steps that have been supported by senior leadership within the department . specifically , based in part on our december 2014 recommendation , doe issued a revised project management order , doe order 413.3b , in may 2016 and added the following requirements for its program offices: develop cost estimates in accordance with industry best practices . conduct analyses of alternatives for projects consistent with industry best practices and independent of the contractor organization responsible for managing the construction or constructing a capital asset project . ensure that major projects' designs and technologies are sufficiently mature before contractors are allowed to begin construction .