snap . literature also suggests that participation in snap , the largest of the federal food and nutrition programs , is associated with positive effects on outcomes related to many of its goals . according to the research , participation in snap has several positive outcomes related to the program's goals of raising the level of nutrition and increasing the food purchasing power of low - income households . for example , participation in snap has been found to increase household food expenditures , increase the availability of nutrients to the household , and , as some research has found , reduce anemia and other nutritional deficiencies . in addition , increasing household food expenditures is also related to snap's goal of strengthening the u.s. agricultural economy . however , the literature is inconclusive regarding whether snap alleviates hunger and malnutrition in low - income households , another program goal . while studies show the program increases household food expenditures and the nutrients available to the household , research finds little or no effect on the dietary or nutrient intake of individuals . the economic research service cites several reasons why , despite increasing household nutrient availability , snap may not affect individual dietary and nutrient intakes . for example , all household members might not share equally in the consumption of additional nutrients made available by snap benefits , some food may be wasted or consumed by guests , and some household members might consume food from other “nonhome” sources . in addition , the availability of more food in the house does not guarantee individuals eat a healthier diet . to shed light on these issues , we addressed the following: ( 1 ) what is the prevalence of food insecurity among u.s. households ; ( 2 ) how much did the federal government spend on food and nutrition assistance programs in fiscal year 2008 , and how has spending on the five largest programs changed over time ; ( 3 ) what is known about the effectiveness of federal food and nutrition programs in meeting program goals ; and ( 4 ) what are the implications of providing food assistance through multiple programs and agencies ? to address these research objectives , we collected information on all federal programs that focus primarily on providing or supporting food and nutrition assistance . we identified these programs by reviewing the catalog of federal domestic assistance , relevant federal laws and regulations , and other relevant documents , and by interviewing federal officials and experts . to show the prevalence of food insecurity among u.s. households from 1995 ( when this information was first collected ) to 2008 ( the most current data available ) , we present usda's food security estimates based on the current population survey ( cps ) annual food security supplement . many of these estimates are obtained from the usda publication household food security in the united states , 2008 . while the food security data have some limitations , these data provide a nationally representative measure of hunger over time , and we consider these data reliable for this engagement .