this approach should: 1 . identify milestones and the entity responsible for integrating the outcomes of its privacy - related initiatives , including the results of its four health it contracts and recommendations from the ncvhs and ahic advisory committees . ensure that key privacy principles in hipaa are fully addressed . address key challenges associated with legal and policy issues , disclosure of personal health information , individuals' rights to request access and amendments to health information , and security measures for protecting health information within a nationwide exchange of health information . in commenting on a draft of our report , hhs disagreed with our recommendation and referred to “the department's comprehensive and integrated approach for ensuring the privacy and security of health information within nationwide health information exchange.” however , an overall approach for integrating the department's various privacy - related initiatives has not been fully defined and implemented . while progress has been made initiating these efforts , much work remains before they are completed and the outcomes of the various efforts are integrated . challenges to exchanging electronic health information areas understanding and resolving legal and policy issues www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 07-400t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . mr. chairman , senator voinovich , members of the subcommittee: we appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on privacy initiatives associated with the department of health and human services's ( hhs ) national health information technology ( it ) strategy . for more information , contact linda d. koontz , ( 202 ) 512-6240 , koontzl@gao.gov . key privacy principles for protecting personal information have been in existence for years and provide a foundation for privacy laws , practices , and policies . in april 2004 , president bush issued an executive order that called for the development and implementation of a strategic plan to guide the nationwide implementation of interoperable health it in both the public and private sectors . the plan is to address privacy and security issues related to interoperable health it and recommend methods to ensure appropriate authorization , authentication , and encryption of data for transmission over the internet . those privacy principles are reflected in the provisions of the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 and its implementing regulations , which define the circumstances under which an individual's protected health information may be used or disclosed . as requested , our testimony summarizes a report being released today that ( 1 ) describes the steps hhs is taking to ensure privacy protection as part of the national health it strategy and ( 2 ) identifies challenges associated with meeting requirements for protecting personal health information within a nationwide health information network . the order also established the position of the national coordinator for health information technology within hhs as the government official responsible for developing and implementing this strategic plan . in preparing for this testimony , we relied on our work supporting the report , which contains a detailed overview of our scope and methodology . the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .