according to the u.s . undersecretary of agriculture , the average tariff for u.s. agricultural products is 12 percent , while the average global tariffs for food and agricultural products worldwide are 62 percent . japan's tariffs average 59 percent , while the cairns group's and the eu's are 30 percent . tariff reductions are a sensitive issue for many developing countries . some developing countries are reluctant to bring tariffs down to a level that might compromise the livelihood of significant segments of their populations who depend on agricultural production . once wto members agree on agricultural tariff modalities , they must submit tariff schedules detailing their proposed new tariff levels by the fifth ministerial conference in september 2003 . accomplishing this task 6 months after the march modalities deadline could be difficult for some wto members . for example , some developing countries have limited staff , experience , and resources . in addition , the european union must create tariff schedules not only for its current members but also for the 10 countries that are candidates to become eu members . a second critical decision point in the doha development agenda involves whether negotiations should proceed on what are generally referred to as the singapore issues , which include issues related to investment , competition , trade facilitation , and transparency in government procurement . because of the extreme sensitivity of these issues , particularly regarding competition and investment , wto members decided in doha to delay the start of formal negotiations on these topics until they could make certain decisions at the fifth ministerial conference in 2003 . these decisions are of key importance , because they , along with progress in agriculture , are likely to drive the rest of the negotiations . eu officials insist that moving forward with negotiations on competition and investment is essential to the successful conclusion of the overall negotiations , while developing countries have consistently opposed including them in the talks . basic disagreement among wto members on the meaning of the language in the doha declaration is likely to make the upcoming decision on the singapore issues difficult , particularly in the areas of trade and investment and trade and competition . the language in the declaration is ambiguous on this issue . it states that for each of the four areas , negotiations should take place after the fifth ministerial conference “on the basis of a decision to be taken , by explicit consensus , at that session on modalities of negotiations.” in the view of developed countries , including the united states and the european union , the declaration calls for negotiations on these issues to be launched after the fifth ministerial in september 2003 . however , india , with the support of some other developing countries , maintains that no such consensus was reached at doha .