information data sources . these are the systems used to collect , fuse , disseminate , and store information for the cop . since the cop became operational in 2003 , the coast guard has provided cop users with various systems that have allowed them to view , manipulate and enhance their use of the cop . among these systems have been the global command and control system ( gccs ) , command and control personal computer ( c2pc ) , and hawkeye . it also includes other documents such as standard operating procedures on how the coast guard uses the cop , agreements with others using the coast guard cop on how information is to be shared or exchanged , and the rules for how data are correlated and also how vessels are flagged as threats or friends . the coast guard relies on gis , which is an integrated collection of computer software and data used to view and manage information about geographic places , analyze spatial relationships , and model spatial processes , in order to share information related to the people , vessels , and facilities in a mapped display . to what extent is the coast guard following its approved information technology development guidance when developing new cop technology ? to address the first objective , we analyzed pertinent provisions of the coast guard's common operational picture concept of operations and the unsigned operational requirements document for the cop . we also reviewed a coast guard - wide message regarding the coast guard enterprise geographic information system ( egis ) , and memos and e - mails written from 2008 through 2013 by coast guard information technology ( it ) systems development leadership about the cop , egis , and coast guard one view ( cg1v ) , the coast guard's ongoing gis viewer development effort . additionally , because the cop is dependent upon underlying systems being developed and deployed by the coast guard , we analyzed pertinent sections of prior gao reports on the deepwater acquisition program to determine the original information sharing expectations for the deepwater command , control , communications , computers , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( c4isr ) system and the system's actual capabilities . similarly , we reviewed our previously published report on interagency operations centers ( ioc ) to determine the planned information sharing capabilities for the watchkeeper software toolset , the capabilities of the system as deployed , and the extent to which maritime security stakeholders outside the coast guard were using the system . we obtained information on user experiences with the coast guard cop and gis systems by interviewing coast guard personnel at 6 of the 35 coast guard sector command centers ( boston , massachusetts ; hampton roads , virginia ; key west and miami , florida ; puget sound , washington ; and san francisco , california ) , five of the nine coast guard district command centers ( boston , massachusetts ; portsmouth , virginia ; miami , florida ; alameda , california ; and seattle , washington ) , and the two coast guard area command centers ( portsmouth , virginia and alameda , california ) .