dod did not concur with our recommendation . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . dod did not concur with our recommendation that the secretary of defense support additional testing and demonstration of near - term active protection systems on the full spectrum effects platform that could respond to the central command's need . it stated that the original decision in may 2006 that delayed delivering full spectrum effects platform capabilities due to technical development and performance risks remains true today . dod added that there are no active protection systems mature enough at this time to integrate on a full spectrum effects platform regardless of any additional testing and demonstration efforts . this represents a much more decided opinion than was rendered at the time of the oft tests . at that time , army officials believed that the trophy would not be sufficiently tested for operational and safety issues in time for the first spiral of the full spectrum effects platform . oft officials believed that the trophy should be tested further to answer the questions raised by the army and to provide insight into its capabilities . ultimately , the joint rapid acquisition cell recommended slipping the active protection capability to a later spiral of the full spectrum effects platform . this was the basis for our recommendation for additional testing of near - term active protection systems on the full spectrum effects platform . dod stated that it continues to pursue active protection , citing the army's vertical launch system for fcs . as stated in our report , this system is technically immature and the army's estimates for testing it appear optimistic . these estimates appear optimistic . at a trl 5 , the vertical launch will require additional technology development and demonstration before it is ready for either application . also , the fcs vehicles have not been fully developed yet . assuming all goes as planned , most fcs vehicle prototypes are expected to be available in 2011 for developmental testing . as we noted in our march 2007 report , the army has in general been accepting significant risks with immature technologies for the fcs program , coupled with compressed schedules for testing and evaluating prototypes . the army and the lead systems integrator were both extensively involved in preparing for and conducting the aps subcontractor selection and the trade study . prior to the selection , fcs program officials assisted in aps requirements development and reviewed and approved the scope of work , schedule , and evaluation criteria for the request for proposals . after the proposals were received , fcs program officials , technical experts from various army research centers , representatives of the tank - automotive and armaments command and the training and doctrine command were active participants in the selection evaluation team and reviewed the proposals along with the lead systems integrator members . figure 1illustrates these relationships . a separate initiative involving active protection resulted from a joint urgent operational needs statement , issued by central command and the multi - national corps in iraq in april of 2005 , which requested 14 special - equipped vehicles with a host of distinctive capabilities , one of which was an aps .