update cio ratings . all six agencies established guidelines for periodically reviewing and updating their cio ratings . specifically , hhs , nsf , doi , and opm reported that they update cio ratings on a monthly basis . another agency noted that the visibility of the it dashboard has increased awareness among investment and project managers about the need to improve the planning of project activities and the definition of operational performance metrics ( which support program management ) . nevertheless , agencies also identified challenges associated with producing and reporting cio ratings . first , three agencies reported a challenge associated with the time and effort required to gather , validate , and gain internal approval for cio ratings and other data reported to the dashboard . for example , one agency reported that , due to the number of organizations involved and the number of investments being evaluated , it generally takes 90 to 120 days to develop and update its cio ratings . the agency further reported that this effort was separate from ( and in addition to ) time it already spends on its own internal processes for managing and overseeing acquisition programs . second , four of the six agencies identified challenges with the number of changes omb has made to the dashboard , as well as with the timeliness and clarity of omb's communication regarding those changes . for example , officials at one agency commented that the frequency of changes has actually hindered their efforts to improve data quality , since errors sometimes resulted when it adapted to changes required by omb . include input from stakeholders . each of the six agencies we reviewed relied on stakeholder input , at least in part , when assigning cio ratings . agencies also cited a variety of review boards , data from program and financial systems , and other investment assessments as inputs to the rating . table 7 describes the data and processes that agencies reported using when they derived their cio ratings . dod has adopted a quarterly update cycle , although an official noted that the actual process of collecting information and evaluating investments for the ratings takes slightly longer than 3 months . dhs officials with the office of the cio stated that the frequency of its updates varies based on the risk level of an investment's previous rating: investments with a previous cio rating of green are to be reviewed semiannually ; yellow investments are to be reviewed quarterly ; and red investments are to be reviewed monthly . utilize omb's investment rating factors . most of the selected agencies use omb's investment rating factors when evaluating their investments . gao - 12-210 . investment into a color for depiction on the dashboard . an omb staff member from the office of e - government and information technology noted that the cio rating should be a current assessment of future performance based on historical results and is the only dashboard performance indicator that has been defined and produced the same way since the dashboard's inception .