leveraging technology . select technologies to enhance asset security through methods like access control , detection , and surveillance systems . this involves not only using technology , but ensuring that there are positive returns on investment in the form of reduced vulnerabilities . information sharing and coordination . establish means of coordinating and sharing security and threat information internally , within large organizations , and externally , with other government entities and the private sector . you requested that we determine whether fps's approach to securing gsa buildings reflects key facility protection practices . in response , on july 29 , 2009 , we issued a sensitive but unclassified report . as that report contained information that was deemed to be either law enforcement sensitive or for official use only , this version of the report is intended to communicate our findings and recommendations as related to each of the key practices that we reviewed while omitting sensitive information about building security , including specific vulnerabilities . to meet the objective , we used the three key practices cited above as a framework for assessing facility protection efforts by fps management and at the individual buildings . in doing our work , we reviewed pertinent documents and policies from fps and gsa , related laws and directives , isc's security standards , and prior and ongoing gao work . we also interviewed fps and gsa officials at the national and regional levels , and the isc executive director . we selected five sites to illustrate how fps protects highly visible gsa buildings , basing our selection on factors that included geographical diversity , occupancy , the building's security level , and other potential security considerations , such as new or planned construction . selected sites included three multitenant level iv buildings , one single - tenant level iv campus , and one single - tenant level iii campus . at these sites , we collected documentation and interviewed officials from fps , gsa , and tenant agencies . to supplement these site visits , we interviewed fps and gsa security officials from the four regions where we had visited buildings . because we observed fps's efforts to protect gsa buildings at a limited number of sites , our observations of security issues at specific buildings cannot be generalized to all the buildings that fps is responsible for securing . we conducted this performance audit from january 2008 to september 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . appendix i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . fps was created in 1971 and located within gsa until , under the homeland security act of 2002 , it was transferred to dhs and placed within ice , effective march 1 , 2003 . under the act , fps is authorized to protect the buildings , grounds , and property that are under the control and custody of gsa and the persons on the property .