we will now discuss each of these areas in detail . irs's financial management has long been problematic . in fiscal year 2001 , it continued to be plagued by many of the serious internal control and financial management issues that we have reported each year since we began auditing irs's financial statements in fiscal year 1992 . despite these issues , irs was , for the second consecutive year , able to produce financial statements covering its tax custodial and administrative activities in fiscal years 2001 and 2000 , that were fairly stated in all material respects . however , this was achieved only through extensive reliance on costly , time - consuming processes ; statistical projections ; external contractors ; substantial adjustments ; and monumental human efforts that extended nearly four months after the september 30 , 2001 , fiscal year - end . these costly efforts would not have been necessary if irs's systems and controls operated effectively . however , irs still does not have a financial management system capable of producing the reliable and timely information its managers need to make day - to - day decisions on an ongoing basis , which is a goal of the cfo act . additionally , irs's current approach to developing its financial statements does not address the underlying financial management and operational issues that adversely affect irs's ability to effectively fulfill its responsibilities as the nation's tax collector . strong commitment and hard work by both irs's senior leadership and staff continued to be the key to its ability to overcome its fundamental systems and internal control deficiencies and achieve its goal of receiving an unqualified audit opinion on its fiscal years 2001 and 2000 financial statements . however , irs found it extremely difficult to prepare its financial records for audit examination and issue its financial statements within the reporting timeline required by the office of management and budget ( omb ) for fiscal year 2001 . omb has announced the executive branch's intention to significantly accelerate this timeline for future years and by fiscal year 2004 , irs will be required to issue its financial statements by november 15 , or 6 weeks after fiscal year end . also , the department of the treasury has established a goal of completing its fiscal year 2002 audit , including those of its component entities , and issuing its department wide accountability report by november 15 , 2002 . without significant and systemic changes in how irs processes transactions , maintains its records , and reports its financial results to accompany its extensive compensating processes , irs's ability to meet this accelerated reporting deadline while sustaining an unqualified opinion on its financial statements is questionable . we would now like to summarize the major financial management challenges confronting irs . irs did not have internal controls over its financial reporting process adequate to enable it to timely , routinely , and reliably generate and report the information needed to prepare financial statements and manage operations on an ongoing basis .