lead development center . irs has adopted a strategy of identifying promoters of tax schemes as a key to halting their promotion and identifying those who have taken advantage of the scheme and thus likely owe taxes . the sb / se division is currently developing plans and strategies for a lead development center . the center's primary functions will be to develop case leads and assemble case information for distribution to compliance field offices for further investigation . initially , the center will focus on abusive tax scheme promoters , and over time , it will expand to perform similar functions for fraud and anti - money laundering cases . the center will also operate a computer laboratory that , among other things , is expected to monitor possible abusive promoter sites on the internet . specifically , the laboratory will support examiners in their case - development needs , including adequately capturing and documenting information from web sites in a manner suitable for introduction into evidence in a court proceeding . the center also will serve as a coordinating link among various irs groups that deal with abusive tax scheme issues and with outside stakeholders such as doj , ftc , and others . the national fraud program , which operates at irs's campuses and field offices , coordinates efforts and provides oversight to irs's compliance efforts to identify potential tax fraud . in addition , the program helps identify trends and disseminates the information within irs and acts as a liaison on fraud cases involving bankruptcy and employment and excise taxes among other types of tax fraud . in addition , ci is working to create a web content manager position with responsibilities that include designing a strategy to maximize the potential of ci's internet site . a national fraud program manager sets overall policy and program direction . fraud managers are located in five area offices , and they oversee the activities of about 65 fraud referral specialists . these specialists assist other irs revenue compliance staff in identifying cases with fraud potential , determining when indications of fraud are present , and developing potential cases . they also review fraud cases for technical accuracy and adequacy of supporting documentation to ensure appropriate and consistent application of fraud program guidelines and requirements . cases where criminal activity is involved are referred to ci . according to the commissioner of internal revenue , illegal tax schemes place a major demand on irs resources . a complex illegal offshore trust case could require several times as many hours as a typical exam , and thousands of these cases are emerging . irs is now beginning to gather data that will better enable it to estimate the magnitude and nature of the offshore credit and debit card schemes . improved data will help irs identify how many and what types of resources it may need to address the schemes . however , the evasive nature of these schemes may necessitate face - to - face audits in a significant portion of cases to determine whether taxes are owed and the amount owed .