this should not be the role for the pension insurance system . this moral hazard has the potential to escalate , with the initial bankruptcy of firms with underfunded plans creating a vicious cycle of bankruptcies and terminations . firms with onerous pension obligations and strained finances could see pbgc as a means of shedding these liabilities , thereby providing them with a competitive advantage over firms that deliver on their pension commitments . should variable rate premiums be more risk - related ? if so , how can they be adjusted to accomplish this objective ? what should pbgc's investment strategy be and what impact , if any , should that have on pension funding , recovery , premium , and other calculations ? it is critical that we address these fundamental issues as soon as possible so that we take actions consistent with our broader policy objectives . furthermore , failure to enact the proper reforms could expedite the demise of the defined benefit pension system . as part of gao's efforts to help congress and other policymakers address such issues , i recently convened a group of pension experts at a comptroller general's forum entitled “the future of the defined benefit system and the pbgc.” we will convey the observations of the forum participants in a forthcoming gao report . i will now turn to the specific issues before this subcommittee today . in particular , i will discuss some of the structural problems that limit pbgc's ability to protect itself from risk and steps pbgc has taken to forecast and manage the risks that it faces . in summary , existing laws governing pension funding and premiums have not protected pbgc from accumulating a significant long - term deficit and have not limited pbgc's exposure to “moral hazard” from the companies whose pension plans it insures . the pension funding rules , under erisa and the internal revenue code ( irc ) , were not designed to ensure that plans have the means to meet their benefit obligations in the event that plan sponsors run into financial distress . meanwhile , in the aggregate , premiums paid by plan sponsors under the pension insurance system have not adequately reflected the financial risk to which pbgc is exposed . accordingly , defined benefit plan sponsors , acting rationally and within the rules , have been able to turn significantly underfunded plans over to pbgc , thus creating pbgc's current deficit . should such costs be handled differently than other pension insurance losses ? what portion of the pbgc's premium revenue should be fixed versus variable rate premiums and for what purposes ? despite the challenges it faces , pbgc has proactively attempted to forecast and mitigate its risks . the pension insurance modeling system , created by pbgc to forecast claim risk , has projected a high probability of future deficits for the agency . over the years , these negotiations have directly led to billions of dollars of pension plan contributions and other protections by the plan sponsors . moreover , pbgc has changed its investment strategy and decreased its equity exposure to better shield itself from market risks .