ii ) . to determine what challenges dot faced and the steps dot took to address them in tiger ii , we interviewed relevant dot officials involved in the tiger evaluation process , including all 10 of the evaluation team leaders and 2 members of the review team . we also reviewed dot webinars , reviewed guidance dot issued in the form of “question and answer” documents on the tiger web site , and reviewed supplemental guidance . we also made comparisons between the tiger and tiger ii guidance documents to understand what had been changed or clarified from the first round of review to the second . only one of the programs communicated more outcome information on technical scores and comments . although it was not required in the recovery act to do so , the department of education's race to the top grant fund published all of its ratings and decisions regarding its applicants on its web site , including the application , the score sheet summarizing how the application was rated , narratives on the application that describe the ratings , the application's progression through the selection process , and whether each applicant received an award . in addition to these recovery act grant programs , we also compared the tiger program to the federal transit administration's discretionary new starts program — the federal government's primary program for supporting capital investments in rail and bus rapid transit systems . like race to the top , dot's new starts program also published all scores . however , the evaluations in these two programs were not structured identically to tiger . specifically , new starts did not have a second round of review and used the ratings from its evaluative process as the basis for recommending awards to congress . the secretary approved awards for each of these 51 applications . tiger awards were distributed across the country with 41 states and the district of columbia receiving awards and with roughly equal funding levels ( from 20 to 27 percent of funding ) going to the four geographic regions dot established , as shown in figure 3 . awardees represented a balance between the needs of urban and rural communities , as both groups received awards in about the same proportion as applications submitted and advanced . however , rural projects tended to receive smaller awards and received 11 percent of the total funds . the average tiger award was just under $30 million . the largest award was $105 million for a large freight rail project in two states that would improve intermodal domestic rail service . the smallest award was $3.15 million for a project to improve a road and waterfront bike path in vermont . figure 3 shows the distribution of awards by region , jurisdiction size , transportation mode , and funding level . while there was no requirement to distribute awards across different modes of transportation , tiger funding supported highway , transit , rail , port , and other projects — including bridge replacements , streetcar lines , and bicycle - pedestrian networks ( see table 4 ) . transit projects received the most funding with 12 projects receiving $469 million .