( see fig . the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) is responsible for dredging u.s. ports and harbors . the corps is to carry out projects for improvements of rivers and harbors , by contract or otherwise , in the manner most economical and advantageous to the united states . depending on whether private industry hopper dredges are able to perform this work in aggregate at a lower or higher cost than if the wheeler performed the work , the total cost to government of the wheeler in ready reserve status could be either lower or higher than the corps' estimated subsidy . in addition to the wheeler's subsidy , restrictions have led to inefficient operations for the other corps hopper dredges , resulting in additional costs for the corps . according to corps officials , september is the ideal time to dredge in the pacific northwest , because dredging conditions generally deteriorate in october . the officials mentioned that , at times , the essayons and the yaquina have reached their fiscal year operating limits and returned to port in september , before the projects they were working on were complete . the dredges were sent back to complete the project after the new fiscal year began in october , even though weather conditions may have made dredging conditions less than optimal , and the corps incurred additional transit costs . according to some corps officials , the annual operating limit cannot be extended . for example , the essayons stopped dredging the mouth of the columbia river and returned to port at the end of fiscal year 2001 when it reached its operating limit . the vessel returned to finish the work at the start of the new fiscal year , but adverse weather conditions prevented it from fully dredging the river . as a result , some projects may be postponed until the following fiscal year , reprioritized , or canceled altogether . a potential benefit of the restrictions on the corps' hopper dredge fleet is that an increase in demand for industry's dredging services could encourage existing firms to make capital investments ( eg , build new dredges or improve existing dredges ) or encourage more firms to enter the dredging market . dredging industry representatives told us that the restrictions have already led to an increase in the number of industry vessels and , as evidence , pointed to the addition of two new dredges , the liberty island , a large - class dredge introduced in 2002 , and the bayport , a medium - class dredge introduced in 1999 , as well as the return of the stuyvesant , a large - class dredge , to the u.s. hopper dredging market . moreover , they added that since the restrictions , the private hopper dredging industry has also made improvements and enhancements to its existing fleet — specifically the columbia — thus improving the efficiency of its dredging operations and increasing the capacity of its vessels . until 1978 , the corps performed all hopper dredging work with its 14 hopper dredges .