( recommendation 5 ) . planning: skills and competencies assessment . in our guide , we stated that effective workforce planning and training begins with a skills and competency assessment . a leading practice under this component is that agencies use an organization - wide knowledge and skills inventory and industry benchmarks to help identify performance problems in their workforces . we stated that workforce planning should entail the collection of valid and reliable data on such indicators as distribution of employees' skills and competencies . officials we interviewed at all the selected sub - agencies explained that grants training needs are primarily identified by grants management supervisors or self - identified by grants workforce employees . the training needs are identified on an ad hoc basis during ( 1 ) manager evaluations or observations of employee performance , ( 2 ) annual and semiannual performance assessments , and ( 3 ) employee career individual development plans . when it came to implementing a more rigorous process involving a knowledge and skills inventory or the collection of valid and reliable data , we found varied use among the 3 agencies and 11 sub - agencies with only some employing such a method . the four hhs sub - agencies we reviewed assess new grants workforce employees' knowledge , skills , and abilities by identifying skills gaps when onboarding new grants workforce employees , through supervisor observation of employee performance , or employee feedback . in fiscal year 2015 , usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) sub - agency started holding monthly meetings with its regional grants management division directors to identify national training needs for its grants management staff . in fiscal year 2017 , fns also conducted a nationwide qualitative survey of its grants employees to identify training gaps and needs . the remaining three sub - agencies we reviewed informally identify skills gaps and training needs through ongoing discussions between supervisors and grants employees and during annual performance evaluations . officials from education's central learning and development office stated they issue a department - wide competency assessment and training needs assessment to the various department sub - agencies annually or bi - annually . officials from education's office of elementary and secondary education sub - agency told us they also conduct their own grants workforce learning needs assessment examining grants tasks , content knowledge , and general skills . officials at the other two education sub - agencies told us they assess skills gaps and training needs through ongoing discussions between supervisors and grants employees , supervisor observation of employee performance , and also during annual performance evaluations . without a formal knowledge and skills inventory or collection of valid and reliable data on the grants workforce's skills and competencies , some sub - agencies may be limited in identifying performance problems , competency gaps , and training needs in their grants workforce . design and development: using a mix of approaches , sources , and delivery . design and development involves identifying specific training and development initiatives that the agency will use , along with other strategies , to improve individual and agency performance .