figure 3 illustrates this . the various interagency and dod views on capability gaps and priorities may not provide a full assessment of the risks associated with these gaps at a departmentwide level . table 2 illustrates that current dod - wide documents do not meet all of gao's criteria for a risk assessment . prior gao work has cited that while principles of risk management acknowledge that risk generally cannot be eliminated altogether , enhancing protection from known or potential threats can serve to significantly reduce risk . efforts such as the maritime domain awareness joint integrating concept and assessment of u.s. defense component annual maritime domain awareness plans have demonstrated dod's progress in identifying capability gaps related to maritime domain awareness , but have not been included in a larger , departmentwide maritime domain awareness risk assessment . as a result , dod may lack the insight needed to actively manage the risk associated with identified capability gaps . additionally , because maritime domain awareness is a broad interagency effort , dod may be unable to effectively coordinate with its interagency partners in the absence of a clear departmentwide strategy for maritime domain awareness . consolidating these component efforts to prioritize capability gaps into a comprehensive departmentwide approach to risk management may facilitate developing solutions for each gap . a strategy that includes a comprehensive , risk - based approach to managing maritime domain awareness , including a departmentwide assessment of the critical capabilities , may also provide better information to decision makers about the potential implications of policy and resourcing decisions both within dod and across the interagency . our prior work has shown that a strategy including goals , roles , and responsibilities ; resource allocation ; and performance measures can help ensure that agencies are supporting national and interagency objectives . achieving maritime domain awareness requires cooperation across a range of agencies throughout the federal , state , and local levels . dod has a lead role in maritime domain awareness both because it serves as a key enabler for its own maritime activities and because dod is positioned to provide so many of the resources which assist other agencies in meeting their respective maritime domain awareness needs . it is important that dod components' efforts are consolidated together and aligned amongst each other to ensure that departmentwide maritime domain awareness needs are met and appropriate contributions to the efforts of its interagency partners are made . in the absence of a departmentwide strategy for maritime domain awareness , including the prioritized allocation of resources to maritime domain awareness , measures of performance in meeting the goals and objectives , monitoring of progress in addressing capability gaps , and assessing risk , dod may not be effectively managing its maritime domain awareness efforts . efforts on the part of dod combatant commands , military services , the dod executive agent for maritime domain awareness , and interagency working groups resulted in the identification of several capability gaps , some identified by multiple components . the next step in achieving effective departmentwide maritime domain awareness would be a departmentwide strategy and risk assessment that incorporates these efforts .