drs . jack melling and sushil sharma provided technical expertise . events occurring on that date terrorist attacks on the world trade center and pentagon prompt heightened concerns about possible bioterrorism . in florida , an american media inc. ( ami ) employee is admitted to the hospital with a respiratory condition . the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) issues an alert about bioterrorism , providing information about preventive measures for anthrax . cdc and the florida department of health announce that ami employee has inhalation anthrax . ami employee dies of inhalation anthrax . the postmaster general announces that postal inspection service is working with other law enforcement agencies on the florida incident . the postal service begins nationwide employee education on signs of anthrax exposure and procedures for handling mail to avoid anthrax infection . in ny , the new york city department of health ( nycdoh ) announces the confirmation of a case of cutaneous anthrax in an nbc employee . the postal service says that it will offer gloves and masks to all employees who handle mail . ( on or about ) daschle letter passes through brentwood . boca raton post office , which had direct access to the ami mail , is tested for anthrax and palm beach county department of health administers nasal swabs and offers a 15-day supply of ciprofloxacin to postal employees . on capitol hill , an employee opens a letter addressed to senator daschle . staff in that office , an adjacent office , and first responders are given nasal swabs and a 3-day supply of antibiotics . in nj , state department of health and senior services ( njdhss ) assures trenton employees that they have a low risk of contracting anthrax . anthrax is confirmed at boca raton post office . part of the hart senate office building is closed in the morning , and the remainder of the building is closed in the evening . over the next 3 days , all hart building and other capitol hill employees who request them are given nasal swabs and a 3-day supply of antibiotics . the postal service arranges for environmental testing at brentwood . events occurring on that date a local hazardous materials response team conducts “quick tests” of brentwood , which are negative for anthrax . a contractor conducts more extensive testing in the evening . postmaster general potter holds a press conference at brentwood , in part to reassure employees they are at low risk . cdc confirms cutaneous anthrax in new jersey postal employee , and a second suspected case is identified . in nj , the trenton facility is closed . employees are sent home . in ny , nycdoh announces another case of cutaneous anthrax , in a cbs employee . in florida , the postal service cleans two postal facilities contaminated with anthrax spores . cdc distributes a press release announcing that the food and drug administration has approved doxycycline for postexposure prophylaxis for anthrax . in the dc , a postal employee who works at the brentwood facility seeks medical attention . in nj , the njdhss refers postal employees to their private physicians for medical treatment . employees begin seeking treatment at a local hospital .