mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . they expect to complete the prototype in mid - september of this year . although department officials consider the pharmacy data prototype to be an initial step toward achieving healthepeople ( federal ) , how and to what extent the prototype will contribute to defining the electronic interface for a two - way data exchange between va's and dod's new health information systems are unclear . such prototypes , if accomplished successfully , can offer valuable contributions to the process of determining the technological solution for larger , more encompassing initiatives . however , ensuring the effective application of lessons learned from the prototype requires that va and dod have a well - defined strategy to show how this project will be integrated with the healthepeople ( federal ) initiative . yet va and dod have not developed a strategy to articulate the integration approach , time frames , and resource requirements associated with implementing the prototype results to define the technological features of the two - way data exchange capability under healthepeople ( federal ) . until va and dod are able to determine the architecture and technological solution for achieving a secure electronic systems interface , they will lack assurance that the capability to begin electronically exchanging patient health information between their new systems in 2005 can be successfully accomplished . in addition to lacking an explicit architecture and technological solution to guide the development of the electronic data exchange capability , va and dod continue to be challenged in ensuring that this undertaking will be managed in a sound , disciplined manner . as was the situation in march , va and dod continue to lack a fully established project management structure for the healthepeople ( federal ) initiative . the relationships among the management entities involved with the initiative have not been clearly established , and no one entity has authority to make final project decisions binding on the other . as we noted during the march hearing , the departments' implementation of our recommendation that it establish a lead entity for the government computer - based patient record project helped strengthen the overall accountability and management of that project and contributed to its successful accomplishment . further , although the departments have designated a project manager and established a project plan defining the work tasks and management structure for the pharmacy prototype , they continue to lack a comprehensive and coordinated project plan for healthepeople ( federal ) , to explain the technical and managerial processes that have been instituted to satisfy project requirements for this broader initiative . such a plan would include , among other information , details on the authority and responsibility of each organizational unit ; the work breakdown structure and schedule for all of the tasks to be performed in developing , testing , and deploying the electronic interface ; as well as a security plan . the departments also have not instituted necessary project review milestones and measures to provide a basis for comprehensive management of the project at critical intervals , progressive decision making , or authorization of funding for each step in the development process . it reported expenditures of about $464 million for the system through fiscal year 2003 .