b . does the fee reimburse the agency's annual appropriations ? c. does the statute specify the fee rate paid by each user , or a specific formula or methodology that the agency must use to determine the fee rate ? for independent regulatory agencies that do not follow omb circular a - 25 , is there a need for policies or requirements to ensure regular and timely reviews of regulatory user fees ? c. how , and by whom , will the fee review be used ? d. are the fee reviews designed to identify meaningful changes that might occur in the regulated industry ? what level of transparency , stakeholder outreach , and input is appropriate as part of the fee review process ? are fee review results communicated in a way that addresses the needs of the full range of stakeholders , appropriately addressing both fee payers and other beneficiaries such as the general public ? b . is the total amount to be collected set in statute or determined by the annual appropriations process ? d. does the agency use the rulemaking process to set the fee rate ? e. in cases where rulemaking is not used , how does the agency communicate new fee rates to users ? to what extent do the fees affect the scope of the agency's regulatory activities ? do the fees provide funding for activities that support the agency's regulatory mission ? are the fees the sole source of funding for the regulatory activities , or one of multiple sources of funding ? c. does the amount of the fee affect the scope of the agency's activities to carry out its mission , such as the level , frequency , or amount of regulation ? d. what role does congress play in setting the total amount of the fee and the rates paid by individual users , and to what extent has this authority been delegated to the agency ? e. what role does the appropriations process play , if any , in setting the total amount of the fee ? to what extent does the regulatory activity for which the fee is charged provide services to regulated entities and benefits to the general public ? is the fee paid as a condition of engaging in a particular activity or business subject to federal government regulation ? b . are fee payers provided with a regulatory service , such as a certificate or application review ? c. is the fee intended to fund a higher level of regulatory service than is funded by annual appropriations , such as expedited reviews ? d. do fee payers receive an indirect benefit from federal government regulation , such as increased consumer confidence or industry stability ? e. what public benefits are derived from the regulatory activity for which the fee is charged ? what consideration has been given to whether small entities should be allowed exemptions or lower fees ? does the statute require exemptions or lower fee rates for small entities ? b . for fees set by rulemaking , how will the agency consider the effect of the fee regulation on small entities , as required by the regulatory flexibility act ?