kleiman . how much crime is drug - related ? history , limitations , and potential improvements of estimation methods . what is “street crime ? the economic burden of incarceration in the u.s. concordance institute for advancing social justice working paper #ci072016 . st. louis , mo: washington university , 2016 . mccollister , kathryn e. , michael t. french , and hai fang . “the cost of crime to society: new crime specific estimates for policy and program evaluation.” drug and alcohol dependence , vol . miller , ted r. , mark a. cohen , and brian wiersema . victim costs and consequences: a new look . a final summary report presented to the national institute of justice . national criminal justice reference service , january 1996 . accessed july 20 , 2017. https: / / www.ncjrs.gov / app / publications / abstract.aspx ? nicosia , nancy , rosalie liccardo pacula , beau kilmer , russell lundberg , and james chiesa . the economic cost of methamphetamine use in the united states , 2005 . santa monica , ca: rand corporation , 2009 . ostermann , michael , and joel m. caplan . “how much do the crimes committed by released inmates cost ? ” crime & delinquency , vol . roman , john k. “how do we measure the severity of crimes ? new estimates of the cost of criminal victimization.” measuring crime and criminality: advances in criminological theory , volume 17 , edited by john macdonald , 37-70 . new brunswick , nj: transaction publishers , 2011 . soares , rodrigo r. “welfare costs of crime and common violence.” journal of economic studies , vol . tcherni , maria , andrew lucas blaize davies , giza lopes , and alan lizotte . “the dark figure of online property crime: is cyberspace hiding a crime wave ? ” justice quarterly , vol . welsh , brandon c. , rolf loeber , bradley r. stevens , magda southamer - loeber , mark a. cohen , and david p. farrington . “costs of juvenile crime in urban areas: a longitudinal perspective.” youth violence and juvenile justice , vol . 3 ( january 2008 ) : 3-27 . wickramasekera , nyantara , judy wright , helen elsey , jenni murray , and sandy tubeuf . “cost of crime: a systematic review.” journal of criminal justice , vol . 3 ( may - june 2015 ) : 218-228 . our report examines the following questions about the cost of crime: ( 1 ) how do experts estimate the cost of crime in the u.s. , and what challenges do they face ? ( 2 ) what actions have experts considered in order to improve the understanding and use of cost of crime research ? for purposes of this report , we focused on crimes committed in the united states . specifically , we included crimes where the victim was in the united states and u.s. courts would be the primary jurisdiction . we excluded any crimes that would be adjudicated in other countries , such as international terrorism or piracy on the high seas .