jacksonville . we selected a random sample of 55 the 167 individual permits identified by jacksonville officials . the district could not locate complete permit files for 13 of the permits we requested . in addition , 18 of the permits we requested did not meet our criteria ; for example , some permits were modified in fiscal year 2000 but were not issued in that year . new orleans . district officials could not identify the permits that met our criteria from the district database . therefore , we asked district officials to select the permits issued in fiscal year 2000 where the permittee was responsible for performing compensatory mitigation and reviewed all of the permits they identified . st. paul . the district could not locate one permit file . in addition to the file reviews , we spoke with district officials and reviewed relevant documentation to gain a better understanding of the districts' oversight programs and to gather any information that may not have been available during our file reviews . to identify the enforcement actions the corps can take if it determines that compensatory mitigation requirements are not being met and the extent to which it takes these actions , we analyzed corps data on how the district offices resolved instances of noncompliance during fiscal year 2003 . in addition , we reviewed relevant regulations and documentation obtained either from corps officials or identified during our file reviews . we also discussed with headquarters and district officials the enforcement actions available to the corps and the frequency with which the districts used these actions . in addition , we met with several sponsors of mitigation banks and in - lieu - fee arrangements , as well as subject area experts , such as members of the national research council , to gain their views on the corps' mitigation program . we conducted our review from june 2004 through september 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as noted earlier , the corps has three primary guidance documents for overseeing compensatory mitigation performed by permittees , mitigation banks , and in - lieu - fee arrangements: ( 1 ) the 1999 army corps of engineers standard operating procedures for the regulatory program ( parts i and ii ) ; ( 2 ) the federal guidance for the establishment , use and operation of mitigation banks ; and ( 3 ) the federal guidance on the use of in - lieu - fee arrangements for compensatory mitigation under section 404 of the clean water act and section 10 of the rivers and harbors act . these documents provide guidance for overseeing compensatory mitigation as described in this appendix . the corps' 1999 standard operating procedures for the regulatory program ( part i ) highlights critical policies and procedures that are major factors in administering a consistent program nationwide . it specifies the following: for all compensatory mitigation , compliance inspections are essential . districts will inspect a relatively high percentage of compensatory mitigation to ensure compliance with permit conditions . this is important because many of the corps permit decisions require compensatory mitigation to offset project impacts .