however , more can be done in these areas . ssa has many strengths . the agency is considered to be a leader in federal service delivery , and it has a long tradition of strategic planning . in addition , ssa produces timely and accurate financial statements and is a leader among government agencies for its accountability reporting . however , since 1995 , when ssa became an independent agency , we have called for effective leadership and sustained management attention to a relatively constant set of unresolved management challenges . these challenges include the need to redesign its disability claims process and heighten the focus on work for claimants , address management and oversight problems with its ssi program , meet its growing future service delivery demands , effectively implement its information technology initiatives , and strengthen its research and policy development capacity . solutions to these challenges are difficult but necessary because they are linked to profound changes in our nation . the baby boom generation is nearing retirement age , people are living longer , technology and its applications are changing rapidly , and public expectations for faster and better service from government are growing . the implications of these changes create some management challenges and make others more difficult to overcome . today , i will discuss ssa's progress in meeting these and other challenges . the information i am providing is based on our previous and ongoing work , much of it performed for these subcommittees . ( see related gao products at the end of this statement. ) in summary , ssa has taken a number of varied steps to address its management challenges ; however , the challenges remain , and some are becoming ever more pressing . in certain instances , ssa's actions show promise , but it is too early to tell how effective they will be ; in others , ssa's efforts have not produced the desired results . in almost all cases , the agency has much more to do and will likely need to take bolder action or make more fundamental changes to existing programs or procedures . ssa has been working for years to improve its disability claims process ; yet , ensuring the quality and timeliness of its disability decisions remains one of the agency's greatest challenges . the agency faces some difficult decisions about its next steps in this area and may need to consider more fundamental changes to the process . in addition , although ssa has taken some positive steps to return people with disabilities to work , a more fundamental change to the agency's process and underlying philosophy is needed . since 1996 , we have called for ssa to integrate return - to - work strategies into all phases of its disability determination process to help disabled workers who can return to work to do so . in 1997 , we designated the ssi program as high risk because of its susceptibility to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . since that time , ssa has taken or begun to take a number of concrete and appropriate steps to improve the integrity of the program .