( see table 1. ) specifically , at $2,327 per patient , therapy payments for corf patients were 3.1 times higher than the per - patient payment of $756 for those treated by outpatient hospital - based therapists . higher therapy payments for medicare patients treated at corfs were largely due to the greater number of services that corf patients received . as shown in table 1 , on average , corf patients received 108 units of therapy compared with 37 to 59 units of outpatient therapy , on average , at the other types of outpatient providers . typically , a unit of therapy service represents about 15 minutes of treatment with a physical therapist , occupational therapist , or speech - language pathologist . the pattern of relatively high payments to corfs was evident in all of the localities where corfs were concentrated . in 8 of the 14 msas in florida that had corfs in 2002 , corf payments per patient were higher than payments to all other types of facility - based outpatient therapy providers . these msas together accounted for 86 percent of all florida corf beneficiaries and 90 percent of the state's corf facilities . in these localities , per - patient payments to corfs ranged from 1.2 to 7.4 times higher than payments to the provider type with the next highest payment amount . for example , in fort lauderdale , the 2002 average corf therapy payment was $2,900 — more than twice the average payment of $1,249 made for beneficiaries treated by rehabilitation agencies . in addition , we interviewed federal law enforcement agencies involved in investigations of florida corf facilities . to assess the effectiveness of the contractor's oversight strategies , we reviewed information developed by the contractor on changes in corf billing practices . we also analyzed 2002 claims data for corf services to identify any corfs with disproportionately high medicare payments . this analysis included payment data for all claims — for both therapy and nontherapy services . in contrast to our comparison of per - patient payments by provider type , in this analysis we included all beneficiaries , regardless of their total annual therapy payments and duration of medicare fee - for - service enrollment . we did not independently verify the reliability of cms's medicare claims data . however , we determined that cms's medicare claims data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this engagement . cms operates a quality assurance system designed to ensure the accuracy of its medicare nch and cwf data files . specifically , the agency has procedures in place to ( 1 ) ensure that files have been transmitted properly and completely , ( 2 ) check the functioning of contractor claims edits , and ( 3 ) sample claims from the files that exhibit unusual or inconsistent coding practices ( indicating that data elements may be unreliable ) . in addition , we consulted with cms's technical staff as necessary to ensure the accuracy and relevance of the data elements used in our analysis . we also screened the files and excluded claims that were denied , claims superseded by an adjustment claim , and claims for services in other years .