none was . in fact , at some of these sites , not only was there no information about the census , but there was no indication that the organization we were looking for resided at the address we had from the database . to allocate federal funds ? to provide a count of overseas americans only for general informational purposes ? the answers to these questions have significant implications for the level of precision needed for the data and , ultimately , the enumeration methodology . congress will need to decide whether or not to count overseas americans , and how the results should be used . these decisions , in turn , will drive the methodology for counting this population group . as i've already mentioned , no decisions have been made on whether the overseas data will be used for purposes of congressional apportionment , redistricting , allocating federal funds , or other applications . some uses , such as apportionment , would require precise population counts and a very rigorous design that parallels the stateside count . other applications do not need as much precision , and thus a less rigorous approach would suffice . the basis for these determinations needs to be sound research on the cost , quality of data , and logistical feasibility of the various options . possibilities include counting americans via a separate survey , administrative records such as passport and voter registration forms ; and / or records maintained by other countries such as published census records and work permits . naturalized citizens ? what determines residency in another country ? to determine who should be included in the stateside census , the bureau applies its “usual residence rule,” which it defines as the place where a person lives and sleeps most of the time . for certain purposes , such as apportioning congress , the bureau would need to assign overseas americans to a particular state . should one's state be determined by the state claimed for income tax purposes ? where one is registered to vote ? last state of residence before going overseas ? these and other options all have limitations that would need to be addressed . how should the population data be used ? to apportion congress ? to redistrict congress ? the bureau's initial research has shown that each of these options has coverage , accuracy , and accessibility issues , and some might introduce systemic biases into the data . far more extensive research would be needed to determine the feasibility of these or other potential approaches . in summary , the 2004 overseas census test was an extremely valuable exercise in that it showed how counting americans abroad as an integral part of the decennial census would not be cost - effective . indeed , the tools and resources available to the bureau cannot successfully overcome the inherent barriers to counting this population group , and produce data comparable to the stateside enumeration . further , an overseas census would introduce new resource demands , risks , and uncertainties to a stateside endeavor that is already costly , complex , and controversial .