pub . 113-128 , tit . iv , §§ 491 , 503 ( e ) , 506 ( d ) , 128 stat . 1425 , 1695 , 1701-1705 ( july 22 , 2014 ) . a screening program completed during basic military training at joint base san antonio to identify mental health and behavioral problems . selected air force medical treatment facilities are outfitted with interactive virtual reality systems for use in enhanced exposure therapy between behavioral health providers and patients suffering from conditions such as post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , mild traumatic brain injury , addictions , phobias , and anger management issues . air national guard psychological health program provides assessment services , ensures continuity and engagement in treatment , and prevents servicemembers from falling through the cracks . this program does not provide direct treatment services . psychological health program provides assessment services , ensures continuity and engagement in treatment , and prevents servicemembers from falling through the cracks . this program does not provide direct treatment services . this is a 10-week comprehensive residential treatment program for active duty members with combat related stress disorders , including ptsd . includes evidence - based treatment such as cognitive processing therapy , along with psychopharmacological interventions and complementary alternative treatments . distributes funding to eligible states and territories for a variety of mental health prevention and treatment services ; planning ; administration ; and educational activities under the state plan for comprehensive community - based mental health services for children with serious emotional disturbance and adults with serious mental illness . children and youth ( birth to age 17 ) , adults ( age 18-64 ) provides support for technical assistance to facilitate the restructuring of the mental health system by promoting consumer directed approaches for adults with serious mental illness . criminal and juvenile justice diverts individuals with serious mental illness from the criminal justice system by providing support services that connect the individual to behavioral health , housing , and job placement services . provides comprehensive services focusing on outreach , engagement , intensive case management , mental health services , substance abuse treatment , benefits support , and linkage to permanent housing . supports state and local governments creation or capacity expansion of evidence - based practices addressing the prevention of mental illness ; trauma - informed care ; screening , treatment and support services for military personnel ; and housing and employment support . expands behavioral health services to individuals who are at risk for or have serious mental illness and / or co - occurring substance use disorder and are at risk or living with hiv / aids . supports programs that develop or expand behavioral health and primary care networks in order to reduce the impact of behavioral health problems , hiv risk and hiv - related health disparities . program description funds the coordination and integration of primary care services into publicly - funded community behavioral health settings . the program encourages grantees to engage in necessary partnerships , expand infrastructure and increase the availability of primary health care and wellness services to individuals with mental illness .