the guam epa official did not recall receiving this information . stakeholders said that they discussed concerns about the formerly used defense sites program with the corps , but the concerns have not been resolved . for example , epa officials organized a work group to improve the corps honolulu district office's process for dealing with formerly used defense sites . these searches occurred on different occasions over the years . for example , between 1984 and 1994 , the corps conducted three separate searches in guam to identify contaminated locations . according to a corps honolulu district office official , more than one search was conducted because corps officials had concerns that all contaminated locations may not have been identified in the prior studies . the identification of formerly used defense sites can be difficult in guam because land use and property transfer records are hard to locate and are often incomplete . searches by the navy , the air force , and the corps identified a large number of potentially contaminated locations on both active dod properties and formerly used defense sites . in addition , several potentially contaminated locations were brought to dod's attention through referrals from other parties , such as guam epa . for all of guam , a total of 202 potentially contaminated locations were included in the dod inventory , including 155 on active installations and 47 on formerly used defense sites . the circumstances varied under which dod used these locations , as did the types of hazardous waste and debris they contained . for example , for years the air force disposed of construction debris , aircraft components , ordnance , and chemical waste , such as pesticides , on private property located on the cliff - line boundary of andersen air force base . at the same time , the navy disposed of paints , paint thinners , battery casings , and other material on its own property , which was located near the ocean at orote point , guam . figure 1 shows the navy's disposal site before environmental restoration action began . in the mid - 1990s , as a result of congressional direction and the belief that much of the environmental contamination had been found , dod changed its focus from identifying locations with potential contamination to addressing contamination at the locations already identified . dod officials said that most contaminated locations had been found and that the change in focus was a natural progression of the program . the congress was also concerned that dod had not made much progress in cleaning up identified locations and that more money was being spent on identifying and studying locations than on the actual cleanup . consequently , in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1996 , the congress set a goal for dod to spend no more than 20 percent of its environmental program funds for program support , studies , and investigations . despite the shift in focus from identifying locations to addressing the contamination already found , dod continued to identify and add potentially contaminated locations to its inventory in guam , although fewer locations were added than in the past ( see table 1 ) .