we are not making any recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of our report to dod , department of homeland security , and the department of state for comment . dod , department of homeland security , and department of state provided technical comments , which we incorporated into this report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees . we are also sending copies to the secretary of defense , secretary of state , and the secretary of homeland security . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3489 or pendletonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , suzanne wren ( assistant director ) , delia zee ( analyst - in - charge ) , john beauchamp , mae jones , amie lesser , ned malone , and shahrzad nikoo made key contributions to this report . coast guard acquisitions: polar icebreaker program needs to address risks before committing resources . gao - 18-600 . washington , d.c.: september 4 , 2018 . navy shipbuilding: past performance provides valuable lessons for future investments . gao - 18-238sp . washington , d.c.: june 6 , 2018 . coast guard acquisitions: status of coast guard's heavy polar icebreaker acquisition . gao - 18-385r . washington , d.c.: april 13 , 2018 . coast guard: status of polar icebreaking fleet capability and recapitalization plan . gao - 17-698r . a third analyst reviewed these assessments and reconciled any discrepancies . we conducted interviews with dod and navy officials to identify current naval capabilities used to meet arctic requirements and attended threat briefings and conducted interviews at the u.s. northern command and at the office of naval intelligence to identify the current threat status in the arctic region . we assessed the june 2018 report against the current naval capabilities and threat status identified in those interviews and briefings . we reviewed the united states navy arctic roadmap for 2014 to 2030 that the office of the chief of naval operations issued in 2014 to provide guidance to prepare the navy to respond effectively to future arctic region contingencies , delineate the navy's leadership role , and articulate the navy's support to achieve national priorities in the arctic . we reviewed information from dod and the department of state about the freedom of navigation program established in 1979 to maintain the global mobility of u.s. forces and unimpeded commerce . we also interviewed officials about the need for that program in the arctic and about the program's benefits and risks . we reviewed a navy technical document on operating ships in polar environments , and interviewed naval sea systems command and coast guard officials on what is known about the cost and feasibility of “ice - hardening” existing ships for arctic operations .