officer of the deck phase i course . according to commander , naval surface forces documentation , the junior officer of the deck course will expand into the officer of the deck phase i course . officer of the deck phase i is under development and will be 6 weeks long ( an additional 2 weeks longer than junior officer of the deck ) , and will take place after swo candidates complete the basic division officer course and before they begin their first at - sea assignment . officer of the deck phase i is intended to build on the junior officer of the deck curriculum by increasing the required number of ship - driving training hours from 158 to 241 , and expanding the course content to include instruction on more advanced radar navigation techniques . surface warfare officers school command and commander , naval surface forces officials expect the officer of the deck phase i course to begin in june 2021 . officer of the deck phase ii course . according to navy documentation , the officer of the deck phase ii course that is under development will be 3 weeks long , and will take place after swos have completed their first at - sea assignment and before they attend the advanced division officer course . differences in assessment content or difficulty , remediation attempts , and the fact that the new check may have career implications for swos as a go / no - go assessment may affect proficiency measurements and pass rates . due to these factors , we believe that a comparison between the current officer of the deck competency assessment and the planned officer of the deck phase ii check or another standard should not be considered as valid means for demonstrating changes in ship - driving proficiency over time . that is , adopting a new standard may affect the navy's ability to determine the impact of training on ship - driving proficiency compared with the 2018 baseline results . the navy also stated in its comments that the swo training and assessment continuum is designed to provide training and evaluation at all career milestone levels . the planned system of additional skills checks will provide the navy with more insight into swo proficiency levels over the course of an officer's career and help the navy to understand the effects of changes to training . as we stated in the report , we believe these checks are significant steps in the right direction but may not provide adequate assessment mechanisms in the near term . the more robust officer of the deck competency assessments are necessary to gauge the level of fleet - wide ship - driving proficiency trends following the implementation of the planned ship - driving training programs . further , the navy stated in its comments that while numerous means of assessing swo mariner skills proficiency at various milestone levels are in place , the ultimate swo career path goal is to develop the most proficient , experienced , and confident commanding officers , which occurs approximately 16 years into the swo career path .