gao - 01-883 . washington , d.c.: sept. 10 , 2001 . ( see table 2. ) because the scope of the study was limited to the 13 states with separate child health programs , the oig examined 322,534 , or 16.5 percent , of the approximately 2 million children enrolled in schip in fiscal year 1999 . a review that also included separate schip programs in states that opted for a combination approach under schip would have expanded the available universe to 26 states and to 65 percent of all schip children enrolled in 1999 . moreover , using the oig's general audit authority , the scope of future reviews could include states with schip medicaid expansions , which would provide the congress with more complete information on the extent to which states are enrolling low - income children in the appropriate programs . if this approach had been used in 1999 , 23 states and almost one - fourth of all children enrolled in schip would have been added . ( see table 3. ) the oig identified important limitations to states' evaluations that made it unable to conclude whether states were making progress in reducing the number of uninsured children and in meeting the objectives and goals that they established under schip . for example , the oig found that states made inappropriate assumptions in reporting data about the relationship of schip enrollment to the rates of uninsured , which undermined the credibility of states' results , and that states often had poor baseline data against which to measure progress . the oig also found that states set goals without considering how to evaluate progress , and that little emphasis was placed on evaluation by the states . as a result , the oig made recommendations to both hcfa and hrsa on ways that the federal government could assist and guide states in making improvements in their analyses . while the initial oig reviews were inconclusive due to weaknesses in states' evaluations , future efforts may benefit from federal initiatives under way aimed at improving state - level data and analyses of schip . these initiatives , however , may not have been in place long enough to benefit the oig's next review , since results are due in 2003 . states choosing combination programs take both approaches . for example , connecticut's combination schip program has a limited medicaid expansion — increasing eligibility for 17 to 18 year olds up to 185 percent of the federal poverty level . additionally , the state created a separate child health program , which covers all children in families with incomes over 185 percent , up to 300 percent of the federal poverty level . with regard to program benefits , the choices states make in designing schip have important implications . for example , a state opting for a medicaid expansion under schip must provide the same benefits offered under its medicaid program . for example , the oig reported that none of the 5 states it reviewed attempted evaluations of their outreach programs or offered explanations of how such programs affected their measurable progress in enrollment or the number of uninsured children .