such changes are verified through testing . this testing will be an ongoing process as additional upgrades are applied . what were the keys in dod meeting the urgent requirement for fielding mrap in a timely manner ? first , dod kept the requirements simple , clear , and flexible and did not dictate a single acceptable solution . third , mrap was also given the highest possible acquisition priority and the participating contractors responded in positive ways to meet the needs . fourth , full and timely funding for the acquisition was a definite plus . the question is , can this formula be applied to all of dod's major acquisitions and the broader acquisition process ? the first two keys — simple requirements and mature technologies — certainly can be and , in fact , recent changes to the department's acquisition policies and acquisition reform legislation passed by the congress should enable these practices to be implemented easier than in the past . however , the mrap program also owes it success to the third and fourth key practices as well — a dx rating as the highest priority acquisition in the department and nearly unlimited funding to meet the urgent need — that are not scalable to the broader acquisition process . not every program can be a highest priority and acquisition funds are constrained . while the mrap acquisition benefited from all of the practices mentioned above , the biggest differentiator between that rapid acquisition and other more common acquisitions in dod was that it established requirements that could be achieved with existing technologies . recent studies by the defense science board , the defense acquisition performance assessment panel ( dapa ) , and gao all indicate that the department can and should acquire and deliver weapon systems that fulfill urgent warfighter needs to the field much more quickly . the dsb study recommends a dual acquisition path that allows for a “rapid” acquisition process for urgent needs and “deliberate” acquisition processes for others . it recommends a new agency , proposed as the rapid acquisition and fielding agency , that would be focused on speed , utilizing existing technologies , and acquisition flexibility to achieve the “75 percent solution” quickly . the dapa panel report , among other things , recommended that the acquisition process should never exceed 6 years from its beginning to initial operational capability of the acquired weapon system . it stated that mature technologies and achievable requirements are critical to the success of such time certain development efforts . gao has issued multiple reports under our “best practices” body of work that underscore the need for faster development cycles and the need for mature technologies , well understood requirements , systems engineering knowledge , and incremental delivery of capabilities to enable quicker deliveries . as early as 1999 , we concluded that successful product developments separated technology development from product development , invested time and money in ensuring that their technology base was vibrant and cutting edge , and eliminated technology risk from acquisitions .