, weakened ) . washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2007 . these influenza a subtypes are further characterized into strains . also in august 2007 , indonesian health officials stated that the county will continue to withhold h5n1 samples at least until a new virus - sharing agreement is developed at an international meeting in november 2007 . later in august indonesia sent two samples to cdc for testing , although concerns remain whether indonesia will share or continue to withhold samples in the future . at the november 2007 meeting , no agreement on sample sharing was reached . indonesia advocated an accord stating that for every virus sample sent out of a country , there should be an agreement specifying that the sample be used only for diagnostic purposes . commercial use of the virus would require permission of the country that provided the sample . improved understanding of influenza viruses could improve surveillance and , in turn , vaccine development . scientists at nih , along with a collaborator at emory university , have identified mutations that would help a strain of the h5n1 virus spread easily from person - to - person . this knowledge could contribute to better surveillance of naturally occurring influenza outbreaks because efforts could be focused on identifying viruses with mutations that lead to increased transmissibility among humans . this could permit the development of vaccines prior to a pandemic , and possibly help contain a pandemic at its outset . who and cdc are undertaking a number of activities in order to improve diagnostic capability worldwide . who reported providing equipment and training to staff working within national laboratories and is providing experts to give hands - on support . at the regional level , it reported enhancing the laboratory network with the facilities and expertise to analyze h5 samples so that every country has access to a regional h5 laboratory . this h5 laboratory network has provided support to countries in shipping samples and providing confirmation of suspected h5n1cases . according to who , four laboratories in africa have been upgraded so that they can conduct h5 diagnosis . for the long term , who is working to build and strengthen local h5 diagnostic capability . in addition , cdc officials stated that among its activities the agency provides financial and technical assistance to 35 countries , who , and who regional offices in order to improve influenza laboratory diagnostic capability . cdc is also providing training for laboratory workers and epidemiologists in order to expand laboratory diagnostic capabilities and develop rapid response teams that could quickly detect , report , and control outbreaks caused by novel influenza viruses . cdc officials have also provided laboratory support and diagnostic reagents to countries investigating h5n1 outbreaks . research is being conducted to improve rapid , diagnostic tests for influenza . in order to forestall a pandemic , it is critical to be able to identify people with h5n1 quickly . a reliable , rapid diagnostic test is needed for epidemiological assessments , traveler screening , and clinical care . currently , rapid tests cannot distinguish between strains and subtypes of influenza viruses .