pub . 111-81 , § 3 , 123 stat . 2137 , 2137 – 38 ( 2009 ) , codified at 38 u.s.c . § 117. estimate projected by the ehcpm and estimates developed for services using other methodologies for fiscal years 2012 , 2013 , and 2014 . we also interviewed va officials to discuss how the methods , types of data , and assumptions were used to develop va's health care budget estimate . we also reviewed the president's budget request for va health care services for fiscal years 2012 , 2013 , and 2014 , including va's congressional budget justification supporting the president's request for these years . to examine key changes between the president's fiscal year 2014 budget request and last year's advance appropriations request for fiscal year 2014 , we reviewed and analyzed each request as well as va documents and data related to the estimates that support them . we interviewed va officials and omb staff to discuss the key reasons for any differences between the estimates used to support the two requests . finally , we reviewed the budget justification supporting the president's fiscal year 2014 request in the context of whether it provided congress relevant information that could have a significant impact on va achieving its objectives , including what va plans to achieve with the resources requested . specifically , we evaluated whether va informed congress in its budget justification about key changes that occurred between the president's fiscal year 2014 budget request and the earlier , advance appropriations request for that same year . to examine the extent to which va addressed issues we previously identified regarding information in va's congressional budget justification , we reviewed va's budget justification that supports the president's fiscal year 2014 budget request . we also reviewed va documents and data that described and supported the amounts va estimated for initiatives , non - recurring maintenance ( nrm ) , non - nrm facility - related activities , and proposed savings . we interviewed va officials and omb staff to discuss the methods va used to develop these estimates . in addition , we assessed the amounts estimated for initiatives , nrm , non - nrm activities , and proposed savings in va's budget justification in the context of federal standards for internal control for information and communication . specifically , we evaluated whether va provided congress reliable information for making decisions based on va's fiscal year 2014 and 2015 estimates for these activities . to assess the reliability of va's estimates , we obtained documents supporting these data and verified the consistency of the information in these documents . we confirmed that the estimates were reflected in the president's fiscal year 2014 budget request for va health care services and va's related budget justification . we also relied on our prior work to compare data and check for internal consistency and discussed these data with va officials . we found the data reliable for the purposes of comparing the fiscal year 2014 president's budget request with the earlier , advance appropriations request for that year and for examining whether the issues we previously identified for nrm and operational improvements continued in the estimates that support the president's fiscal year 2014 year budget request .