gao - 14-343sp . washington , d.c.: april 8 , 2014 . some projects may not require nmtc funding . the urban institute study estimated that about 20 percent of projects in the first 4 years of the program showed no evidence of needing nmtcs to proceed while about 30-40 percent did with 30 percent uncertain . however , even in the case where the nmtc funding is necessary , the intricate patterns of investment flows through nmtc structures , where multiple sources may be mingled and later dispersed , make it difficult to determine who is receiving subsidies and whether the return to nmtc investors is higher than necessary . in addition , the network of transactions in the nmtc financial structures increase costs both in terms of explicit cde fees and other resources used to pay the legal and accounting costs necessary to establish the entities that make the transactions . fees and retentions directly reduce the amount of tax subsidized equity investment that is available to low - income community businesses but these costs do not represent the only way that equity can be reduced . the costs associated with financial structures could also appear in the form of higher interest rates , especially when the investor and leveraged lenders are related parties . in listening sessions organized by cdfi fund officials , some cdes reported that comparison of the fees that they charged to the fees charged by integrated investors / lenders were inaccurate because of the ability of integrated investors / lenders to receive compensation in other ways . the fees , interest , and other costs that can offset one another ( a low fee may be offset by a high interest rate ) also reduce transparency by making the net effect on the tax subsidized equity reaching the low - income community business hard to determine . officials at the cdfi fund are attempting to address this issue by requiring cdes to provide a disclosure statement to low - income community businesses about the size of tax subsidized equity and how it is affected by fees and interest rates.the new requirement that cdes disclose to the low - income community businesses all transactions costs , fees , and compensation could help those businesses understand the final net benefit to the project being financed with nmtcs . however , because treasury does not require the cdfi fund to collect the cde disclosure statements itself , the cdfi fund database has incomplete information about fees , interest , and other costs . without such complete information the treasury is limited in its ability to analyze the final net financial benefit of nmtc investments to low - income community businesses . our analysis shows that fees and retentions by the cdes reduced the $8.8 billion of nmtc investment available to the businesses in 2011-2012 by about $619 million or 7.1 percent . the initial reduction occurred as part of the nmtc investment that the cdes retain to cover administrative costs before investing the remainder in the project . the cdes then also charge fees over the course of the 7-year compliance period that further reduces the equity available to the project .