i would be pleased to respond to any questions . if you or your staff have any questions about this statement , please contact marie a. mak , ( 202 ) 512-4841 or makm@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include rick cederholm , assistant director ; peter w. anderson ; john crawford ; claire li ; roxanna sun ; and david wishard . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . the coast guard plans to implement this recommendation by march 2020 . in june 2014 , we found that the coast guard needed to take a more strategic approach in managing its acquisition portfolio . we recommended that the coast guard develop a 20-year fleet modernization plan that would identify all acquisitions necessary for maintaining at least its current level of service and the fiscal resources necessary to build these assets . in july 2018 , we found that that the coast guard has historically operated vessels well past their expected end of service life , and it will likely need to do so with these assets given limited available acquisition funding . our best practices for developing project schedules state that estimating how long an activity takes should be based on the effort required to complete the activity and the resources available and not driven by a specific completion date . in addition , preliminary findings indicate the coast guard did not conduct analysis to identify a reasonable amount of margin or time to include in the program schedule baseline to account for any delays in the program . the current heavy polar icebreaker's schedule includes only 6 months of margin between the coast guard's target and latest acceptable delivery dates . however , our analysis of recent shipbuilding acquisitions shows that longer schedule delays , whether they are in the program's control or not , should be expected . the coast guard has a management body — the executive oversight council — in place to conduct oversight of its major acquisition programs ; however , this management body has not conducted oversight across the entire acquisition portfolio using a comprehensive , collective approach . among the coast guard's three cross - directorate groups that have roles in the acquisition process , we found in july 2018 that the executive oversight council is best positioned to oversee the portfolio collectively and has the potential to implement key portfolio - wide management practices , including conducting formal reviews and issuing reports . this council has cross - directorate senior - level management representation , access to information on acquisition programs , and support from the other two cross - directorate groups ( the systems integration team and the resource councils ) . however , this council has not carried out these portfolio - wide practices .