( see app . i for statistics on service members and advisors participating in the tuition assistance program , fiscal years 2011 through 2013. ) the methods by which the installation and the academic institution assess institutional effectiveness in meeting the educational needs of the installation and monitoring institutional compliance with the mou or contract ( if overseas ) . conduct regularly scheduled education service officers' education workshops for the purpose of training military education services personnel , career counselors , and command master chiefs . advise enlisted and officer airmen on academic and career development from the time they enter active duty until the time they retire or separate . provide counseling prior to authorization of military tuition assistance for first time use on a specific education goal . additional counseling will be provided to meet specific needs as they arise during an airman's progress toward an education goal . counsel and assist students with application for the education benefits programs available under existing department of veterans affairs programs of title 38 of the u.s. code to include , but not limited to , the following: chapter 30 , montgomery gi bill ; chapter 32 , post - vietnam era veterans educational assistance program ; and chapter 33 , post - 9 / 11 gi bill . further assistance with gi bill - related issues should be referred to the regional department of veterans affairs office , as appropriate . provide counseling in both group and individual venues so students can make informed decisions on their eligibility for , and use of , gi bill benefits . counseling is appropriate when requested , but may also be provided prior to separation or retirement in , or apart from , transition assistance briefings . emphasize potential benefits available to airmen who are scheduled to be involuntarily separated . from fiscal year 2011 through 2013 , the number of service members taking courses using the tuition assistance program declined by 8,819 ( about 3 percent ) , according to dod data . dod officials said the decrease was due in part to a temporary suspension of the program resulting from the automatic spending reductions to federal budgets as part of the 2013 sequestration . further , according to dod officials , the drawdown of forces in 2013 accounted for some of this decrease . as the forces continue to draw down , the demand for tuition assistance could drop as service members leave active duty service and are no longer eligible for the program . decreases in the number of active duty service members could potentially affect the number of advisors needed in the future . to help service members pursue educational opportunities , dod advisors are available to provide a range of assistance and information and service members can also receive assistance from other sources ( see fig . dod advisors , who are required to have specific training in educational advising , are available to help service members determine their educational goals , advise them about the range and types of schools they can attend , and the types of courses and degrees these schools offer . ( see app . ii for a description of dod advisor qualifications. )