section 2-8.b . of the cpd monitoring handbook describes hud's basis for determining whether a deficiency should result in a finding or concern , but it does not help field office staff determine which sanction may be appropriate if the deficiency results in a finding . finally , as we mentioned in our response to the previous comment , the additional handbook hud referenced was issued in 1992 , while the cpd monitoring handbook was issued in 2005 . given the great flexibility that exists when taking sanctions , we believe it would be useful to provide field office staff further guidance to ensure they are treating recipients that commit similar infractions equitably . however , given the importance of holding cdbg recipients accountable for how they use their funds , we recommend that hud consider issuing additional guidance for field staff that establishes the parameters within which field offices should operate and provides greater transparency to the sanctioning process . in addition , paul schmidt , assistant director ; nima patel edwards ; cynthia grant ; curtis groves ; alison martin ; john mcgrail ; marc molino ; david noguera ; david pittman ; nitin rao ; and paige smith made key contributions to this report . we revised the report to include the suggested text . we revised the text to make it clear that the 29 exhibits we mention are in the two handbook chapters that are specific to the cdbg program . we agree that the meetings referenced by hud can be helpful in sharing information on current operational issues with idis . however , the meetings that hud has referenced are either regularly scheduled management meetings or training on hud's new performance measurement system . none of these meetings are the field office sessions that are specifically mentioned in the statement of work for the reengineered idis system . when we asked about the status of sessions that the statement of work said would be held with field staff regarding user requirements , accomplishment reporting , and proposed navigation approaches , the hud official that is overseeing development of the new system stated that these sessions would not be held until late summer 2006 at the earliest , although a functional requirements document had already been drafted . further , additional statements made by that official and hud's written comments indicate that the focus of future meetings with field staff will only be on reporting requirements . we continue to believe that soliciting input from end users on system requirements is consistent with best practices for system development and recommend that field office staff should participate in project management throughout the system's life cycle to ensure that the completed system supports both hud's business needs and the end user field office needs . we agree that monitoring low - or medium - risk grantees can serve a useful and valid program purpose , especially considering the large number of grantees designated as such . the report acknowledges that hud policy permits the monitoring of medium - and low - risk recipients by noting that they can be reviewed using remote , or off - site , monitoring . therefore , we made no change to the report .