( app . ii contains more information on the provisions of the 2006 softwood lumber agreement. ) in 2008 , congress passed the softwood lumber act imposing additional requirements on cbp for monitoring the softwood lumber trade . according to the legislation , the required reconciliations are to ensure the proper operation and implementation of international agreements related to softwood lumber . furthermore , the importer declaration program established by the act is intended to assist in the enforcement of any international obligations arising from international agreements related to softwood lumber . the act does not contain language specifying an end date for these efforts . to meet these legislative requirements , cbp adapted its existing entry summary compliance measurement program to include softwood lumber as a subcomponent . the program selects softwood lumber entries for verification via random statistical sampling . when an entry is selected for verification , import specialists at the ports review the entry form to ensure that all of the required information is included and request supporting documentation from the importers to verify that the information on the entry document has been recorded correctly . the import specialists then enter the results into an electronic database system that cbp headquarters accesses and analyzes . in its october 2009 semiannual report to congress , cbp reported that approximately 82 percent of the samples its officials verified during the first 6 months of the process , from october 2008 to march 2009 , correctly reported the export price — with a higher rate , almost 85 percent , for imports from canada . regarding the export charge , about 77 percent of the entries cbp sampled from canada had that value reported correctly . in addition , cbp reported that about 90 percent of the importer declarations were reported properly . according to cbp , the requirements did not apply to an additional 5 to 10 percent of the selected canadian samples because they were exempt from the provisions of the bilateral trade agreement . officials stated that the combination of samples that were reported correctly and those for which the requirements were not applicable brought the overall results for the softwood lumber samples for canada close to what they see for other commodities . because the importer or customs broker should copy the export price from the canadian export permit onto the u.s. entry form , cbp officials said they expect discrepancies in the data to result mainly from the following: ( 1 ) human errors in copying the export price from one form to another and ( 2 ) differences caused by converting from canadian to u.s. dollars . in addition , cbp officials explained that the export price for a shipment could be listed as one line on the canadian export permit , but broken into multiple lines on the u.s. entry form . cbp has instructed importers in how to resolve this issue , but officials said that importers sometimes do not perform this calculation correctly . in its october 2009 report to congress , cbp reported that discrepancies between the export price reported on the canadian export permit and the export price reported on the u.s. entry form have decreased over time .