ii. ) the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 ( sara ) added provisions to cercla specifically governing the cleanup of federal facilities , including active military bases and those that are slated for closure under brac and , among other things , required the secretary of defense to carry out the defense environmental restoration program ( derp ) . following sara's enactment , dod established derp , which now consists of two subprograms: ( 1 ) the installation restoration program , which addresses the cleanup of hazardous substances that are primarily controlled under cercla and were released into the environment prior to october 17 , 1986 ; and ( 2 ) the military munitions response program , which addresses the cleanup of munitions including uxo and the contaminants and metals related to munitions that were released into the environment prior to september 30 , 2002 . cleanups of hazardous substances released after 1986 and munitions released after 2002 are not eligible for derp funds . these cleanups are generally referred to as non - derp or “compliance” cleanups and often include activities that are regulated by the resource conservation and recovery act . these cleanups involve the closure and cleanup of operations associated with landfills , training ranges , and underground storage tanks and are generally funded under base operations and maintenance accounts for active bases . once the property is determined to be unneeded and transferable to other users under brac , the cleanups are funded under the brac account . while sara had originally required the government to warrant that all necessary cleanup actions had been taken before transferring property to nonfederal ownership , the act was amended in 1996 to expedite transfers of contaminated property . now such property , under some circumstances , can be transferred to nonfederal users before all remedial action has been taken . however , certain conditions must exist before the department can exercise this early transfer authority , such as the property must be suitable for the intended reuse and the governor of the state must concur with the transfer . in addition to investigations into potential hazards , dod is required to follow national environmental policy act requirements and consult with local redevelopment authorities during the process of property disposal and during the process of relocating functions from one installation to another . although the decision to close or realign installations is not subject to the national environmental policy act , dod is required to follow the act's requirements during the process of property disposal and during the process of relocating functions from one installation to another . the national environmental policy act requires federal agencies , including dod , to consult with and obtain the comments of other federal agencies that have jurisdiction by law or special expertise with respect to any environmental impact involved with the action . dod's march 2006 base redevelopment and realignment manual requires the military services to prepare an environmental condition of property report for closing brac bases . the report is used to evaluate the environmental condition of all transferable property based on already available information on contamination . it can be used to identify “gaps” in information regarding environmental conditions and where more study is required .