gao - 09-632t . washington , d.c.: april 22 , 2009 . older workers: enhanced communication among federal agencies could improve strategies for hiring and retaining experienced workers . gao - 09-206 . washington , d.c.: february 24 , 2009 . the chcos we selected were members of the chco council . because a portion of the survey focused on agency perceptions of opm's assistance , we excluded opm's chco from our sample . additionally , because we intended the survey respondents to speak on behalf of their department or agency , we excluded two chco council members who serve as proxies for numerous federal agencies , specifically one member representing small federal agencies and another member representing federal national security and intelligence agencies . of the 40 potential respondents , 33 completed our survey . we reviewed applicable statutes and regulations , past opm reports , opm's 2006-2010 and 2010-2015 strategic plans , written policy , guidance , directives , and material on opm's web site relating to work / life assistance , guidance , and identification of leading practices . we interviewed opm officials and staff in opm's office of work / life / wellness . we reviewed reports and periodical articles about the work / life programs of leading private sector companies . we selected seven private sector companies representing various industries that have been recognized by human capital associations and publications as providing their employees with quality work / life programs . we interviewed the officials from these companies who have direct knowledge of their companies' work / life programs to obtain information on the development and implementation of those programs . however , these seven companies are not representative of all private sector companies and therefore , we cannot generalize the information these private sector officials provided about their work / life programs to other private sector companies . we reviewed prior gao reports on human capital issues . see appendix i for more information about our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from august 2009 through december 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . employers in both the public and private sectors have realized that offering work / life programs — such as alternative work schedules , child care , and health and wellness programs — have become an essential element in recruiting and retaining their workforces . the federal government , as a major employer , also recognizes that work / life policies , programs , and practices make good business sense . congress has recognized the need to provide federal workers workplace flexibilities and has authorized numerous work / life programs for federal agencies to implement . in addition , the executive branch has recognized and supported the benefits of these programs by implementing a range of work / life programs , from flexible work arrangements to child care assistance .