this is not a gao conclusion . other challenges are highlighted below . program officials agreed with our assessment of dd ( x ) program risks , but believe these risks can be mitigated through use of fallback technologies and design budgeting . design budgeting refers to the practice of building in extra margins , such as weight and space , to accommodate growth as the design matures . appendix i provides details on the status of all 10 engineering development models . the integrated power system is currently exceeding its weight allowances by a significant amount and has used up its entire additional design margin for weight . this means that any further increases in weight could affect other systems or result in an unplanned and unbudgeted weight reduction program . the power system has also experienced some software compliance issues with the total ship computing environment . program officials have defined the software issue and are working toward a solution . in addition , the testing schedule for the power system has been altered due to changes to the dual band radar . program officials had planned to test the two subsystems together in at - sea tests on a surrogate vessel . when the delays in testing for dual band radar occurred , at - sea tests for the power system were cancelled . to compensate for the loss of knowledge that was to be gained by this testing , the program office plans for increased fidelity in land based testing . plans for the integrated power system do include the use of a fallback technology . use of the technology would require some trade - offs in performance , weight , and noise requirements . in their comments on this report , the department of defense stated that the navy has allocated additional margin from the total ship design to account for weight growth in the integrated power system . while this adjustment in overall ship margin does not directly impact the overall ship design , it may leave less space for future growth in other systems . while the early tests of the autonomic fire suppression system exceeded expectations , by sustaining significant damage and still controlling the fire , some challenges have arisen that delayed later testing . like the power system , the fire suppression system experienced compatibility issues with the total ship computing environment . these issues have been recognized and the program office has identified solutions to resolve them . these software compatibility issues caused a delay in the system tests that pushed their completion beyond the system - level critical design review . the current testing plans for the integrated undersea warfare system include testing of the dual frequency sonar array for internal interference , the ability of the high frequency portion of this array to detect mines , and the software necessary to integrate all functions and reduce the sailor's workload . though these tests may prove the functionality of components and technologies within the undersea warfare system , they do not demonstrate the system as a whole . as a result , when the current series of testing concludes in may 2005 , the undersea warfare system will not have demonstrated operations in the intended environment .