attorneys offices . the secret service and ice ( in homeland security ) also investigate cases involving money laundering and terrorist activities . irs - ci uses bsa information to investigate possible cases of money laundering and terrorist financing activities . federal and multiagency law enforcement teams , which may include state and local law enforcement representatives , also use sar data to provide additional information about subjects during ongoing investigations . from 2000 through 2007 , depository institutions filed an increasing number of sars each year and representatives from federal regulators , law enforcement , and depository institutions with whom we spoke attributed the increase to a number of factors . according to fincen data , sar filings by depository institutions increased from approximately 163,000 in 2000 to more than 732,000 in 2008 . in our report , our analysis of sar and banking data from 2004 through 2007 indicates that the growth rates in sar filings varied over time among depository institutions of different asset sizes . for example , the greatest increase in sars filed during this period by the largest depository institutions occurred from 2004 to 2005 , and sars filed by small credit unions nearly doubled from 2005 to 2006 . representatives of federal banking regulators , law enforcement agencies , and depository institutions most frequently attributed the increase to two factors: technological advances and the effect of public enforcement actions on institutions . according to the representatives , automated transaction monitoring systems can flag multiple indicators of suspicious activity and identify much more unusual activity than could be identified manually . at the largest depository institutions , these systems conduct complex analyses incorporating customer profiles . the representatives also said that issuance of several public enforcement actions in 2004 and 2005 with civil money penalties and forfeitures up to $40 million against a few depository institutions prompted many institutions to file more sars . fincen and the federal banking regulators took the actions because of systemic bsa program noncompliance , which included failures to meet sar filing requirements . more recently in march 2010 , government actions taken against one depository institution for bsa violations , including sars violations , included $160 million in penalties and fines . depository institution representatives with whom we spoke cited a third factor for increases — concerns they would receive criticisms during examinations about decisions not to file sars . to avoid such criticism , they said their institutions filed sars even when they thought them unnecessary — a practice sometimes called “defensive sar filing.” however , according to the federal regulators and some law enforcement officials with whom we spoke , there is no means of determining what , if any , portion of the increase in filings could be attributed to defensive filing . the representatives suggested additional factors as contributing to the increase , including greater awareness of bsa requirements after september 11 , 2001 , more regulator guidance for bsa examinations , and more bsa - related training at the institutions . fincen and law enforcement agencies have taken multiple actions to educate filers about sars usefulness and improve the quality of sar filings .