feedback through the emma website . msrb's long - range plan includes improving search capabilities to make it easier for investors to find securities . planned changes would allow users to find specific securities information using information other than cusip numbers , such as keywords , map - based information , or hierarchy - based searches ( for example , securities within a given state ) , and would allow users to conduct advanced searches within disclosure documents . the plan also includes ongoing work with the issuer community to develop additional tools and utilities to help issuers manage their debt portfolios and to promote more comprehensive and timely disclosure . for example , msrb plans to develop more flexibility for issuers to manage disclosure submissions and their appearance in emma . these new emma capabilities could enable issuers to compare the disclosure and performance of their securities with their peers' securities . msrb also plans to continue promoting awareness of emma and provide additional online education information for investors , including how to work with advisors , access pricing information , and use emma . sec's ongoing study of the state of the municipal securities market has focused on a range of issues such as primary and secondary market disclosure practices , financial reporting and accounting , investor protection and education , and market structure ( including pretrade price transparency ) . sec staff told us one purpose of the study is to identify risks in the market and what types of changes , if any , might be needed , including changes in the quality and timeliness of disclosure information provided to the market . sec staff expect to release their staff report in 2012 , and include legislative , regulatory , and industry best practices and recommendations to sec commissioners for measures to improve primary and secondary market disclosure practices , measures to improve market practices , and associated regulation . in addition , the dodd - frank act required sec to create an office of municipal securities to administer sec rules for municipal securities brokers and dealers , advisors , investors , and issuers , and to coordinate with msrb on rulemaking and enforcement actions . sec has been in the process of hiring an office of municipal securities director and staff . sec's fiscal year 2012 budget provides for five full - time staff ; however , as of april 2012 , the office had three employees . we provided a draft of this report to sec , msrb , and finra for comment . sec and msrb provided technical comments , which we incorporated , as appropriate . finra did not provide comments on the draft report . we are sending copies of this report to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs and the house committee on financial services . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or clowersa@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of public affairs and congressional relations may be found on the last page of this report .