state does not have any rhcs . kentucky has the authority to use a payment methodology other than the bipa pps for paying fqhcs and rhcs in the counties operating under the state's 1115 waiver managed care program . under utah's 1115 waiver , the state has the authority to use a payment methodology other than the bipa pps for paying fqhcs for beneficiaries enrolled in the state's primary care network program . ( fig . 4 provides the timeline of the issuance of cms guidance. ) on january 19 , 2001 , cms issued a letter to state medicaid directors summarizing bipa's new fqhc and rhc payment provisions , but the letter provided no interpretation of the legislation or clarification as to how cms expected states to implement the new payment provisions . the letter also instructed states to submit spas that conformed to the bipa requirements before the end of the first calendar quarter of 2001 ( march 31 , 2001 ) . to assist states in meeting this deadline , cms provided regional offices with standard bipa - compliant spa language on march 9 , 2001 . according to cms , prior to approving the spas , the regional offices were to work with each state to ensure that the spa reflected the specifics of the state's payment methodology . while most of cms's 10 regions followed this protocol , 1 region approved the spas for its six states even though most of these spas still contained only the standard language initially provided by cms . these spas indicated that states intended to conform to bipa , but most contained no details as to how each state planned to implement the new payment system . although these states reported to us in response to our survey the details of how they were paying fqhcs and rhcs , cms did not require these states to update their spas . as a result , cms did not have an official record detailing how fqhcs and rhcs were paid in most of the states in this region . while cms later provided the states and regional offices with more detailed guidance , this guidance was issued after many states' spas were submitted and approved . on april 13 , 2001 , 2 weeks after the deadline for spa submission , a cms official provided regional office staff with suggested spa review guidelines by e - mail . by the time this guidance was provided , all states had submitted their spas and cms had approved 2 states' spas . the april 2001 guidance outlined key points that each spa was to include to ensure compliance with bipa . for example , the guidance recommended that each spa explain the averaging methodology used to determine the base pps rate . additional guidance from cms was not issued until 5 months later , by which time 57 percent of spas ( spas for 29 of 51 states ) had been approved . specifically , on september 12 , 2001 , cms sent a question and answer document to regional office administrators , who were instructed to provide the guidance to states . overall caps . ten states reported applying limits on how much they would reimburse for a patient's visit .