to execute all response plans . emergency equipment includes at least one of the following: a radio system that is redundant and interoperable with law enforcement and emergency response agencies . at least one backup communications system , such as cell phones / desk phones . an emergency notification system ( eg , a siren or other facility - wide alarm system ) . automated control systems or other process safeguards for all process units to rapidly place critical asset ( s ) in a safe and stable condition and procedures for their use in an emergency . emergency safe - shutdown procedures for all process units . d.1.5 ___ all facility personnel have been trained on all response plans and response plans are exercised on a regular basis and at a minimum of biennially . prescriptive nature of the eap . as previously discussed , the cfats act of 2014 required dhs to develop specific security measures for the eap that are sufficient to meet risk - based performance standards . iscd officials and officials from 6 of the 11 industry organizations we interviewed stated that the prescriptive security measures required in the expedited security plan likely deterred some facilities from using the eap . according to iscd officials , some industry officials think that certain eap - required security measures are too strict for tier 3 and tier 4 facilities . officials we interviewed from 5 of the 11 industry organizations said that some , if not most , eap - required security measures are more robust or strict than they should be for tier 3 and tier 4 facilities ; however , officials from a sector coordinating council and a member organization said that the eap's required security measures are fair or appropriate for tier 3 and tier 4 facilities . iscd officials agreed that some eap required security measures are strict because the cfats act of 2014 requires that dhs develop specific security measures and approve expedited security plans that are determined to not be facially deficient based only on a review of the plan . for example , an industry official told us that a security measure pertaining to screening and inspection of vehicles is too strict . specifically , the eap guidance states that a facility must screen and inspect all vehicles for firearms , explosives , or certain materials prior to allowing vehicles access to the facility's perimeter by visually inspecting the vehicle , using a trained explosive detection dog team , under / over vehicle inspection systems , or cargo inspection systems . iscd officials told us that this security measure is required because iscd would not be able to evaluate the capability of a facility's random or percentage - based screening and inspection program by doing a review of the facility's expedited security plan ; therefore , iscd requires that eap facilities apply this requirement to all vehicles prior to accessing a facility's perimeter . however , iscd officials and officials from 4 of 11 industry organizations also stated that the eap's prescriptive measures actually could encourage some facilities to use the eap .