viii ) . the administrator of general services concurred with our findings and recommendations and stated that the administration has developed and implemented an automated tracking system , providing it with internal control of the data . in addition , the administrator stated that gsa had increased the foia staff , resulting in more checks and reviews to verify that data are entered correctly ( see app . vi ) . three agencies provided written comments describing additional actions taken in regard to overdue requests: the director of the department of homeland security's gao / oig liaison office concurred with our findings and recommendations and described actions taken by the department to continue to decrease the number of overdue requests , actions taken by cis to expedite foia processing , and the priority given to departmentwide guidance ( see app . vii ) . the assistant administrator and chief information officer of the environmental protection agency described actions that the department has taken to ensure that it continues to decrease the number of its overdue requests ( see app . v ) . such requests are generally granted in full . other agencies , on the other hand , receive numerous requests whose responses must routinely be redacted to prevent disclosure of personal or other exempt information . for example , nsf reported in its fiscal year 2005 annual report that most of its requests ( an estimated 90 percent ) are for copies of funded grant proposals . the responsive documents are routinely redacted to remove personal information on individual principal investigators ( such as salaries , home addresses , and so on ) , which results in high numbers of “partial grants” compared to “full grants. for 2006 , the reported time required to process requests ( by track ) varied considerably among agencies . table 6 presents data on median processing times for fiscal year 2006 . those goals were to be expressed in two ways . first , each agency was required to set a goal for the number of requests and the number of appeals that it planned to process during each fiscal year from 2008 through 2010 . second , each agency was required to set a goal for the number of requests and the number of appeals that the agency estimated would be pending beyond the statutory time period ( i.e. , backlog of overdue requests ) at the end of each fiscal year from 2008 through 2010 . in october 2007 , justice issued supplemental guidance on the section of the fiscal year 2007 annual foia reports in which agencies were to describe progress on their improvement plans and provide certain additional statistics . among other things , this guidance required agencies to track their 10 oldest pending requests ; to track the number of consultations received , processed , and pending ; and to report this information in their fiscal year 2007 annual foia reports . it also provided templates for the progress reports and additional statistics . in 2001 , in response to a congressional request , we prepared the first in a series of reports on the implementation of the 1996 amendments to foia , starting from fiscal year 1999 .