location . sixteen state agencies reported that the unknown or uncertain location of unregulated gathering pipelines presents a moderate or high safety risk . although individual operators may know the locations of unregulated pipelines , state and local safety agencies may not know or may be uncertain about the locations and mileage of unregulated pipeline infrastructure in their communities . this information is particularly useful for “call before you dig” programs operated by states and localities . one state pipeline safety official reported that making such attention public can bring additional pressure on and provide incentives for a company to maintain and operate its infrastructure safely . one phmsa official reported that although many states do not have an enforcement program as elaborate as phmsa , states with stronger enforcement programs have more of an impact on the operators to increase safety . pipeline operators may have procedures and established contacts with local enforcement personnel in order to act appropriately to halt dangerous excavation activities that may damage pipelines and potentially cause an immediate threat to life or property . regarding federally unregulated gathering pipelines , one colorado official reported that because gathering pipeline companies operate pipelines and conduct excavation work , they would be subject to any necessary enforcement due to safety violations . however , sharing of information among states on the safety practices they use for unregulated gathering pipelines appears to be limited . some state and phmsa officials we interviewed had limited awareness of what other states were doing to help ensure the safety of gathering pipelines not regulated by phmsa . for example , pipeline safety officials we interviewed had limited awareness of other state programs — sometimes even for an adjacent state — even if those programs were intended to address common risks , such as reducing excavation damage and corrosion . phmsa officials were likewise unable to report on the safety practices that many states use or on states' regulations that were more stringent than federal requirements . phmsa's website holds a wealth of information on various pipeline safety topics , including recent pipeline forums and industry research , incident investigations , and other information . however , information targeted at gathering pipelines , including relevant safety practices and state activities , is limited . in addition , all related information could be grouped to decrease time spent searching and scanning . currently , there is no central phmsa web page or resource for gathering pipelines , regulated or unregulated — possibly due , in part , to the lower safety risks that regulated gathering pipelines have posed to people and property when compared with other pipelines , like transmission pipelines . phmsa officials said that its website also focuses on pipelines that phmsa regulates but excludes most gathering pipelines . phmsa has considered the development of a website to help facilitate sharing information among states . while this project is still in the planning stages and not targeted at gathering pipelines , it could be a resource to share program and safety practices among states and phmsa . increased communication and information sharing about pipeline safety practices could boost the use of those practices in states with unregulated gathering pipelines .