( see fig . 1 for a simplified depiction of dod's organizational structure. ) in support of its military operations , the department performs an assortment of interrelated and interdependent business functions , including logistics management , procurement , health care management , and financial management . as we have previously reported , the dod systems environment that supports these business functions is overly complex and error prone , and is characterized by ( 1 ) little standardization across the department , ( 2 ) multiple systems performing the same tasks , ( 3 ) the same data stored in multiple systems , and ( 4 ) the need for data to be entered manually into multiple systems . moreover , the department's nonintegrated and duplicative systems impair its ability to combat fraud , waste , and abuse . the department recently reported that this systems environment is composed of approximately 2,480 separate business systems . for fiscal year 2010 , dod requested about $15.5 billion in funds to operate , maintain , and modernize its business systems and associated information technology ( it ) infrastructure . dod currently bears responsibility , in whole or in part , for 15 of the 31 programs across the federal government that we have designated as high risk because they are highly susceptible to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . eight of these areas are specific to the department , and 7 other high - risk areas are shared with other federal agencies . however , other important performances measures , which typically include measures associated with determining progress against program cost , capability , and benefit commitments , are not included in the report . bta officials cited various reasons for the scope and content of the information provided and not provided , but these reasons are at odds with other aspects of its report . in addition to the contact person named above , key contributors to this report were carl barden , justin booth , nancy glover , michael holland , neelaxi lakhmani ( assistant director ) , kate nielsen , constantine papanastasiou , christine san , sylvia shanks , jennifer stavros - turner , and adam vodraska . without including information on program performance against , and revisions to , such key measures as cost , capability , and benefit commitments , dod is not providing congress with the information needed to inform its oversight of business system modernization programs . consistent with the act's requirement that dod report on specific milestones and revisions to the milestones , dod's march 2010 report includes a summary of the status of milestones that were to be completed during fiscal 2009 , the revisions associated with these milestones ( e.g . delayed or deleted ) , and the reason for the revision . specifically , the report lists three categories of milestones: standard acquisition milestones: key events and dates that are provided for under dod's system acquisition process . bea compliance milestones: time frames for addressing specific irb certification conditions related to ensuring bea compliance . interim milestones: key events and dates to supplement dod's system acquisition process milestones ( eg , implementing specific system capabilities or upgrading infrastructure by a given date ) .