repeat offenders . changes in the percentage of persons apprehended who have repeatedly crossed the border illegally ( referred to as the recidivism rate ) is a factor that border patrol considers in assessing its ability to deter individuals from attempting to illegally cross the border . our analysis of border patrol apprehension data showed that the recidivism rate has declined across the southwest border by about 6 percentage points from fiscal years 2008 to 2011 in regard to the number of apprehended aliens who had repeatedly crossed the border in the prior 3 years . specifically , our analysis showed that the recidivism rate across the overall southwest border was about 42 percent in fiscal year 2008 compared with about 36 percent in fiscal year 2011 . the tucson sector had the third - highest recidivism rate across the southwest border in fiscal year 2011 , while the highest rate of recidivism occurred in el centro sector , as shown in figure 2 . according to border patrol headquarters officials , the agency has implemented various initiatives designed to address recidivism through increased prosecution of individuals apprehended for crossing the border illegally . seizures of drugs and other contraband . border patrol headquarters officials said that data regarding seizures of drugs and other contraband are good indicators of the effectiveness of targeted enforcement operations , and are used to identify trends in the smuggling threat and as indicators of overall cross - border illegal activity , in addition to potential gaps in border coverage , risk , and enforcement operations . however , these officials stated that these data are not used as a performance measure for overall border security because while the agency has a mission to secure the border against the smuggling threat , most smuggling is related to illegal drugs , and that drug smuggling is the primary responsibility of other federal agencies , such as the drug enforcement administration and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement , homeland security investigations . our analysis of border patrol data indicated that across southwest border sectors , seizures of drugs and other contraband increased 83 percent from fiscal years 2006 to 2011 , with drug seizures accounting for the vast majority of all contraband seizures . specifically , the number of drug and contraband seizures increased from 10,321 in fiscal year 2006 to 18,898 in fiscal year 2011 . most seizures of drugs and other contraband occurred in the tucson sector , with about 28 percent , or 5,299 , of the 18,898 southwest border seizures occurring in the sector in fiscal year 2011 as shown in figure 3 . data reported by border patrol following the issuance of our december 2012 report show that seizures of drugs and other contraband across the southwest border decreased from 18,898 in fiscal year 2011 to 17,891 in fiscal year 2012 . it is too early to assess whether this decrease indicates a change in the trend for border patrol seizures across the southwest border . southwest border sectors scheduled most agent workdays for enforcement activities during fiscal years 2006 to 2011 , and the activity related to patrolling the border accounted for a greater proportion of enforcement activity workdays than any of the other activities .