has more than 150 penalties . in fiscal year 2007 , irs assessed more than 37.6 million civil penalties , totaling more than $29.5 billion , while abating — that is , rescinding in whole or in part — more than 4.9 million civil penalties for more than $11.1 billion . major reforms to civil tax penalties were last made in 1989 . your committee has expressed interest in the process irs follows when administering penalties and the effectiveness of the penalty regime , and about the implementation of a penalty for failing to disclose reportable transactions — transactions irs has identified as tax avoidance transactions or that are substantially similar thereto — and whether it was being appropriately assessed . therefore , we agreed to determine ( 1 ) whether irs is evaluating penalties in a manner that supports sound penalty administration and voluntary compliance and , if not , how irs may be able to do so and ( 2 ) whether guidance for a new penalty for the failure to disclose reportable transactions was issued in a timely manner and was useful to affected parties , and whether and how irs has assessed the new penalty . to determine whether irs is evaluating penalties in a manner that supports sound penalty administration and voluntary compliance , we reviewed official documents and guidance , including the internal revenue manual . we interviewed officials from the irs office of servicewide penalties ( osp ) and the four irs business divisions ( small business / self employed ( sb / se ) , large & mid - size business , tax exempt and government entities , and wage and investment ) to determine their roles in penalty administration . in addition , we interviewed state officials and reviewed academic studies regarding assessments of penalty effectiveness and contacted the federation of tax administrators ( fta ) for recommendations of states to contact . in all , we spoke with representatives of 25 states . to determine whether irs issued guidance for a new penalty for failure to include reportable transactions information with returns in a timely manner that was useful to affected parties and whether and how irs has assessed the new penalty , we reviewed irs documentation and guidance for implementing the penalty and implementation action plans . for example , the task force's report and congress in the conference report for the act that included the penalty reform recommended that irs analyze information concerning the administration and impact of penalties for the purpose of suggesting changes in compliance programs , educational programs , penalty design , and penalty administration . the task force also recommended that irs analyze data to enable irs , treasury , and congress to evaluate how well penalties operate and what impact they have on voluntary compliance . similarly , in her 2008 annual report , the national taxpayer advocate wrote that before serious penalty reform can occur , better data about whether and how penalties promote voluntary compliance is needed . however , osp generally does not fulfill the responsibilities specified in irs policy or as envisioned by the 1989 irs task force report , congress , or the national taxpayer advocate .