, they are tenant - based ) . reduce payments standards: because phas may set their own payment standards — that is , the maximum rent that can be used to calculate rental subsidies — anywhere between 90 and 110 percent of the fmr for their area , reducing payment standards allow phas to limit growth in rental subsidy payments . ensure reasonable rents: statute and hud regulations require phas to compare rents for voucher units to those for comparable unassisted units and reduce rents for voucher units if warranted . to ensure that rents are reasonable , phas can conduct more frequent reviews of rents charged by landlords . any rent reductions would reduce the rental subsidy payments that phas make . deny moves within and outside pha jurisdiction: the voucher program allows households to move anywhere within and outside of a pha's jurisdiction . however , if a pha has insufficient funding , it can deny a voucher household's move to an area that would result in higher subsidy costs — for example , an area with a higher payment standard . not reissue vouchers or terminate assistance: vouchers can become available to new households when assisted households leave the program ( turnover ) . to limit costs , phas can choose not to reissue turnover vouchers or pull back outstanding vouchers for other unassisted households searching for housing . phas can also terminate assistance if they determine that the funding provided by hud is insufficient , although according to hud , the department is not aware of any instance in which a pha has terminated voucher assistance . set higher minimum rents: hud policy allows phas to set a minimum rent for households that can range from as low as $0 to as high as $50 . some phas currently allow certain households with very little income to pay rents that are below the minimum rent ceiling ( i.e. , less than $50 ) . to reduce their costs , these phas can raise the minimum rent to $50 . furthermore , hud supports proposed legislation — the state and local housing flexibility act of 2005 — that would replace the existing voucher program with the “flexible voucher program.” this proposed program would , among other things , allow individual phas to set ( within broad federal guidelines ) eligibility requirements , the maximum period that a household could receive assistance , and households' contributions toward rents . according to hud , this proposed program , which would initially continue to fund vouchers using the dollar - based approach , would create incentives and provide flexibilities for phas to manage their funds in a cost - effective manner . for the project - based program , congress has taken steps to control the cost of rental subsidies , and as our analysis shows , these steps have limited growth in the program's average rental subsidy per household and thus in outlays . in 1997 , congress passed the multifamily assisted housing reform and affordability act , which established the mark - to - market program .