gao disagrees . as ustr is aware , gao extensively reviewed official ftaa and u.s. government documents and had several meetings with u.s. and brazilian officials to discuss and analyze the outstanding issues . we highlight in the report those issues that emerged as the key sticking points as of when the talks broke down , according to our interviews with officials directly familiar with the talks . we acknowledge that there are more unresolved issues and have made a minor wording changes in the report to make that more clear . gao disagrees . see comment 1 . although they often acknowledged that the two - tier structure was agreed to by all 34 participants at miami , those we spoke with generally expressed disappointment that the two - tiered structure has not , as hoped , propelled the process forward , nor provided members with a workable roadmap for resuming pursuit of an ftaa . in particular , the two tiered structure has not resolved differences in vision over the ftaa's ambition , and some experts felt it has complicated the task of striking an acceptable balance of rights and obligations among ftaa nations . see comment 2 . the report as submitted to ustr for comment states that brazil's ambassador expressed concern that key brazilian products would be excluded from ftaa tariff elimination — not that the u.s. plans to reduce its market access offer . ustr mischaracterizes the treatment of this issue in the report . the report describes the competitive liberalization policy of the united states and the priority given by the united states to pursuit of the wto doha round and sub - regional initiatives . in addition , the report notes u.s. officials' belief that progress in these forums have already yielded important progress and may ultimately be helpful to the ftaa . in addition , the report states that those we spoke with felt the progress in the wto was helpful to the ftaa and that further wto progress was desirable . with respect to u.s. pursuit of sub - regional agreements such as bilateral ftas , consistent with the evidence collected , the report notes that the united states believes that these are advancing u.s. trade goals in the hemisphere in a step - by - step fashion , but states that not all participants and observers are convinced that these are helpful to the ftaa and to hemispheric integration generally . the following is gao's comment on the u.s. department of commerce's letter received january 24 , 2005 . gao updated the report to reflect this . in addition to those listed above , jose martinez - fabre , mark keenan , michelle munn , jonathan rose , jamie mcdonald , etana finkler , and ernie jackson made key contributions to this report . world trade organization: cancun ministerial fails to move global trade negotiations forward ; next steps uncertain . gao - 04-250 . washington , d.c.: january 15 , 2004. international trade: intensifying free trade negotiating agenda calls for better allocation of staff and resources . gao - 04-233 . washington , d.c.: january 12 , 2004 .