electronic . electronic equipment ( also called direct recording electronic or dre ) comes in two basic types , pushbutton or touchscreen , with the pushbutton being the older and more widely used of the two . for pushbuttons , voters press a button next to the name of the candidate or the issue , which then lights up to indicate the selection . similarly , voters using touchscreens make their selections by touching the screen next to the candidate or issue , which is then highlighted . when voters are finished making their selections , they cast their votes by pressing a final “vote” button or screen . because all electronic equipment is programmable , it does not allow overvotes . in addition , voters can change their selections before hitting the final button to cast their votes . there have been several broad - based studies that have examined relationships among voter demographics , voting equipment , and / or uncounted votes . these studies , whose methods and findings we did not independently verify , included the following . a recent research study estimated that about 1.5 million voters thought they had voted for president but did not have their votes for president counted in the 2000 election . faulty voting equipment and confusing ballots were among the stated reasons for the ballots being unmarked , spoiled , or too ambiguous to count . the study reported that punch card and electronic voting equipment were associated with uncounted votes for president exceeding 2 percent of all ballots cast . ( caltech / mit , july 2001. ) another recent research study reported that , despite the perception that minorities and poor people were disproportionately more likely to vote on antiquated voting machinery and therefore have their ballots invalidated , the data did not support this contention . the study found that in the majority of states , whites and non - poor voters were more likely than african americans and poor voters to reside in counties that used punch card equipment , based on 1998 voter equipment data . ( knack & kropf , jan . a study of invalidated ballots in the 1996 presidential election found that counties with more african americans and hispanics were more likely to have higher rates of invalidated ballots , particularly in counties using punch card machines , optical scanners with centralized ( as opposed to precinct - based ) counting , and hand - counted paper ballots . when counties used equipment that can be programmed to prevent overvoting ( i.e. , lever technology , electronic voting technology , and precinct - count optical scan systems ) , racial differences in the rate of invalidated votes disappeared . ( knack & kropf , may 2001. ) a study of the 2000 presidential election found that the percentage of uncounted votes in 20 congressional districts with low - income / high - minority populations were higher , regardless of the type of voting equipment used , than in 20 congressional districts with high - income / low - minority populations . in both types of districts , the percent of uncounted votes was highest when punch card equipment was used .