naval academy band . the army , marine corps , and air force have service headquarters - level organizations that manage their band programs , but their service guidance provides that local commands maintain control over and provide funding for their bands . table 1 identifies army , navy , marine corps , and air force offices that manage their military service's bands , and summarizes the offices' responsibilities . for the other three services , the individual bands completed the questionnaire . based on the responses to our questionnaire , we made the following observations about the bands' facilities and transportation resources . based on the responses to our questionnaire , the types of facilities that bands used varied . when asked to describe the facilities used by their band in fiscal year 2016 , bands responded that their facilities included band halls , chapels or church buildings , armories , and former base dining halls , among others . bands provided additional details on the facilities they used in fiscal year 2016 , including the following: bands reported using between one and six buildings . premier and specialty bands typically reported using more buildings than the regional and field bands . of the 128 bands that responded , 78 ( or 61 percent ) stated that they shared at least one building with another organization . in some cases , bands responded that they shared a building but not the band's offices or rooms with another organization . in other cases , bands indicated that they shared specific areas with another organization . for example , one band reported that its rehearsal hall was occasionally used as a classroom , while another band stated that one of its larger musical groups rehearsed in the base dining facility . bands generally reported having rehearsal space , office space , and storage space . the overall size of these three types of spaces ranged from 260 to about 48,000 square feet . premier and specialty bands reported that the overall size of their rehearsal , office , and storage space ranged from 5,000 to about 48,000 square feet , while regional and field bands reported the overall size of these spaces ranged from 260 to over 28,000 square feet . four bands reported that the facilities the band used in fiscal year 2016 were built in fiscal years 2012 through 2016 , which they reported had a total cost of $56 million . in addition , 10 bands identified single projects greater than $1 million to repair , renovate , or construct a facility for the bands' use that were initiated in fiscal years 2012 through 2016 , which they reported had a total cost of about $29 million . bands also described the projects and why they were needed . for example , one band reported that the project provided space so that multiple music groups could train at the same time . in another case , a band reported that renovations were needed to correct aged facilities based on inspection results . based on the responses to our questionnaire , the transportation used to travel to performances varied by band .