an assessment of each element is provided below . the aegis bmd program has awarded a prime contract for each of its two major components — the aegis bmd weapon system and the standard missile - 3 . during fiscal year 2006 , the work of both prime contractors cost a little more than expected , but only the weapon system contractor was slightly behind schedule . even though the weapon system contractor was unable to perform fiscal year 2006 work at the planned cost , its cumulative cost performance remains positive because of good performance in prior years . at year's end , the weapon system contract had a cumulative favorable cost variance of $0.1 million , but an unfavorable cumulative schedule variance of $0.8 million . as shown in figure 1 , the contractor's cost and schedule performance fluctuated significantly throughout the year . the decline in the aegis bmd weapon system contractor's cost performance began shortly after the contractor adjusted its cost and schedule baseline in september 2005 . at that time , the contractor corrected its baseline to account for a december 2004 dod budget cut . however , it did not make adjustments to the baseline to incorporate new work that the government directed . this caused the contractor's cost performance to decline significantly because although the cost of the new effort was being reported , the baseline included no budget for the work . recognizing that the contract baseline still needed to be replanned , the director issued approval to restructure the program and rebaseline the contract in december 2005 . this is particularly true of an element . for example , a block 2006 element like gmd covers a wide range of activities , from research and development on future enhancements to the fabrication of interceptors for operations . if the gmd program runs into problems with one activity , it can defer work on another to cover the cost of the problems . mda's flexibility to change goals for each element complements the flexibility in how it uses its funds . after a new block of the bmds has been presented in the budget , mda can change the outcomes – in terms of planned delivery of assets and other work activities – that are expected of the block . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . the major contributors are listed in appendix iv . like other government agencies , mda acquires the supplies and services needed to fulfill its mission by awarding contracts . two types of contracts are prevalent at mda — contracts for support services and contracts for hardware . the contractors that support mda's mission are commonly known as support contractors , while the contractors that are responsible for developing elements of the ballistic missile defense system ( bmds ) are called prime contractors . according to mda's manpower database , about 8,186 personnel positions — not counting prime contractors — currently support the missile defense program .