funding of the four programs varies . although initially funded through annual appropriations , the black lung program is now funded by a trust fund established in 1978 that is financed by an excise tax on coal and supplemented with additional funds . the tax , however , has not been adequate to fund the program ; at the time of our review , the fund had borrowed over $8.7 billion from the federal treasury . for the vicp , claims involving vaccines administered before october 1 , 1988 , were paid with funds appropriated annually through fiscal year 1999 . claims involving vaccines administered on or after october 1 , 1988 , are paid from a trust fund financed by a per dose excise tax on each vaccine . for example , the excise tax on the measles , mumps , and rubella vaccine at the time of our review was $2.25 . eeoicp and recp are completely federally funded . although recp was initially funded through an annual appropriation , in 2002 the congress made funding for recp mandatory and provided $655 million for fiscal years 2002 through 2011 . vicp covers individuals who show that they were injured by certain vaccines and claimants must show , among other things , that they received a qualifying vaccine . recp covers some workers in the uranium mining industry and others exposed to radiation during the government's atmospheric nuclear testing who developed certain diseases . claimants must show that they were physically present in certain geographic locations during specified time periods or that they participated on - site during an atmospheric nuclear detonation and developed certain medical conditions . finally , eeoicp covers workers in nuclear weapons facilities during specified time periods who developed specific diseases . at the time of our review , total benefits paid for two of the programs — the black lung program and recp — significantly exceeded their initial estimates . an initial cost estimate was not available for vicp . the initial estimate of benefits for the black lung program developed in 1969 was about $3 billion . actual benefits paid through 1976 — the date when the program was initially to have ended — totaled over $4.5 billion and benefits paid through fiscal year 2004 totaled over $41 billion . for recp , the costs of benefits paid through fiscal year 2004 exceeded the initial estimate by about $247 million . table 1 shows the initial program estimates and actual costs of benefits paid through fiscal year 2004 for the four programs . actual costs for the black lung program have significantly exceeded the initial estimate for several reasons , including ( 1 ) the program was initially set up to end in 1976 when state workers' compensation programs were to have provided these benefits to coal miners and their dependents , and ( 2 ) the program has been expanded several times to increase benefits and add categories of claimants . the reasons the actual costs of recp have exceeded the initial estimate include the fact that the original program was expanded to provide benefits to additional categories of claimants , including uranium miners who worked above ground , ore transporters , and mill workers .