( see fig . in terms of centralizing personnel investigations , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 authorized an action that , if taken , would result in the office of personnel management ( opm ) being responsible for an estimated 80 percent of the personnel investigations conducted for the federal government . the act authorized the transfer of dod's personnel security investigative functions and 1,855 investigative employees to opm . opm indicated that it will not accept the transfer at least during fiscal year 2004 because of concerns about the financial risk associated with the authorized transfer . dod and opm have , however , signed a memorandum of understanding that , among other things , results in opm providing dod investigative staff with training on opm's investigative procedures as well as training on and access to opm's case management system . as for centralizing the adjudication steps in the clearance process , in may 2004 , we reported that dod's senior executive council was considering the consolidation of the clearance adjudicative functions that two of dod's 10 central adjudication facilities perform . a dod official told us that the consolidation would provide greater flexibility in using adjudicators to meet changes in the clearance approval workload and could eliminate some of the time required to transfer cases between adjudication facilities . a wider - ranging adjudicative initiative is also being undertaken in dod . when fully implemented , the joint personnel adjudication system ( jpas ) is supposed to enhance dod's adjudicative capabilities by — among other things — consolidating information into a dod - wide security clearance data system ( instead of maintaining the data on 10 adjudication facility - specific systems ) , providing near real - time input and retrieval of clearance - related information , and improving the ability to monitor overdue reinvestigations and estimate the size of that portion of delayed clearances . jpas , identified as mission critical by the dod chief information officer , was supposed to be implemented in fiscal year 2001 and is now projected for full implementation sometime in fiscal year 2004 . even though jpas may consolidate adjudicative data on the approximately 2 million clearances that dod had on september 30 , 2003 , other agencies , such as the fbi , maintain their own databases with adjudicative information . regardless of the decision about whether or not to consolidate investigative and adjudicative functions governmentwide , existing impediments — such as the lack of a governmentwide database of clearance information — hinder efforts to provide timely , high - quality clearance determinations . i will discuss two of those major impediments — large workloads and too few investigators , and two internal control issues . the remainder of this section relies heavily on work that we conducted on dod's investigative and adjudicative functions because there is a dearth of reports available on these functions in other federal departments and agencies . the large number of requests for security clearances for service members , government employees , and industry personnel taxes a process that already is experiencing backlogs and delays .