dod agreed with these recommendations . also , in july 2011 we reported on the training and manning information presented in the navy's february 2011 report to congress regarding ship readiness . the navy's report included information on ships' ability to perform required maintenance tasks , pass inspection , and any projected effects on the lifespan of individual ships . we concluded that the navy's report did not provide discussion of data limitations or caveats to any of the information it presented , including its conclusions and recommendations . however , we found that the navy did outline specific actions that it was taking or planned to take to address the declines in readiness due to manning and crew changes . in january 2011 , the commanders of u.s. fleet forces command and u.s. pacific fleet jointly instructed their type commanders to develop a pilot program to “establish a sequenced , integrated , and building block approach” to achieve required readiness levels . this pilot program began in march 2011 , and in march 2012 , near the end of the pilot , the navy issued its surface force readiness manual , which details a new strategy for optimizing surface force readiness throughout the fleet response plan . the strategy calls for integrating and synchronizing maintenance , training , and resources among multiple organizations such as afloat training groups and regional maintenance centers . for the period from 2008 to 2012 , available data show variations in material readiness between different types of ships — such as material readiness differences between amphibious warfare ships and surface combatants — but data limitations prevent us from making any conclusions concerning improvements or declines in the overall readiness of the surface combatant and amphibious warfare fleet during the period . through a variety of means and systems , the navy collects , analyzes , and tracks data that show the material condition of its surface ships — in terms of both their current and life cycle readiness . three of the data sources the navy uses to provide information on the material condition of ships are casualty reports ; defense readiness reporting system – navy ( drrs - n ) reports ; and board of inspection and survey ( insurv ) material inspection reports . none of these individual data sources are designed to provide a complete picture of the overall material condition of the surface force . however , the data sources can be viewed as complementary and , when taken together , provide data on both the current and life cycle material readiness of the surface force . for example , some casualty report data must be updated every 72 hours and provides information on individual pieces of equipment that are currently degraded or out of commission . drrs - n data is normally reported monthly and focuses on current readiness by presenting information on broader capability and resource areas , such as ship command , control , and communications , rather than individual equipment .