ustr has not updated its plans . ustr stated in its report that these are “initial steps” and that additional action items would be developed and implemented in consultation with congress and other stakeholders to ensure meaningful progress in achieving the reports' key objectives . however , the action items in the report have not been updated since its issuance over 2 years ago in february 2006 . there have been several important developments in u.s. - china trade since the top - to - bottom review occurred , which are not reflected in ustr's report . ( see app . ii , table 10 , which identifies the 10 action items and the accompanying 25 implementing steps , along with agency responsibilities and status. ) we confirmed that key u.s. trade agencies took steps to increase bilateral engagement with the chinese and expanded the u.s. government's capacity to enforce and negotiate by increasing staff levels in headquarters and overseas and by improving training opportunities . while assessing these agencies' implementation of the top - to - bottom report action items , we also followed up on progress made addressing management challenges identified in our 2004 report on u.s. monitoring and enforcement activities related to china . we recommended that the key agencies take various steps to improve performance management pertinent to china wto compliance efforts and that they undertake actions to mitigate the effects of staff turnover in the agencies china wto compliance units . we found that some previously identified challenges — staffing gaps and limited chinese language capacity — remained at some agencies . as a result of the top - to - bottom report , key trade agencies are undertaking several action items to improve and increase bilateral engagement with china . the u.s. government has utilized two formal consultative mechanisms to address commerce , trade , and financial issues , both of which demonstrated an emphasis on high - level , bilateral engagement . first , the united states uses the jcct , a forum for dialogue on bilateral trade issues and a mechanism to promote commercial relations . this forum had been elevated to a higher level after a 2003 meeting and refocused to give greater attention to outstanding trade disputes . second , the united states and china created the sed in september 2006 , as another bilateral high - level forum to address the most important , long - term , strategic issues in the united states - china economic relationship . the meeting of the sed , which is convened every six months , is led by a u.s . cabinet official and a chinese vice premier , and each dialogue session comprises u.s. cabinet officials and chinese ministers . the sed allows both governments to communicate at the highest levels and with one voice on issues of long - term and strategic importance , including issues that extend across multiple departments and agencies . the united states has three core objectives for the sed: ( 1 ) to advance the u.s. - china economic relationship by establishing new habits of cooperation ; ( 2 ) to accelerate china's next wave of economic transition ; and ( 3 ) to encourage china to act as a responsible global economic power .