reviewing nationwide bonds . officials from 10 of the 20 blm offices told us that they encountered challenges reviewing nationwide bonds because of a lack of coordination between blm offices . the purpose section of the bond adequacy review policy states that field offices are to review bonds to determine whether the bond amount appropriately reflects the level of potential risk posed by the operator . however , the bond adequacy review policy also states in a directive that if the bond being reviewed is a nationwide or statewide bond , field offices are only to review the wells within their field office . officials from one field office told us that without insights into an operator's activities in the jurisdictions of other field offices , bond adequacy reviews do not cover when an operator has been cited with an incident of noncompliance or the number of inactive wells the operator may have in other jurisdictions . officials from one field office told us of one particular instance in which blm had spent over 7 years attempting to enforce the requirements for reclamation activities . blm had issued an incident of noncompliance , but the operator did not respond and instead reorganized as a separate corporate entity . subsequently , the operator went bankrupt , requiring blm to restart the communications process from the beginning with the newly formed entity . blm officials told us that the agency has very little leverage when companies change their name or reorganize in an attempt to evade performing required reclamation activities . blm headquarters officials told us that working with operators was a delicate balance , especially when oil and gas prices are down , and blm field offices would benefit from conducting periodic operator outreach to have an open dialogue with the operators . blm is responsible for overseeing oil and gas development on federal lands and for balancing the sometimes competing priorities of encouraging oil and gas development , while ensuring that when wells run dry , operators return well sites to their original natural conditions . federal laws , regulations , and blm's own policies call for the agency to take various actions to manage its potential oil and gas well liabilities and reclaim orphaned wells . however , blm does not systematically or comprehensively track how much the agency has spent to reclaim orphaned wells or information , such as the number of orphaned wells and inactive wells over time , necessary to determine the agency's potential liabilities . without systematically or comprehensively tracking information on blm's well reclamation costs and indicators of potential future costs , its ability to monitor its progress and plan for its potential liabilities associated with orphaned wells is limited . in addition , implementation of blm's well and bond adequacy review policies by the field offices is hampered by officials having different understandings of what constitutes a well review . this variance is because blm's well review policy does not outline specific instructions on what actions field offices should take when conducting a well review . this situation results in inconsistent ways of conducting well reviews and annually reporting on them .