( fig . rd instructions require that tenants be certified at least annually so that state and local office staff can document their income and determine their rental contributions . property owners certify tenants initially and then every year , or when a tenant's income rises by $40 or more per month ( $480 per year ) or decreases by $20 or more per month ( $240 per year ) . in these cases , the income must be verified again . according to rd instructions , the property owner must obtain verification of the tenant's stated income , in writing , from the tenant's employer . if the owner is not able to immediately obtain written verification , the tenant's income may be temporarily verified by examining income checks or check stubs . the survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 04-978sp . we conducted our work from september 2003 through june 2004 in a number of locations , including connecticut , massachusetts , mississippi , new york , south carolina , utah , and washington , d.c. , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the section 521 rental assistance program , started in 1978 , is administered by rhs's multifamily housing portfolio management division . the program provides rental assistance for tenants living in units created through rhs's multifamily direct rural rental housing loans and multifamily housing farm labor loans programs . these programs provide loans subsidized with interest rates as low as 1 percent to help build rental housing for rural residents and farm workers . under the rental assistance program , eligible tenants pay no more than 30 percent of their income toward the rent , and rhs pays the balance to the property owner . rhs allocates rental assistance subsidies through 5-year contracts with property owners ; 20-year contracts were also issued to units in newly constructed properties from 1978 through 1982 . in fiscal year 2004 , contracts were issued for a term of 4 years . the contracts specify that owners will receive payments on behalf of tenants in a designated number of units at the property . contracts may be renewed as many times as funds are made available , and additional rental assistance units may be allocated if funds become available . property owners are required to follow rhs guidance in managing their properties . each month , they must document how many units designated for rental assistance are occupied . if a unit is empty and rental assistance is not being used , the property owner is required to assign another eligible tenant . if no eligible tenants are waiting for the unit , the property owner can work with rhs to transfer the rental assistance to another property . as shown in figure 1 , rhs's national , state , and local offices share administrative duties for the rental assistance program . the national office develops and implements regulations for the rental assistance program and other rhs programs ( rural development instructions ) . the current rural development ( rd ) instruction for the rental assistance program has been in effect since the 1980s and was last revised in 1993 .