i for additional detail ) . blm uses a multistep process to determine whether to suspend oil and gas leases , and this process , according to blm guidance and officials , typically begins with an operator submitting a suspension request to the appropriate blm field office . once the request is received , the cognizant blm field official — usually a petroleum engineer at the field office — reviews it for completeness and whether the reasons cited meet the suspension criteria established in federal regulations and blm's suspensions of operations and / or production manual . these criteria require that lease suspensions be approved only in the interest of the conservation of natural resources or for circumstances beyond the operator's control . there is no limit on how long a lease can be suspended . during a suspension of operations and production , the government does not collect rents or royalty payments and the time remaining to begin drilling is reserved so that the operator is not penalized for the time the lease is in suspension . blm is responsible for implementing the federal land policy and management act of 1976 , as amended , which directs interior to manage federal lands for multiple uses , such as recreation and resource extraction , while also taking any action required to prevent “unnecessary or undue degradation” of these lands . in cases in which the state office agrees with the field office's recommendation , the state office is to issue a decision letter to the operator noting the changes to the terms and conditions of the lease . members of congress and others have raised questions about whether some suspensions , particularly those that have been in effect for more than 10 years , may hinder oil and gas production or adversely affect the use of federal lands for other purposes , such as recreation . see figure 1 , below , for examples of circumstances for which suspensions can be issued . seven of these 14 suspensions were issued because blm needed additional time to review the environmental assessments submitted with the drilling permit applications . eight leases were suspended because they faced logistical conflicts with other surface development , such as mining activities occurring on the lease or adjacent lands . these suspensions had been in effect for approximately 4 years to 25 years . five leases were suspended for other , short - term reasons , such as weather - related issues or economic conditions , but were recorded in lr2000 as suspended for approximately 22 years to 74 years . we were unable to determine the reasons why the 5 remaining leases were suspended . these leases were recorded as suspended for approximately 28 to 82 years . according to blm officials , if the field office recommends approving the operator's request for suspension , the field office is to forward the request to the appropriate blm state office for final review , as shown in figure 2 below . a copy of the letter is also to be sent to the office of natural resources revenue , if necessary , requesting deferment of rent and royalty payments while the lease is suspended .