these projects are listed in table 3 below . omb has taken steps to improve the identification and oversight of the management watch list and high risk projects by addressing some of the recommendations we previously made , but additional efforts are needed to more effectively perform these activities and ultimately ensure that potentially billions of taxpayer dollars are not wasted . they then submit the list to omb for review . according to omb and agency officials , after the submission of the initial list , examiners at omb work with individual agencies to identify or remove projects as appropriate . in january 2006 , we noted that the underlying support for information provided in the exhibit 300s was often inadequate and that , as a result , the management watch list may be undermined by inaccurate and unreliable data . specifically , we noted that documentation either did not exist or did not fully agree with specific areas of all exhibit 300s ; agencies did not always demonstrate that they complied with federal or departmental requirements or policies with regard to management and reporting processes ; for example , no exhibit 300 had cost analyses that fully complied with omb requirements for cost - benefit and cost - effectiveness analyses ; and data for actual costs were unreliable because they were not derived from cost - accounting systems with adequate controls ; in the absence of such systems , agencies generally derived cost information from ad hoc processes . we recommended , among other things , that omb direct agencies to improve the accuracy and reliability of exhibit 300 information . to address our recommendation , in june 2006 , omb directed agencies to post their exhibit 300s on their website within two weeks of the release of the president's budget request for fiscal year 2008 . while this is a step in the right direction , the accuracy and reliability of exhibit 300 information is still a significant weakness among the 24 major agencies , as evidenced by a march 2007 president's council on integrity and efficiency and executive council on integrity and efficiency study commissioned by omb to ascertain the validity of exhibit 300s . specifically , according to individual agency reports contained within the study , inspectors general found that the documents supporting agencies' exhibit 300s continue to have accuracy and reliability issues . for example , according to these reports , the agency for international development did not maintain the documentation supporting exhibit 300s cost figures . in addition , at the internal revenue service , the exhibit 300s were unreliable because , among other things , project costs were being reported inaccurately and progress on projects in development was measured inaccurately . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . each year , omb and federal agencies work together to determine how much the government plans to spend for it and how these funds are to be allocated . federal it spending has risen to an estimated $65 billion in fiscal year 2008 . omb plays a key role in overseeing the implementation and management of federal it investments .