counsel review . to reduce processing time , irs is requesting legislative authority to change the threshold for counsel review of offers . section 7122 ( b ) of the internal revenue code requires counsel review in all cases where the total liability is $50,000 or more . according to irs's quality review of a sample of closed offer cases , it took an average of 57.2 days for cases to be sent to and returned from counsel during fiscal year 2001 . irs questioned the added value of the counsel review for offers for liabilities less than $250,000 and has proposed that the threshold be raised from $50,000 to $250,000 . if this authority is granted , it would reduce processing time for offers for liabilities between $50,000 and $250,000 . an irs official told us that 31.2 percent of the offers closed in fiscal year 2000 were for tax liabilities between $50,000 and $250,000 and 4.8 percent were for tax liabilities of $250,000 or more . user fee . to offset the cost of the direct staff hours used to process offers , irs is requesting legislative authority to charge taxpayers a user fee . although offers from low - income taxpayers and offers based on effective tax administration would be exempt , the taxpayer would need to pay a user fee when the offer is submitted and would be reimbursed later . based on irs's best guess , this proposal , if approved , would reduce new offers by as much as 3 percent . statutory period . irs is also requesting legislative authority for the collection statute to be suspended when an offer is submitted . as discussed above , by law irs has 10 years from the date of assessment to collect the delinquent taxes from the taxpayer . however , when a taxpayer files an offer , the collection statute does not stop while the offer is pending . this has encouraged some taxpayers to file offers as an attempt to delay collection action while the statutes of limitation on collecting their tax debts continue to expire . irs officials believe this proposal would reduce the number of new submissions . however , irs cannot quantify the potential reduction of future submissions that may have been submitted in order to delay collection action . as of january 2002 , irs had not completed plans for evaluating the effectiveness of most of its offer initiatives , had not completed plans for a performance data system , and had not set program goals based on an evaluation of taxpayer needs , other benefits , and costs . without such plans and goals , irs may not be able to determine the effectiveness of the initiatives . program officials said that they intend to evaluate centralized processing . irs's office of program evaluation and risk analysis ( opera ) has agreed to conduct an evaluation , but a plan for the evaluation had not yet been developed . program officials told us , however , that they had put in place measures for centralized processing and that program managers were continually collecting data and making changes as centralized processing was being implemented .