( see fig . dcps: dcps functions as a traditional local educational agency , or school district . the head of dcps , the chancellor , is appointed by the mayor , confirmed by the d.c. council , and serves at the mayor's discretion . the chancellor sets the academic priorities and the curriculum for public schools , and works with schools in need of improvement under the no child left behind act ( nclba ) . school districts have the primary responsibility for ensuring that underperforming schools receive technical assistance , as required by nclba . they noted that in the past , plans were written , “put on a shelf,” and never used . we agree that the deputy mayor is taking steps to coordinate the individual plans of these offices , and that the mayor's education team recognizes the importance of taking a strategic approach to address the educational needs of district students . however , as we have said in this statement , we see value in developing a documented strategy that could help the district's education leaders coordinate their efforts and goals , and provide future leaders the benefit of understanding what worked , what didn't , and why . while past administrations may have developed strategic plans and not used them , what is unknown is whether these plans could have been of value if they had been used . the current administration's development and implementation of an articulated documented strategy could provide a foundation that would help coordinate future efforts . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include harriet ganson , elizabeth morrison , sheranda campbell , jeff miller , bryon gordon , susan aschoff , sheila mccoy , sandy silzer , sarah veale , janice latimer , and terry dorn . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . department of education: the new d.c. department of education is headed by the deputy major for education and oversees the state superintendent's office , facilities office , and the ombudsman's office . the department is responsible for planning , coordinating , and supervising all public education and education - related activities that are under the purview of these three offices . it also acts as chief advisor to the mayor for broad , high - level education strategies that involve more than one district education office and has responsibility for bringing together key players to determine who should take the lead on specific initiatives .