these tools are currently unavailable . dod and sandia national laboratories also have provided information on anti - tamper techniques and tools to program managers at periodic workshops where attendance is voluntary . to further assist program managers , dod is in the process of overseeing the development of generic anti - tamper techniques , but it is uncertain to what extent such techniques address a program's specific needs . in 2001 , dod issued several contracts to encourage anti - tamper technology development . to date , several defense contractors have provided anti - tamper technology concepts , but according to the executive agent , programs need to further develop the technology before it can be applied to and function on a particular system . according to air force research laboratory and sandia national laboratories officials , generic anti - tamper techniques can be considered , but program managers have to design and incorporate the techniques needed for their unique systems . program managers ultimately have to ensure that the techniques protect critical technologies and do not adversely affect performance objectives for the system . anti - tamper protection is one of the key ways dod can preserve u.s. investment in critical technologies , while operating in an environment of coalition warfare and a globalized defense industry . however , implementation of the anti - tamper policy , thus far , has been difficult — in part because dod has not developed an implementation strategy to ensure success . for program managers expected to implement anti - tamper protection , the policy can compete with their goals of meeting cost and schedule objectives , particularly when the anti - tamper requirement is identified late in the system development process . without providing more oversight and guidance about what needs to be protected and how to do so , dod is at risk of program managers making decisions on individual programs that can result in unprotected technologies and have negative consequences for maintaining the military's overall technological advantage . we are recommending that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of acquisition , technology , and logistics and the anti - tamper executive agent to take the following five actions to improve oversight and assist program offices in implementing anti - tamper protection on weapon systems . to better oversee identification of critical technologies for all programs subject to the anti - tamper policy , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary for acquisition , technology , and logistics , in coordination with the executive agent and the focal points , to ( 1 ) collect from program managers information they are to develop on critical technology identification and ( 2 ) appoint appropriate technical experts to centrally review the technologies identified for consistency across programs and services .