ii ) . the deputy acknowledged the benefit of the recommendations made as part of this year's audit and stated that fdic concurred with seven of our recommendations and has implemented or will implement them in the coming year . he also stated that fdic partially concurred with our remaining five recommendations and has developed or implemented plans to adequately address the underlying risks that prompted these five recommendations , in some instances through alternative corrective actions . with regard to the five recommendations to which fdic partially concurred , if the corporation adequately implements the corrective actions below , it will have satisfied the intent of our recommendations . regarding our recommendation that fdic require that e - mail containing or transmitting accounting data be secured to protect the integrity of the accounting data , the deputy stated that by july 31 , 2007 , fdic will ensure that the integrity of accounting data transmitted by e - mail is appropriately protected , and that it will evaluate the various exchanges of accounting information and identify and document where more secure communications are needed . concerning our recommendation that fdic instruct personnel to lock rooms that contain sensitive software , the deputy stated that fdic has conducted additional analysis on the software that had access to payroll information and has removed that software from the desktop . with regard to our recommendation that fdic require that significant changes to the system , such as parameter changes , go through a formal change management process , the deputy stated that by december 31 , 2007 , fdic will have developed procedures that will include appropriate management of , and documentation standards for , parameter changes . based on the deputy's comments , we have clarified our recommendation that fdic update the nfe risk assessment to include the risk associated with vulnerabilities identified during security testing and evaluation . the deputy stated that fdic has since changed its process to require updates to the risk assessments when applications undergo major changes that affect the security of the system . finally , with regard to the recommendation that fdic develop procedures to review events occurring in the nfe to determine whether the events are computer security incidents , the deputy stated that fdic addressed this issue during the first quarter of 2007 when it established a formal process for monitoring and reviewing such events . in addition , fdic plans to have documented procedures for elevating potential security violations to the incident handling team and for monitoring unusual events by august 31 , 2007 . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking minority member of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; the chairman and ranking minority member of the house committee on financial services ; members of the fdic audit committee ; officials in fdic's divisions of information resources management , administration , and finance ; and the fdic inspector general . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .