we recognize that this will not be easy . reforming programs and activities leads to winners and losers , notwithstanding demonstrated shortfalls in performance and design . given prior experiences and political realities , there is little real “low - hanging fruit” in the federal budget . today i will touch first on the need for a fundamental reexamination of government given our nation's long - term fiscal challenge . then i will turn to and discuss the important role of performance budgeting in any such reexamination . the successful application of performance budgeting in this reexamination process rests on continuing to build on the legacy of gpra by improving the reliability and credibility of performance information and increasing program evaluation capacity ; encouraging demand for that information by garnering stakeholder buy - in — particularly from congress — on what to measure and how to present this information , since only then will it be linked to the congressional authorization , appropriations , and oversight processes ; and developing a comprehensive , crosscutting approach to assessing the performance of all programs — including tax expenditures — relevant to common goals . this testimony draws upon our wide - ranging work on gpra and federal budget and performance integration and on information in the president's budget of the u.s. government , fiscal year 2006 , specifically the budget and performance integration initiative of the president's management agenda ( pma ) . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as i noted , known demographic trends and rising health care costs are major drivers of the nation's large and growing structural deficits . the nation cannot ignore this fiscal pressure — it is not a matter of whether the nation deals with the fiscal gap , but how and when . gao's long - term budget simulations illustrate the magnitude of this fiscal challenge . figures 1 and 2 show these simulations under two different sets of assumptions . figure 1 uses the cbo january 2005 baseline through 2015 . as required by law , that baseline assumes no changes in current law , that discretionary spending grows with inflation through 2015 , and that all tax cuts currently scheduled to expire are permitted to expire . in figure 2 , two assumptions about that first 10 years are changed: ( 1 ) discretionary spending grows with the economy rather than with inflation and ( 2 ) all tax cuts currently scheduled to expire are made permanent . in both simulations discretionary spending is assumed to grow with the economy after 2015 and revenue is held constant as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) at the 2015 level . also in both simulations long - term social security and medicare spending are based on the 2005 trustee's intermediate projections , and we assume that benefits continue to be paid in full after the trust funds are exhausted . long - term medicaid spending is based on cbo's december 2003 long - term projections under midrange assumptions .