each is defined below . governance refers to core elements that provide the management structures and processes needed to guide and direct the architecture program . content refers to core elements that provide for the scope , depth , integrity , understanding , and consistency of products and artifacts that make up the architecture . use refers to core elements that provide for an architecture - centric approach to it investment management ( i.e. , treating architecture as the authoritative frame of reference in guiding and constraining it investments ) . measurement refers to core elements that provide for determining and disclosing progress in developing , maintaining , and using the architecture , including measurement against plans , process standards , and product quality standards . these groups are generally consistent with the capability area descriptions in the omb ea assessment tool . for example , omb's completion capability area addresses ensuring that architecture products describe the agency in terms of processes , services , data , technology , and performance and that the agency has developed a transition strategy . similarly , our content group includes developing and completing these same ea products . in addition , omb's results capability area addresses performance measurement , as does our measurement group , and omb's use capability area addresses many of the same elements in our governance and use groups . table 1 lists the core elements according to eammf group . dod is pursing a federated strategy to develop and implement the many and varied architectures across the department's four mission areas — warfighting , business , dod intelligence , and enterprise information environment . according to officials in the office of the assistant secretary of defense ( networks and information integration ) / chief information officer ( asd ( nii ) / cio ) , they have issued a strategy for evolving dod's global information grid ( gig ) architecture that is to provide a comprehensive architectural description of the entire dod enterprise , including all mission areas and the relationships between and among all levels of the enterprise ( eg , mission areas , components , and programs ) . figure 2 provides a simplified , conceptual depiction of dod's ea federation strategy . asd ( nii ) / cio officials stated that the goal of this strategy is to improve the ability of dod's mission areas , components , and programs to share architectural information . in this regard , officials stated that the dod ea federation strategy will define federation and integration concepts , alignment ( i.e. , linking and mapping ) processes , and shared services . the first business mission area ( bma ) federation strategy was released in september 2006 , according to asd ( nii ) / cio officials . its purpose is to expand on the dod ea federation strategy and provide details on how various aspects of the federation will be applied within the department's bma .