gao - 17-156 . washington , d.c.: december 8 , 2016 . developing and approving data standards . managing , controlling , monitoring , and enforcing consistent application of data standards . making decisions about changes to existing data standards and resolving conflicts related to the application of data standards . obtaining input from stakeholders and involving them in key decisions , as appropriate . delineating roles and responsibilities for decision - making and accountability , including roles and responsibilities for stakeholder input on key decisions . a robust , institutionalized data governance structure is important to provide consistent data management during times of change and transition . the transition to a new administration presents risks to implementing the data act , including potential shifted priorities or loss of momentum . we have shared these key practices with omb and treasury . the lack of a robust and institutionalized data governance structure for managing efforts going forward presents additional risks regarding the ability of agencies to meet their statutory deadlines in the event that priorities shift over time . in june 2016 , omb directed the 24 cfo act agencies to update the initial data act implementation plans that they submitted in response to omb's may 2015 request . in reviewing the 24 cfo act agencies' august 2016 implementation plan updates , we found that 19 of the 24 cfo act agencies continue to face challenges implementing the data act . we identified four overarching categories of challenges reported by these agencies that may impede their ability to effectively and efficiently implement the data act: systems integration issues , lack of resources , evolving and complex reporting requirements , and inadequate guidance . to address these challenges , most agencies reported taking mitigating actions , such as making changes to internal policies and procedures , leveraging existing resources , utilizing external resources , and employing manual and temporary workarounds . however , the information reported by the cfo act agencies in their implementation plan updates indicates that some agencies are at increased risk of not meeting the may 2017 reporting deadline because of these challenges . in addition , inspectors general for some agencies , such as the departments of labor and housing and urban development , have issued readiness review reports indicating that their respective agencies are at risk of not meeting the reporting deadline . as discussed further below , the technical software requirements for agency reporting are still evolving , so any changes to the technical requirements over the next few months could also affect agencies' ability to meet the reporting deadline . in august 2016 , in response to a prior gao recommendation , omb established procedures for reviewing and using agency implementation plan updates that include procedures for identifying ongoing challenges . according to the procedures document , omb will also be monitoring progress toward the statutory deadline and setting up meetings with any of the 24 cfo act agencies that omb identifies as being at risk of not meeting the implementation deadline . in may 2016 , in response to a prior gao recommendation , omb released additional guidance on reporting financial and award information required under the act to address potential clarity , consistency , and quality issues with the definitions of standardized data elements .