gao - 05-891t . washington , d.c.: july 12 , 2005 . ( see fig . although npr 7120.5c requires that projects document in the project plan a continuum of technical and management reviews , such as a pdr and cdr , it does not require any specific reviews . in addition , nasa's march 2005 policy does not require a nar - type decision review to ensure a project has obtained the knowledge needed to proceed beyond the final design phase into the fabrication , assembly , and test phase , which serves as both the demonstration and production phase of the nasa life cycle . according to nasa officials , projects conduct a cdr at the end of the final design phase to ensure adequate information is available about product design and producibility before entering the fabrication , assembly , and test phase . the cdr , however , is a technical review — not a major decision review like the nar . furthermore , the policy does not establish criteria as to what constitutes successful completion of a cdr . nasa's policy also does not require a major decision review before beginning manufacturing . ( see fig . therefore , the transition from final design to fabrication , assembly , and test often marks a de facto production decision . according to nasa officials , the agency rarely enters a formal production phase due to the small quantities of space systems that they build . however , due to the high cost of failure associated with nasa projects and the costs and risks involved in repairing a system in - orbit , a major decision review at production that assesses product reliability is essential even for these limited production systems . in addition , although nasa's production quantities are typically low , in some instances nasa does produce larger quantities of a system or subsystem , such as the external tanks for the space shuttle . furthermore , nasa's plans indicate that the agency may be increasing production for elements of their future systems . for example , nasa's exploration systems architecture study indicates that nasa plans to build several new crew exploration vehicles , with disposable elements , such as the lunar lander , solid rocket boosters , and space shuttle main engines that will require higher numbers of production runs . rather than establish specific criteria by which all projects are judged , nasa's policy requires that projects manage to baselines and plans established in key management documents and approved at the project nar . the baselines and plans serve as their primary tools for measuring project progress and as the primary basis for judgment at project reviews . while the plans may include some information that addresses knowledge - based criteria for design and production , the instructions for preparing them leaves the establishment of thresholds and success criteria to the discretion of the project manager . for example , nasa policy requires that projects include , as part of the project plan , a verification and validation sub plan that describes the project's approach to verifying and validating hardware and software as part of the project plan . the policy , however , includes no instruction as to what constitutes a sufficient approach to testing .