changes to increase use of program . contracting officers also identified changes they believe could increase use of the wosb set - aside . for example , some noted that allowing sole - source contracts could increase program use . currently , contract officers can establish a set - aside only if there is a reasonable expectation that at least two eligible wosbs will submit a bid for the contract . some contracting officers suggested expanding the list of north american industry association classification system ( naics ) codes eligible for use under the wosb set - aside . complexity and burdensome requirements . contracting officers described challenges to using the wosb set - aside . some contracting officers noted that generally , all contracts awarded to wosbs count for the purposes of meeting agencies' 5 percent goal and that from their perspective it does not matter whether a contract is awarded to a wosb using the wosb program , another set - aside program , or open competition . some contracting officers said that wosb program requirements were burdensome or complex relative to other sba programs with set - asides . unlike the other programs , the wosb program requires the use of a separate electronic repository , maintained by sba , to collect and store certification documents . one contracting officer noted that the contracting process slowed when officials had to seek information from the repository . another contracting officer told us the role of the contracting officer included confirming that businesses had uploaded required documents in the sba repository based on a list of required documents in the program regulation — but noted this task was not required under other contracting programs . lack of awareness and agency commitment . representatives from advocacy groups also identified awareness of and commitment to the program as another area for improvement . an advocacy group representative told us that some of their member wosbs had encountered confusion and reluctance on the part of contracting officers to use the program . another advocacy group said that sba should engender more commitment to the program among contracting officers and agencies . another representative noted that there are no consequences for agency leaders for failure to meet contracting goals for wosbs or use the set - aside program . sba officials described to us consequences that included a low rating in the publicly available sba contracting scorecard , which may draw negative attention to the agency . also , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 includes the extent to which agencies meet contracting goals as a competency by which members of the senior executive service are rated . all of the businesses we interviewed that received wosb program contracts cited the need for increased agency outreach or awareness of the program . for example , one participant advocated increasing contracting officer awareness and understanding of how an agency could benefit from using the wosb set - aside program . for example , one contracting office said that the designated naics for the set - aside program did not meet their procurement needs . one representative pointed out that sba had designated some naics codes just for edwosb and others for wosbs .