appeals decision . appeals makes a decision on a taxpayer's case after weighing evidence from the compliance unit and the taxpayer . appeals determines whether irs compliance decisions correctly reflect the facts , as well as applicable law , regulations , and irs procedures . to resolve an examination appeal case , appeals may ( 1 ) agree with the irs examination compliance unit and fully sustain its recommended assessment , ( 2 ) disagree and reduce the recommended assessment to partially sustain the assessment , or ( 3 ) fully concede to the taxpayer's position and not sustain the assessment . to resolve a collection appeal case , appeals may ( 1 ) agree with and sustain the proposed enforcement action , ( 2 ) disagree and modify the proposed action ( eg , propose an installment agreement rather than a levy ) or defer collection , or ( 3 ) fully concede to the taxpayer's position and not sustain the collection action . this is the final decision by appeals . once appeals makes its decision , it informs the taxpayer in writing and also irs . taxpayers dissatisfied with appeals' decision may file a petition in tax court if they are eligible . to handle the diverse array of taxpayer appeals across all workstreams , irs relies on an appeals workforce that must have sufficient numbers of staff with expertise in all areas of tax law . compliance review . compliance staff work directly with the taxpayer to try to resolve the issue once they determine a taxpayer is requesting an appeal . this may involve multiple interactions by telephone or correspondence . compliance staff will review any new information submitted by the taxpayer as they attempt to resolve open collection or examination matters . figure 5 illustrates the steps compliance staff are to follow when they receive an appeal . if compliance staff cannot reach agreement with the taxpayer , the compliance unit forwards the appeal request and documentation from the taxpayer along with the proposed compliance action documentation to appeals . appeals provides a case routing tool on the irs intranet with instructions and addresses for compliance staff transferring appeal documentation to an appeals location . in general , taxpayer appeals related to examination and collection campus cases are transferred to an appeals campus location . appeals for field examination and collection cases are transferred to an appeals office near the taxpayer's location . compliance staff may not forward an appeal request to appeals if the taxpayer did not file the request in time or refuses to sign the appeal under penalty of perjury , among other reasons . appeals receipt and review . figure 6 provides an overview of how appeals receives and assigns cases . upon receipt of an appeal , appeals processing staff log each appeal case into the acds used to control and track cases in appeals inventory . most appeal cases arrive from compliance as paper files , and appeals is working to receive certain collection cases electronically . for examination cases , appeals processing staff also check that sufficient time remains for appeals to complete its review .