see figure 5 below . the pathfinder tests have allowed the project and harris to practice processes and procedures that will be used for the eventual otis cryovacuum testing and validate the performance of ground support equipment . this is intended to create a more efficient test flow and proactively address issues before the test on flight hardware commences . for example , the second pathfinder test showed that vibration levels inside the test chamber were too high , and adjustments to the ground support equipment were implemented to address this issue . additionally , after the second pathfinder test , the project discovered that the adhesive on the back of the tape used throughout the observatory can flake and release particles at cryogenic temperatures , which raised concerns about contamination of sensitive hardware , particularly in the instrument module . because these issues were discovered during the pathfinder tests , the project was able to address them before otis testing where flight hardware could have been affected and prevent the use of additional schedule reserve . sunshield: the sunshield experienced several issues , which in total reduced schedule reserves by 7 weeks and required adjustments to the integration and test flow at northrop grumman to minimize further schedule impacts . for example , in october 2015 , the project reported that a piece of flight hardware for the sunshield's mid - boom assembly was irreparably damaged during vacuum sealing in preparation for shipping . the damaged piece had to be remanufactured , which consumed 3 weeks of schedule reserve . in january 2016 , subcontractor manufacturing delays with the individual sunshield membrane layers consumed 2 additional weeks of schedule reserves . most recently , in june 2016 , northrop grumman redesigned the membrane tensioning system , which allows the sunshield to unfold and maintain its shape when deployed . according to contractor officials , during previous mass reduction efforts , the pulley walls in the system were thinned out ; however , when tested under higher loads , the weaker walls allowed a cable to become pinched during a test . because the observatory now has sufficient mass margin , the system was redesigned to thicken the walls . the redesign of the system consumed an additional 2 weeks of schedule reserves , and the project is tracking further schedule threats related to conducting an anti - corrosion chemical treatment of the system's parts and investigating a deployment test anomaly . to accommodate the 2-week slip and minimize use of additional schedule reserves , northrop grumman adjusted its planned sunshield and spacecraft integration and test flow . for example , delivery of the structures that support the sunshield will now be delayed from september to december 2016 . sunshield integration needs to be completed by september 2017 to avoid delaying integration and testing of the completed observatory . figure 6 shows the full scale sunshield templates used for testing the deployment of the sunshield . spacecraft: the spacecraft consumed 4 weeks of schedule reserves due to a variety of technical challenges , particularly with the electronics and propulsion components .