maintenance of effort . we have reported that there were numerous challenges for dot and states in implementing the transportation maintenance - of - effort provision in the recovery act . this provision required the governor of each state to certify that the state would maintain its planned level of transportation spending from february 17 , 2009 , through september 30 , 2010 , to help ensure that federal funds would be used in addition to , rather than in place of , state funds and , thus , increase overall spending . a january 2011 preliminary dot report indicated that 29 states met their planned levels of expenditure , and 21 states did not . states had a monetary incentive to meet their certified planned level of spending in each transportation program area funded by the recovery act because those that fail would not be eligible to participate in the august 2011 redistribution of obligation authority under the federal - aid highway program . states had until april 15 , 2011 , to verify their actual expenditures for transportation programs covered by the recovery act . dot is reviewing this information to determine if any more states met their planned levels of spending . the dot preliminary report summarized reasons states did not meet their certified planned spending levels , such as experiencing a reduction in dedicated revenues for transportation due to a decline in state revenues or a lower - than - expected level of approved transportation funding in the state budget . the preliminary report also identified a number of challenges dot encountered in implementing the provision , such as insufficient statutory definitions of such terms as what constitutes “state funding” or how well dot guidance on calculating planned expenditures would work in the many different contexts in which it would have to operate . as a result , many problems came to light only after dot had issued initial guidance and states had submitted their first certifications . dot issued guidance seven times during the first year after the act was signed to clarify how states were to calculate their planned or actual expenditures for their maintenance - of - effort certifications . the last guidance — issued february 9 , 2010 — communicated dot's decision that the maintenance - of - effort requirement would be applied to each of the program areas funded by the recovery act , rather than cumulatively for all the programs . the implication of this decision is that fewer states met the requirement . dot invested a significant amount of time and work to ensure consistency across states on how compliance with the maintenance - of - effort provision would be certified and reported . as a result , dot is well - positioned to understand lessons learned — what worked , what did not , and what could be improved in the future . dot and state officials told us that while the maintenance - of - effort requirement can be useful for ensuring continued investment in transportation , more flexibility to allow for differences in states and programs , and to allow adjustments for unexpected changes to states' economic conditions , should be considered for future provisions .