pub . 109-295 , § 550 , 120 stat . facilities to develop security plans , review these plans , and inspect the facilities to ensure compliance with regulatory requirements . dhs's national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) is responsible for the cfats program . within nppd , the infrastructure security compliance division ( iscd ) , a division of the office of infrastructure protection ( ip ) , manages the program . on february 6 , 2014 congressman meehan and other members of the house of representatives' committee on homeland security , along with one member of the house of representatives' committee on energy and commerce , introduced h.r . 4007 , the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards authorization and accountability act of 2014 . among other things , h.r . 4007 contained provisions regarding multiple aspects of the cfats program , including risk assessment , security plan reviews , and facility inspections . on april 30 , 2014 , the bill , as amended , was reported out by the house committee on homeland security . related to h.r . 4007 , on february 27 , 2014 , we testified on dhs efforts to implement and manage the cfats program at a legislative hearing before the subcommittee on cybersecurity , infrastructure protection , and security technologies , house committee on homeland security . the purpose of this statement is to provide our observations on the status of dhs's efforts related to the implementation and management of the cfats program . specifically my testimony today summarizes our past work on the cfats program and provides our observations on the status of dhs's efforts in four key areas — identifying facilities to be covered by cfats , assessing risk and prioritizing covered facilities , reviewing facility security plans , and inspecting facilities to verify compliance with cfats regulations . my statement is based on reports and a testimony we issued from july 2012 through february 2014 on various aspects of the cfats program.regulations , as well as nppd , ip , and iscd policies and procedures for administering the cfats program and conducting its mission . we interviewed senior iscd officials along with nppd and ip officials to obtain their views on the program and how iscd assesses risk . we also reviewed iscd documents and data on tiered facilities and the approach used to determine a facility's risk and assessed iscd's process for reviewing security plans . further details on the scope and methodology for the previously issued reports and testimony statement are available within each of the published products . to conduct our prior work , we reviewed applicable laws and we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dhs has begun to take action to work with other agencies to identify facilities that are required to report their chemical holdings to dhs but may not have done so .