schedules . in july 2011 , we reported that tsa had established a schedule for the acquisition of the explosives detection systems ( eds ) tsa deploys to screen checked baggage , but it did not fully comply with leading practices , and tsa had not developed a plan to upgrade its eds fleet to meet the 2010 explosives detection requirements . we noted that some of tsa's approximately 2,200 deployed systems met 2005 explosive requirements while the remainder met 1998 explosive detection requirements.system acquisition , such as tsa's eds acquisition , depends in part on having a reliable schedule that identifies when the program's set of work activities and milestone events will occur , amongst other things . we reported that the schedule for the eds acquisition is not reliable because it does not include a timeline to deploy eds or plans to procure eds to meet subsequent phases of explosive detection requirements . we stated that developing a reliable schedule would help tsa better monitor and oversee the progress of the eds acquisition . dhs concurred with the recommendation to develop and maintain a schedule for the entire ebsp in accordance with the leading practices we identified for preparing a schedule . dhs commented that tsa had already begun working with key stakeholders to develop and define requirements for a schedule and to ensure that the schedule aligns with the leading practices . in april 2012 , leading practices state that the success of a large - scale tsa stated that it had secured contractor resources to support development of an integrated master schedule in accordance with our and industry best practices , and that it anticipated completion of this schedule by september 2013 . cost estimates . in april 2012 , we reported that tsa's methods for developing life cycle cost estimates for the ebsp did not fully adhere to best practices for developing these estimates . we reported in march 2009 that a high - quality , reliable cost estimation process provides a sound basis for making accurate and well - informed decisions about resource investments , budgets , assessments of progress , and accountability for results and thus is critical to the success of a program . we reported that tsa's estimates partially met three characteristics and minimally met one characteristic of a reliable cost estimate . dhs concurred with the recommendation that tsa ensure that its life cycle cost estimates conform to cost estimating best practices , and identified efforts underway to address it . as we reported in july 2012 , tsa has worked with industry and other stakeholders to enhance general aviation security , such as issuing regulations and enhancing outreach and awareness , but there are weaknesses in the agency's process for vetting foreign flight student applicants and in dhs's process for identifying flight students who may be in the country illegally . we recommended two actions that dhs and tsa could take to address these concerns , with which dhs concurred . vetting foreign flight student applicants . under afsp , foreign nationals seeking flight training in the united states undergo a tsa security threat assessment before receiving flight training to determine whether each applicant is a security threat to the united states .