elizabeth a . field , ( 202 ) 512-2775 or fielde1@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , sally newman ( assistant director ) , tracy barnes , margaret best , arkelga braxton , william carpluk , timothy dinapoli , michael holland , chad johnson , kristi karls , william lamping , ned malone , jared sippel , susan tindall , sarah veale , and lillian yob made key contributions to this report . gao - 18-592 . dod was statutorily required to periodically review the services and supplies each dafa provides to ensure there is a continuing need for each , and that the provision of services and supplies by each dafa , rather than by the military departments , is more effective , economical , or efficient ( see 10 u.s.c . ยง 192 ( c ) ) . since 2012 , dod has relied on existing processes , such as its annual budget process , to fulfill this review requirement . however , dod did not provide sufficient evidence that these processes satisfy the statute . for example , while dod reviews the dafas during the budget process , it does not specifically review the provision of services by the dafas rather than the military departments . that provide shared business services for the department , as designated by the secretary or deputy secretary of defense . in january 2018 , the deputy secretary reported to congress that the secretary of defense formally identified the pentagon force protection agency and washington headquarters services ( whs ) as the dafas that provide shared business services , and directed that they would fall under the authority , direction , and control of the cmo . however , both of these organizations had already been identified as providing shared business services and aligned under the previous dcmo . in addition , the deputy secretary's january 2018 report to congress did not explain why these two dafas , but not others , were designated as providing shared business services . in the january 2018 report to congress , the deputy secretary of defense also stated that , under his direction , the dcmo and director of cape were leading defense reform work that would result in recommendations on , among other things , any required organizational changes . they have also not determined what those decisions would mean for the ocmo's management of its responsibility to provide direct authority , control , and direction over those dafas . according to dod's report , such changes would include the designation of , and oversight arrangements for , other dafas providing shared business services that require cmo oversight . the recommendations were expected in late summer 2018 . however , when we asked ocmo officials for a status update in november 2018 , they acknowledged that they had not yet conducted the review . in november 2018 , ocmo officials told us they had recently begun a review of the dafas but had not designated any additional dafas as providing shared business services . ocmo officials explained that the dafas were prioritized for review , with whs being selected to be the first reviewed .