such an approach would require legislation . if congress and the administration agree to take such action , it would ensure that each program's costs are fully reflected in program budgets . requiring that agencies accrue budget authority for cleanup costs would likely increase the attention paid to improving the quality of estimates . all in all , given the current quality of agency estimates and significant implementation issues , such an approach may best be viewed as something to be considered in the future . beyond the issue of developing reasonable and credible estimates early on , this third approach also would present administrative and structural challenges such as developing mechanisms to ensure that ( 1 ) budget authority provided for cleanup is adequately fenced off for cleanup , ( 2 ) agencies adequately track and manage that budget authority , and 3 ) reestimates provide positive incentives to reflect the best approximation of the government's total environmental liabilities . when demand for current funding is great , fencing off budget authority for future use can be a challenge . and ( 3 ) how could budgeting for these environmental liabilities be improved ? to determine the federal government's reported environmental liabilities , we extracted data from agencies' fiscal year 2001 consolidated balance sheets . because this analysis showed that about 98 percent of the government's reported environmental liabilities were associated with dod and doe , we focused our review on the practices of these two departments . we reviewed published reports , related guidance , and budget and financial statement documentation from each agency . we also interviewed dod , doe , and omb staff to discuss current budget practices . to develop alternative approaches to improve budgeting for environmental liabilities , we discussed ideas with staff from dod , doe , omb , and cbo . we also met with appropriations subcommittee staff with jurisdiction over dod and doe to discuss the type of information that they would find most helpful . we analyzed the pros and cons of the approaches based on the extent to which they would ( 1 ) provide meaningful , full - cost information to decision makers up front , ( 2 ) provide disincentives for artificially low cost estimates , and ( 3 ) present implementation issues , such as additional administrative burdens for agencies or increased complexity to the budget and appropriations process . finally , to understand how private organizations provide for environmental cleanup , we conducted limited research of private sector budgeting practices . however , little information was available about up - front decision making . our work was done in washington , d.c. , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we provided a draft of this report to the secretary of defense , the secretary of energy , and the director of omb . comments are summarized in the “agency comments” section . nearly all of the $307 billion in environmental liabilities reported for fiscal year 2001 was associated with dod and doe . about 78 percent of these liabilities were associated with doe and represent the environmental legacy resulting from the production of nuclear weapons .