reg . 38806 ( july 25 , 1996 ) . fsis coordinates with numerous federal agencies , state agencies , and local entities to help ensure a safe poultry product from the farm to the consumer ( known as the farm - to - table continuum — see fig . for example , on the farm , usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) administers voluntary programs to evaluate and certify that poultry are free of certain diseases . fsis coordinates with aphis to share information when investigating foodborne illnesses . verification testing and sampling fsis recently evaluated its pathogen sampling program and assessed that it could not measure prevalence of salmonella in poultry products over time , in part because it does not conduct random sampling . do you think fsis needs estimates of prevalence of salmonella in poultry products to set its salmonella public health goal ? salmonella is known to be ubiquitous and persistent in the natural environment . do you think these traits make it difficult to control salmonella in poultry products fsis regulates ? to make sure that our results were presented in an accurate and balanced manner , we evaluated responses in terms of the extent of agreement among the three stakeholder groups . where there was stark disagreement among the groups , we presented the results separately . additionally , we reviewed five salmonella and campylobacter outbreaks attributed to poultry products with the highest number of illnesses to better understand any challenges that may have contributed to the outbreaks ; these outbreaks started during the time period from fiscal year 2011 through fiscal year 2013 . the case study included four salmonella outbreaks from poultry products and one campylobacter outbreak from poultry products . these outbreaks are not generalizeable to all outbreaks from salmonella and campylobacter contaminated poultry products . the selected outbreaks provided illustrative examples of challenges usda faces . to describe the selected outbreaks , we interviewed state officials from departments of health or agriculture from california , new york , texas , vermont , and washington . these states had the highest number of illnesses for each outbreak in our review . we also interviewed cdc officials with knowledge of the outbreaks and fsis officials familiar with each outbreak investigation to learn about any challenges usda faced and other challenges related to investigating outbreaks . we also reviewed states' , cdc , and fsis documentation on each outbreak to describe each outbreak . for our three objectives , we visited poultry plants in california to gain a better understanding of poultry plant operations and fsis inspection activities . we chose california because the state has a number of small and large chicken and turkey plants . california also produces a high volume of chicken and turkey in the united states . we reviewed prior gao reports on food safety , surveillance systems , and performance management . we limited the scope of our review to four of the six most recent salmonella outbreaks that had the highest number of confirmed illnesses that the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and the u.s. department of agriculture's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) investigated since 2009 .