dod does not have this knowledge . we continue to believe that this knowledge needs to be considered as part of the decision to allow the crusader program to enter product development . we have rewritten the recommendation to clarify its intent . to determine the readiness of the crusader program to enter the system development and demonstration phase , we assessed , along with engineers from the crusader project office , the current maturity of the critical crusader technologies using the technology readiness level tool . we identified the crusader technologies we believed were critical to meeting the crusader system key performance parameters . program engineers reviewed our list , suggested revisions , and agreed that the revised critical technologies list was complete and appropriate . after considering the program's plans for maturing the critical technologies before milestone b , we jointly determined the probable trl levels of each of the critical technologies at the milestone . this determination assumed that the program office would successfully execute its existing plans for demonstrating some of the technologies before the milestone . to assess the status of the crusader software development , we used project management criteria derived from software engineering institute's software development capability maturity model . we visited the crusader prime contractor , met with army and contractor officials , observed software development and test facilities , and examined project information . we also obtained and reviewed project documentation from the prime contractor and the army program office . to assess the crusader program's ability to meet the crusader reduced weight requirements and improve the crusader system's strategic deployability , we analyzed the army's plans and requirements for reducing the weight of the crusader and requested that the army perform an analysis of the improvement in strategic deployability that the reduced weight crusader system would provide compared to the original weight crusader system . for this analysis , at our request , the army determined the number of crusader systems to be deployed , the other equipment and supplies that were required to be deployed with the crusader systems , and the range of the aircraft used for the deployment . we reviewed the results of the army's crusader deployment analysis . to determine whether the army is developing the crusader and the future combat systems to be fielded at the same time and to meet the same artillery missions , we analyzed and compared the crusader and future combat systems schedules and reviewed the crusader system operational requirements documents . the future combat systems do not have operational requirements documents at this stage of development . also , we discussed with appropriate officials in the army's objective force task force , the army's artillery school , and the crusader and the future combat systems programs ( 1 ) the probability that the two programs would meet their individual schedules and ( 2 ) the potential technologies that might be used in the future combat systems to provide it with artillery capabilities .