michigan did not have any comments on the report . in its response , hhs concurred with our recommendation to issue guidance to state medicaid , child - welfare , and mental - health officials regarding prescription - drug monitoring and oversight for children in foster care receiving psychotropic medications through mcos , and stated that cms will work with other involved agencies to coordinate guidance between cms and other hhs agencies . hhs further stated that guidance can be targeted regarding the use of mcos for the foster - care population , but noted that previously issued guidance to state agencies from hhs already applies . however , the guidance that hhs referred to in its written comments is not specific to oversight within the context of a managed - care environment , and officials from the states in our review agreed that additional federal guidance could be beneficial . therefore , we continue to believe that specific guidance to help states prepare and implement monitoring efforts within the context of a managed - care environment is needed to help ensure appropriate oversight of psychotropic medications to children in foster care . in its written comments , the florida agency for health care administration did not indicate whether it agreed or disagreed with our findings and recommendation , but said that it appreciated our efforts to evaluate florida's medicaid program and the reimbursement of psychotropic medications for foster children . florida's response also provided additional information about the state's future plans for using managed - care plans and drug - utilization review requirements . for example , florida's response stated that these managed - care plans must adhere to florida statute requirements regarding prior - authorization procedures for covering medically necessary services , including prescription - drug services . however , the extent to which drug - utilization reviews and point - of - sale controls currently used by the state under fee - for - service would apply after transitioning to mcos is still unclear . for example , as we discussed in the report , if point - of - sale controls are not continued under mcos , then safety monitoring developed by the state under fee - for - service may not continue for children administered medications through mcos . in its written comments , massachusetts's executive office of health and human services did not indicate whether it agreed or disagreed with our findings and recommendation , but thanked us for recognizing the work massachusetts has done in the area of psychotropic medications being administered to children in foster care and agreed that discussion and investigation of this topic is timely and important to improve the health and welfare of children in foster care . in its response , massachusetts noted that mco contracts require the mcos to monitor psychotropic prescribing for members under the age of 19 in accordance with guidelines established by massachusetts's psychoactive medications in children working group . massachusetts also stated it conducted an operational review with each mco to ensure that there is an established follow - up process for cases that are flagged , and that it continues to monitor mcos closely to assure they remain in compliance with this contract requirement .