tsa's policies and procedures address this requirement . one change resulting from tsara is the requirement that tsa notify congress at least 30 days preceding contract awards for new security - related technology acquisitions exceeding $30 million , which tsa addressed by developing new procedures . see appendix i for our detailed analysis on the status of tsa's efforts to implement all tsara requirements . tsa policies and procedures address tsara provisions related to justifying acquisitions by requiring the development and approval of specific acquisition documents , including a concept of operations and an analysis of alternatives , prior to the implementation of an acquisition . the concept of operations is to include identifying scenarios of transportation security risk and assessing how the use of the proposed acquisition would help improve transportation security . the analysis of alternatives is to include identifying different security solutions , including technology and non - technology solutions , and an analysis of the operational effectiveness , cost , and benefits of each viable solution . regarding the requirement that congressional notification be made in advance of obtaining acquisitions of more than $30 million , tsa amended its policies to include the 30-day notification for contracts exceeding $30 million awarded after tsara's enactment . tsa also developed a template for a notification letter to congress that is to include a certification by the tsa administrator . consistent with tsara , tsa is to provide 5-day notice for contract awards that exceed $30 million to facilitate a rapid response if there is a known or suspected imminent threat to transportation security . tsa officials stated they will continue to provide 5-day notice for all individual task order awards or delivery order awards exceeding $1 million or more based on policies in effect prior to tsara's enactment . according to tsa officials , tsa has not yet awarded a contract for security - related technology in excess of $30 million since tsara's enactment . tsa's policies and procedures address tsara requirements for managing inventory related to , among other things , ( 1 ) using existing units before procuring more equipment ; ( 2 ) establishing policies and procedures to track the location , use , and quantity of security - related equipment in inventory ; and ( 3 ) providing for the exception from using just - in - time logistics , a process that involves delivering equipment directly from manufacturers to airports to avoid the need to warehouse equipment . we conducted this performance audit from april 2015 to february 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions on our audit objectives . as a dhs component , tsa follows the department's policies and procedures for managing its acquisition programs . dhs has established policies and procedures for acquisition management , test and evaluation , and resource allocation . the department uses these policies and procedures to deliver systems that are intended to close critical capability gaps and enable dhs to execute its missions and achieve its goals .