see fig . 1 for a timeline of internal and external factors that have affected or may affect vha's strategic goals and objectives . vha conducts a strategic planning process annually and through this process also established its current strategic plan . according to officials , vha's current strategic plan was developed through its fy 2012 strategic planning process . vha officials told us that they currently do not have plans to revise vha's current strategic plan or develop a new one , but may , however , develop an operational plan that will cascade from and operationalize va's strategic plan . vha officials told us that they do plan to continue to use their current annual strategic planning process to identify vha's future strategic goals and objectives . according to vha officials , vha's strategic planning process includes two key steps — ( 1 ) assessing the environment , which vha refers to as environmental scanning , and ( 2 ) holding the annual nlc strategic planning summit . these steps are consistent with leading practices in strategic planning . vha conducts environmental scanning to identify and assess factors that may affect its future health care delivery . according to vha policy , data from vha's environmental scan , such as the projected number of veterans to be served , are to be used by vha in developing its goals and objectives . in addition , the results from vha's environmental scanning are to be used by vha's office of policy and planning and vha program offices , in strategic decision making . in addition to environmental scanning , the nlc strategic planning summit is also key to vha's strategic planning process , in that it is the primary forum through which vha leadership identifies and discusses the strategic goals and objectives for the next year . the nlc is responsible for recommending new or revised strategic goals and objectives and for formulating strategies to achieve them . vha's office of policy and planning coordinates the summit and invites various stakeholders to attend — such as officials from vha central office , including program offices ; va central office ; veterans benefits administration ; national cemetery administration ; visns ; and representatives of veterans service organizations . veterans benefits administration and national cemetery administration officials indicated that they have varied levels of participation . veterans benefits administration officials told us that they have historically attended several days of the summit , and national cemetery administration officials indicated that they may listen to the vha's general body sessions during the summit . even though officials from both administrations indicated they believe their input and coordination with vha regarding its strategic planning was sufficient , veterans benefits administration officials noted that increased engagement in vha's strategic planning process would be beneficial , given the direct correlation between veterans' disability compensation ratings assigned by them and the subsequent care delivered from vha . during the course of the summit , the nlc determines if changes to vha's strategic goals and objectives are needed . if there are changes , vha's office of policy and planning drafts a document , gathers additional stakeholder feedback , and presents the document to vha's under secretary for health for approval .