circular no . a - 127 further states that financial systems must have common data elements , common transaction processing , consistent internal controls , and efficient transaction entry , and that reports produced by the systems shall provide financial data that can be traced directly to the general ledger accounts . sec's period - end financial reporting process for recording transactions , maintaining account balances , and preparing financial statements and disclosures are supported to varying degrees by a collection of automated systems that are not integrated or compatible with its general ledger system . these automated systems' lack of integration and compatibility require that extensive compensating manual and labor - intensive accounting procedures , involving large spreadsheets and numerous posting and routine correcting journal entries , dominate sec's period - end financial reporting process . some of sec's subsidiary systems , such as that for property and equipment and for disgorgements and penalties , do not share common data elements and common transaction processing with the general ledger system . therefore , intermediary information processing steps , including extensive use of spreadsheets , manipulation of data , and manual journal entries , are needed to process the information in sec's general ledger . this processing complicates review of the transactions and greatly increases the risk that the transactions are not recorded completely , properly , or consistently , ultimately affecting the reliability of the data presented in the financial statements . our identification this year of errors in sec's calculation of disgorgement and penalty accounts receivable , discussed below , illustrates this risk . the risk to data reliability is further increased because basic controls over electronic data , such as worksheet and password protection , change history , and controls over data verification , such as control totals and record counts , were not consistently used during the data processing between the source systems and the general ledger . in addition , currently , sec's general ledger has several unconventional posting models and other limitations that prevent proper recording of certain transactions . as a result , sec's year - end reporting process requires extensive routine correcting journal entries to correct errors created by incorrectly posted transactions in its general ledger . we also noted that sec's documentation used to crosswalk individual accounts to the financial statement line items contained an incorrect routing to a line item on sec's statement of budgetary resources for sec's year - end financial statement preparation process , which caused a material error in sec's draft financial statements . also , sec did not have detailed written documentation of its methodologies and processes for preparing financial statements and disclosures , increasing the risk of inconsistent and improper reporting and the risk that disruptions and error may arise when staff turnover occurs . as part of its enforcement responsibilities , sec issues orders and administers judgments ordering , among other things , disgorgements , civil monetary penalties , and interest against violators of federal securities laws . sec recognizes a receivable when sec is designated in an order or a final judgment to collect the assessed disgorgements , penalties , and interest .