ii ) . opm said the draft report confirms that growth in average fehbp premiums has slowed and has been lower than that of other large employer purchasers for the last several years . regarding the projected withdrawals of reserves for 2007 , opm said that the actual drawdown could be lower if the actual increase in the cost and utilization of services in 2007 is less than projected . we agree this could occur , and as we noted in the draft report and as opm said in its comments , the projected withdrawals of reserves for 2006 were ultimately not made because of lower than expected increases in the cost and utilization of services in that year . regarding the manner in which premiums are set , opm said that rate negotiations between opm and the plans are guided by projections of future costs that are based on a retrospective analysis of actual costs , and that adjustments to the reserve accounts of most plans are made when actual costs differ from the projections . opm said that , as a result , these reserve adjustments help stabilize premium growth over time and ensure that premiums ultimately reflect actual cost increases . we agree with this characterization of the effect of reserve adjustments . regarding our discussion of benefit changes that resulted in less generous coverage for prescription drugs , opm said that some plans modified their prescription drug benefit to create incentives to use generic medications , and that this does not result in a less generous benefit . while we agree that plans can change benefits to encourage generic drug utilization without resulting in less generous coverage , officials from three of the six plans we interviewed with lower - than - average premium growth said that they made benefit changes that resulted in less generous coverage . opm provided other comments describing aspects of fehbp and provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the director of opm and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 or dickenj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . randy dirosa , assistant director ; iola d'souza ; menq - tsong p. juang ; and timothy walker made key contributions to this report . pursuant to 5 u.s.c . as of january 1 , 2006 , employers offering prescription drug coverage to medicare - eligible retirees enrolled in their plans could apply for a tax - exempt government subsidy . see medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 , pub . 108- 173 , 117 stat . opm has chosen not to apply for the subsidy .