mr . chairmen , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the committee may have at this time . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov . other key contributors to this testimony include colleen phillips ( assistant director ) , carol cha , and teresa smith . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the space segment includes the sensors and the spacecraft . the npoess program office has made progress in restructuring the acquisition . specifically , the program office has established interim program plans guiding the contractor's work activities in 2006 and 2007 and has made progress in implementing these plans . in june 2006 , the nunn - mccurdy certification decision approved this new management structure and the integrated program office implemented it . figure 1 provides an overview of the relationships among the integrated program office , the program executive office , and the executive committee , as well as key divisions within the program office . operating under this new management structure , the program office implemented more rigorous and frequent subcontractor , contractor , and program reviews , improved visibility into risk management and mitigation activities , and institutionalized the use of earned value management techniques to monitor contractor performance . that report contains a detailed overview of our scope and methodology . all the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . since the 1960s , the united states has operated two separate operational polar - orbiting meteorological satellite systems: the polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite ( poes ) series — managed by noaa — and the defense meteorological satellite program ( dmsp ) — managed by the air force . these satellites obtain environmental data that are processed to provide graphical weather images and specialized weather products . these satellite data are also the predominant input to numerical weather prediction models , which are a primary tool for forecasting weather 3 or more days in advance — including forecasting the path and intensity of hurricanes . the weather products and models are used to predict the potential impact of severe weather so that communities and emergency managers can help prevent and mitigate their effects . polar satellites also provide data used to monitor environmental phenomena , such as ozone depletion and drought conditions , as well as data sets that are used by researchers for a variety of studies such as climate monitoring . with the expectation that combining the poes and dmsp programs would reduce duplication and result in sizable cost savings , a may 1994 presidential decision directive required noaa and dod to converge the two satellite programs into a single satellite program capable of satisfying both civilian and military requirements .