omb circular no . a - 133 requires management decisions to be issued by federal awarding agencies within 6 months of receipt of the audit report . however , the project's guidelines required the federal awarding agencies to issue a management decision as promptly as possible and not later than 90 days after the date that the corrective action plan was received by the cognizant agency for audit . the internal control reports for the project identified internal control deficiencies in at least 24 recovery act programs awarded by seven federal agencies by december 31 , 2009 . moreover , under the project's guidelines , most corrective action plans were completed by january 31 , 2010 , 2 months earlier than the time frames under omb circular no . a - 133 and were concurrently provided to the federal awarding agencies . ” and programmatic questions such as “for each activity , is the grantee on track to meet performance goals ? ” doe is also developing guidance that includes best practices for how states should monitor their subrecipients . as of july 28 , 2010 , doe has conducted 3,985 desktop reviews of the eecbg program , and about 170 on - site reviews . through its monitoring , doe has found that smaller recipients have been more likely to fail to complete quarterly programmatic and financial reporting to doe . while 97 percent of larger recipients ( recipients with grants greater than $2 million ) have completed required quarterly reports due april 30 , only 79 percent of recipients receiving less than $250,000 completed quarterly reports . while doe monitors its grant recipients ( as well as conducts work - site reviews of subrecipients as needed ) , grant recipients are expected to monitor their subrecipients . while doe does not expect grant recipients to have a formal monitoring plan , doe does require that state recipients “develop a sub - granting process…that prevents fraudulent spending” doe is also developing guidance that includes best practices for how states should monitor their subrecipients . several of the states we visited do have a formal plan in place for monitoring their subrecipients . a few of the states we visited have begun monitoring their subrecipients . for example , colorado reviews monthly reports prepared by subrecipients , michigan project managers review detailed expenditure and employment data submitted by subrecipients on a quarterly basis , and massachusetts is beginning to monitor subrecipients through regular interactions with subrecipients . doe also expects localities to have a system for monitoring to ensure that subrecipients comply with eecbg requirements . however , for localities that received direct funding , and as we also found in our may 2010 report on doe's weatherization assistance program , doe provides localities with discretion in developing and implementing internal controls , and as a result , several localities we visited did not have a formal monitoring plan in place for monitoring subrecipients or work performed .