documented , accurate , and credible . it is important that fps ensure that these analyses are consistently done . without these analyses , fps and dhs management faces limitations in making informed decisions about how best to protect delegated federal facilities from potential terrorist attacks or other acts of violence , protection that is fps's responsibility . we conducted this performance audit from january 2014 to march 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we assessed fps's cost estimation model using the gao cost guide's framework of the four characteristics — comprehensive , well - documented , accurate , and credible — associated with high - quality , reliable cost estimates . specifically , we assessed fps's cost model based on most of table 3 the leading practices associated with these four characteristics.provides greater detail on our comparison of the model with the leading practices that are aligned with the four cost estimating characteristics . in addition to the contact named above , tammy conquest , assistant director ; karen richey , assistant director ; jennifer dubord ; sharon dyer ; geoff hamilton ; delwen jones ; abishek krupanand ; steve martinez ; and kelly rubin made key contributions to this report . in september 2014 , fps drafted a directive that establishes its policy and procedures and assigns responsibilities for law enforcement and contract security guard delegations of authority . gao , gao cost estimating and assessment guide: best practices for developing and managing capital program costs , gao - 09-3sp ( washington , d.c.: march 2009 ) . the extent to which the characteristics are met is determined by the extent to which the underlying leading practices for each characteristic are incorporated . the cost guide identifies 20 leading practices for developing a cost estimate that include underlying tasks associated with each of the four characteristics of reliable cost estimates . gao developed the cost guide to assist government agencies as they develop , manage , and evaluate the costs of capital projects . although fps does not directly implement or oversee implementation of capital projects at federal facilities , the agency develops cost estimates as part of its delegation of authority review process ( through its cost estimation model ) and needs reliable cost estimates to inform dhs's decisions about whether to grant , renew , or rescind a delegation . as a result , most of the leading practices are applicable to the assessment of fps's cost estimation model . however , we found that three leading practices and one of the underlying tasks associated with the leading practices were not applicable , in part , because we were assessing a cost model rather than a cost estimate for an acquisition .