gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 2009 . we disagree with opm's assertion . as we explain in our report , we categorized an investigative item as incomplete if the investigative report did not contain the required documentation as prescribed in the federal investigative standards and opm's internal guidance . we also explained that , to the extent possible , we counted an item as complete if the report included documentation of an investigator's unsuccessful attempt to gather the required information . ( 2 ) how complete is the documentation of investigations and adjudications for initial top secret security clearances favorably adjudicated within dod ? ( 3 ) to what extent did executive branch reporting to congress from 2006 through 2009 on dod and other federal agencies include information on quality in the security clearance process ? to determine the completeness of the timeliness data that the executive branch reported for dod clearances granted in fiscal year 2008 , we reviewed the requirements specified in irtpa , conducted an independent analysis of the timeliness of dod personnel security clearances in fiscal year 2008 , and analyzed the timeliness data contained in the executive branch's 2009 report to congress on clearances granted in fiscal year 2008 . in our independent analysis , we measured the timeliness of nearly 450,000 initial clearances and more than 180,000 clearance renewals at the confidential , secret , and top secret levels that were adjudicated in fiscal year 2008 . these nearly 630,000 clearances account for more than 93 percent of dod personnel security clearances adjudicated in fiscal year 2008 . we conducted electronic testing on the data we used in our independent analysis and compared values in dod's and opm's electronic databases with the data contained in the original clearance files . we found that the data we used were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to determine the completeness of both investigation and adjudication documentation for initial top secret security clearances favorably adjudicated within dod , we independently and randomly selected and reviewed a generalizable sample of 100 opm - provided investigative reports and associated dod adjudicative files for clearances granted to military , dod civilian , and private industry personnel working on dod contracts in july 2008 by the central adjudication facilities of the u.s. army , u.s. navy , and u.s. air force . we limited our focus to initial top secret clearances because ( 1 ) we have identified documentation problems with this clearance level in previous work ; ( 2 ) investigators gather the most information for investigations for top secret clearances ; and ( 3 ) individuals granted top secret clearances have access to information that , if improperly disclosed , could cause exceptionally grave damage to national security . using a standardized instrument , we compared the documentation in the opm - provided investigative reports with the requirements outlined in federal investigative standards and opm internal guidance . similarly , we used a standardized instrument to compare the documentation in the dod adjudicative files with federal adjudicative guidelines and dod regulation . based on the results of this review , we developed statistical estimates for about 3,500 clearances granted in july 2008 by these central adjudication facilities .