gao - 08-844 . washington , d.c.: july 25 , 2008 . ( see fig . these evaluation criteria reflect a range of benefits and effects of the proposed project , such as cost - effectiveness , as well as the ability of the project sponsor to fund the project and finance the continued operation of its transit system . fta has developed specific measures for each of the criteria outlined in the statute . on the basis of these measures , fta assigns the proposed project a rating for each criterion and then assigns a summary rating for local financial commitment and project justification . these two ratings are averaged together to create an overall rating , which is used in conjunction with a determination of the project's “readiness” for construction to determine what projects are recommended for funding . projects are rated at several points during the new starts process — as part of the evaluation for entry into the preliminary engineering and the final design phases , and yearly for inclusion in the new starts annual report . as required by statute , the administration uses the fta evaluation and rating process , along with the development phases of new starts projects , to decide which projects to recommend to congress for funding . numerous changes have been made to the new starts program over the last decade . these changes include statutory , regulatory , and administrative changes to the program . for example , we reported in 2005 that fta had implemented 16 changes to the new starts application , evaluation , rating , and project development oversight process since the fiscal year 2001 evaluation cycle . additional changes have been made to the program since 2005 . examples of these changes made to the program over the last 10 years , in chronological order , include the following . new data collection requirements: starting with the fiscal year 2004 evaluation cycle , fta required project sponsors seeking an ffga to submit a plan for the collection and analysis of information to determine the impacts of the project and the accuracy of the forecasts that were prepared during project planning and development . safetea - lu subsequently codified this “before and after” study requirement . evaluation measures revised: fta revised its cost - effectiveness and mobility improvements criteria by adopting the transportation system user benefits ( tsub ) measure that includes benefits for both new and existing transit system riders . although project sponsors generally view the new cost - effectiveness measure of cost per hour of tsub as an improvement over the previous measure of cost per new rider , we have reported that some project sponsors have had difficulties correctly calculating the tsub value for their projects , resulting in delays and additional costs as they conduct multiple iterations of the tsub measure . new analysis requirement added: starting with the fiscal year 2005 evaluation cycle , fta required project sponsors to complete risk assessments . since implementation , the form and timing of the risk assessments have evolved since 2003 , but the intent of the assessments remains to identify the issues that could affect the project's schedule or cost .