we reviewed the office's collection processes and procedures . in 1991 , dod consolidated debt management within dfas . at dfas columbus , two offices are involved in collecting contractor debts owed to the government . the accounts receivable branch manages all newly identified debts . in managing new debts the accounts receivable branch is to use dod's policies and procedures that detail the requirements for an initial demand letter to the contractor , followed by efforts to offset the debt against amounts dod owes the contractor , followed by a second demand letter . the procedures specify that any debt of $600 or greater that has not been resolved after two demand letters is to be transferred to the debt management office . the office manages debts in excess of $600 owed to dod by unresponsive contractors and debts by contractors that agreed to repay the amounts owed in installments . after the transfer from accounts receivable , the debt management office is to review the file to ensure that the debt is valid and adequately supported , and that the file does not contain an installment request , deferment request , or bankruptcy notification . if the debt is erroneous or without clear legal merit , the office can terminate collection action . after determining that the debt is valid and should be collected , the office is to issue a third and final demand letter to give the contractor a final opportunity to settle the debt . the debt management office is to refer debts to the defense criminal investigative service if illegal activities by the contractor could be involved . also , the office is to undertake other collection actions , such as transferring debts to collection agencies , adding a contractor's name and amount owed to the list of contractors indebted to the united states , or referring debts to the u.s. treasury's centralized debt collection programs . the u.s. treasury's centralized debt collection programs , the treasury offset program ( top ) and cross - servicing program , were developed to assist agencies in collecting delinquent nontax debt owed to the federal government . top is a governmentwide debt matching and payment offset program that uses certain of the treasury financial management service's payment data to collect delinquent nontax debts . it uses a centralized delinquent debtor database to match specific delinquent debts against certain payments to be made by the government . the cross - servicing program , like top , was developed in response to the debt collection improvement act of 1996 . under this program , agencies are to identify and refer eligible delinquent nontax debt to treasury's financial management service for collection . our work was performed from february 2000 through january 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we did not independently verify the completeness or accuracy of data provided by dfas on the number and amount of contractor debts as of september 30 , 2000 . the investigative portion of our work was done by our office of special investigations and was completed in accordance with investigative standards established by the president's council on integrity and efficiency .