there are consequences to these outcomes . the warfighter does not receive needed capability on time and the department and congress must spend additional unplanned money to correct mistakes — an expense they can ill afford . a knowledge - based product development process steeped in best practices from systems engineering can solve many of these problems before they start . dod knows how to do this and , in fact , informs its acquisition policy with systems engineering rules . it should redouble its efforts to drive these policies into practice . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes our prepared statement . we would be pleased to answer any questions you may have . for further information about this statement , please contact william m. solis at 202-512-8365 or solisw@gao.gov or michael j. sullivan at 202-512- 4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov . contact points for offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made major contributions to this testimony include marie ahearn , ann borseth , cheryl andrew , claudia dickey , mike hazard , matthew lea , oscar mardis , sean merrill , karen thornton , and steve woods . defense acquisitions: major weapon systems continue to experience cost and schedule problems under dod's revised policy . gao - 06-368 . washington , d.c.: april 13 , 2006 defense acquisitions: assessments of selected major weapon programs . gao - 06-391 . washington , d.c.:march 31 , 2006 . dod acquisition outcomes: a case for change . gao - 06-257t . washington , d.c.: november 15 , 2005 . best practices: capturing design and manufacturing knowledge early improves acquisition outcomes . gao - 02-701 . washington , d.c.: july 15 , 2002 . ( see figure 1. ) in december 2005 , dod issued a report on the study of its mobility capabilities . the goal of this mobility capabilities study was to identify and quantify the mobility capabilities needed to support u.s. strategic objectives into the next decade . the mcs determined that the projected mobility capabilities are adequate to achieve u.s. objectives with an acceptable level of risk during the period from fiscal years 2007 through 2013 ; that is , the current u.s. inventory of aircraft , ships , prepositioned assets , and other capabilities are sufficient , in conjunction with host nation support . the mcs emphasized that continued investment in the mobility system , in line with current departmental priorities and planned spending , is required to maintain these capabilities in the future . this includes , for example , fully funding army prepositioned assets as planned and completing a planned reengineering of the c - 5 aircraft . in our previous reports concerning acquisition outcomes and best practices , we have noted the importance of matching warfighter requirements with available resources , a responsibility shared by the requirements and acquisition communities in dod . as described in air force implementing guidance , there is within dod a distinct separation between the requirements authority and acquisition authority . under this guidance , this separation requires early and continued collaboration between both communities .