also , the methodology used for both reports is the same . once flying hours are allocated to units , the wing commanders manage those hours and report monthly to headquarters air force on the number of hours actually flown . the air force strategy , america's air force: a call to the future , discusses the need to ensure a full - spectrum - capable force that can successfully achieve missions to address a broad range of current and emerging threats . we have previously reported on virtual training issues for the air force . in 2012 , we assessed the air force's virtual training efforts in response to the secretary of defense's efficiency initiatives . we found that the air force lacked some key elements of an overarching organizational framework that were needed to fully integrate virtual training into overall training goals and that it had no methodology for determining the costs of its virtual training enterprise . similarly , inexperienced aircrews are to complete 108 annual sorties ( 9 per month ) , of which 54 are flown to fulfill primary mission requirements . both experienced and inexperienced aircrews are required to complete 36 annual simulator missions ( 3 simulator missions per month ) to be considered combat mission ready . as we noted in our report , the air force's initiatives represent positive steps to study aspects of the combat aircrew annual training requirements . however , given that these studies are in the initial stages or not yet underway , it is unclear whether the scope of the studies is sufficient to address all of the assumptions that need to be revisited . the secretary of the air force is responsible for recruiting , organizing , training , and equipping forces in order to meet the current and future operational requirements of dod's combatant commands . the air force is organized into 10 major commands that are assigned a major part of the air force mission . numbered air forces fall directly under the major commands and are focused on ensuring the readiness of assigned forces . for example , pacific air forces contains three numbered air forces that are located in south korea , japan , and alaska . they provide operational leadership and supervision and are assigned subordinate units , such as wings , groups , and squadrons . the component numbered air force is a specialized category of numbered air force that is structured to perform an operational and warfighting mission in support of a combatant command . air force units , such as an operational flying squadron , are designed to provide a specific set of mission capabilities to meet anticipated operational requirements . see figure 1 for general characteristics of the combat aircraft platforms included in our review . each combat unit has a designed operational capability statement that it uses for reporting readiness data and includes , among other things , the full range of core missions that the unit can be called on to provide . air combat command has responsibility for developing and managing aircrew training requirements to meet the full range of core missions . throughout their careers , air force personnel designated as aircrews participate in several different types of training .