in testing , dhs did not address this . the four tests are described briefly below . the set of all genes of an organism is known as its genome . protein signatures: proteins are long chains of building blocks called amino acids . because there are many types of amino acids , the way each protein interacts with different stimuli , such as light , can be unique . for example , shining one color of light on a protein can result in its emitting different colors . the set of colors the protein gives off can be considered an “optical fingerprint” of the protein , commonly referred to as a type of protein signature . antibodies: antibodies are proteins created by the immune system that attach to specific chemicals on the surface of disease - causing organisms , resulting in the organisms' being rendered harmless . antibodies can be designed to attach to a given target and modified to be detectable under certain conditions . thus it is possible to use antibodies to see whether a target is present by soaking a sample with the antibodies , washing off unattached antibodies , and then measuring those that remain . pcr , which is used to detect nucleic acid signatures , is used to amplify and detect genetic material , or nucleic acids , of organisms . by amplifying ( i.e. , repeatedly duplicating ) those sections of genes associated with certain biological agents , it is possible to distinguish the agents among various organisms . because of the amplifying capability of pcr , small amounts of genetic material are sufficient for detection , resulting in high sensitivity for this technology . specificity can be high if the sections of the genes being amplified are unique to the agent . however , related organisms , called genetic near - neighbors , may contain similar gene sections and lead to a pcr detection when the agent itself is not present . pcr is the method used in the current ( gen - 2 ) biowatch system . immunoassays and protein signatures use antibodies or light to identify organisms . immunoassays use antibodies that attach to chemicals that primarily appear on certain biological agents ; thus immunoassays can be tailored for high specificity . according to another national academies report , the biowatch national conference call usually occurs 1-2 hours after a local call of the biowatch advisory committee . thus , the time between an attack and when medication is fully distributed — and the number of lives potentially saved by minimizing this time — could vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction . dhs officials agreed that the jurisdictional response can vary and conducts exercises and training to help plan for a response . however , it is not clear what effect such exercises have on response time variability . in addition , faster detection may not be the most effective way to save lives . for example , a modeling study showed results indicating that an attack detected in 2 days , but requiring 10 days to distribute medication , would result in more deaths than an attack detected in 5 days , but requiring only 2 days to distribute medication .