he did not ask for any identification . we first reported on potential security vulnerabilities at unmanned and unmonitored border areas in our 2003 testimony . while conducting testing at u.s. – canada ports of entry , we found that one of our investigators was able to walk into the united states from canada at a park straddling the border . the investigator was not stopped or questioned by law enforcement personnel from either canada or the united states . in our september 2007 testimony , we reported on similar vulnerabilities at unmanned and unmonitored locations on the northern and southern borders . the unmanned and unmonitored border areas we visited were defined as locations where cbp does not maintain a manned presence 24 hours per day or where there was no apparent monitoring equipment in place . safety considerations prevented our investigators from performing the same assessment work on the u.s. – mexico border as performed on the northern border . we found three main vulnerabilities during this limited security assessment . first , we found state roads close to the border that appeared to be unmanned and unmonitored , allowing us to simulate the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband from canada into the united states . second , we also located several ports of entry that had posted daytime hours and which , although monitored , were unmanned overnight . investigators observed that surveillance equipment was in operation but that the only observable preventive measure to stop a cross - border violator from entering the united states was a barrier across the road that could be driven around . finally , investigators identified potential security vulnerabilities on federally managed lands adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border . these areas did not appear to be monitored or have a noticeable law enforcement presence during the time our investigators visited the sites . see table 3 for a summary of the vulnerabilities we found and the activity of investigators at each location . selected details related to these covert tests are discussed below . according to cbp , the ease and speed with which a cross - border violator can travel to the border , cross the border , and leave the location of the crossing are critical factors in determining whether an area of the border is vulnerable . we identified state roads close to the border that appeared to be unmanned and unmonitored , allowing us to simulate the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband from canada into the united states . for example , on october 31 , 2006 , our investigators positioned themselves on opposite sides of the u.s. – canada border in an unmanned location . our investigators selected this location because roads on either side of the border would allow them to quickly and easily exchange simulated contraband . after receiving a signal by cell phone , the investigator in canada left his vehicle and walked approximately 25 feet to the border carrying a red duffel bag .