x . all states reported that their medicaid programs paid for at least one of the nine brand name drugs or two of the generic drugs that were included in our survey and which were approved by the fda to treat ibd . figure 1 shows the number of states covering each drug . the brand name drug remicade was the most commonly paid for drug , with all states reporting payment . the generic drugs available for azulfidine and rowasa were covered by 48 and 46 states respectively . further analysis revealed that six states — colorado , minnesota , montana , nevada , oklahoma , and wisconsin — reported that individuals must use generic drugs if they are available , before obtaining the equivalent , but more expensive brand name drugs . three states — california , iowa , and ohio — indicated that they would not cover the brand name drug remicade without prior authorizations . see app . xi for a listing of each state's coverage of drugs listed in our survey to treat ibd for adults and children . we provided a draft of this report to cms . in its written comments , cms said that it determined that we correctly described the medicare coverage policies for parenteral and enteral nutrition and ostomy supplies . however , cms suggested that we clarify our description of medicare's coverage policy for prescription drugs that are not self - administered . we revised our language to address this concern . it also said that , as it proceeds with policy development , it will continue to give consideration to access issues that affect medicare beneficiaries and medicaid recipients in their treatment of ibd . we have reprinted cms's letter in app . xii . we also provided fda with excerpts of the draft concerning drugs it has approved to treat crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis . fda responded by e - mail and provided a list that contained several additional drugs it said it considered as valid , labeled , treatments for ibd . iii . our analysis showed that medicare and most state medicaid programs will generally cover enteral nutrition as follows: medicare: medicare covers enteral nutrition under the prosthetic devices benefit category . the ncd coverage standards for enteral nutrition are very similar to those for parenteral nutrition , with the primary difference being the requirements involving the patient's clinical condition . as with parenteral nutrition , coverage for enteral nutrition is provided in both home health and outpatient delivery settings . however , for enteral nutrition , the patient may have a functioning gastrointestinal tract but must be unable to maintain appropriate weight and strength due to pathology to , or the nonfunction of , the structures that normally permit food to reach the digestive tract . the only other differing requirement in the ncd between the two therapies is that there is no hospitalization requirement for a patient seeking medicare coverage for enteral nutrition . the ncd also requires a physician's written order or prescription and sufficient medical documentation to show that the prosthetic device coverage requirements are met and that enteral nutrition therapy is medically necessary . the local coverage policy on enteral nutrition is simpler than the local policy for parenteral nutrition .