( fig . 1 provides an overview of the work cdr process. ) when a di work - related overpayment is identified , the beneficiary is notified of the overpayment and may request reconsideration or waiver of that overpayment . ssa may grant a waiver request if the agency finds the beneficiary was not at fault and recovery or adjustment would either defeat the purpose of the program or be against equity and good conscience , as defined by ssa . if ssa denies a reconsideration or waiver request , full repayment is requested . if the beneficiary is receiving di or certain other ssa benefits , ssa may withhold partial payment of these benefits to recover the debt . however , if no ssa benefits are being received , or if the beneficiary asserts that the proposed withholding amount is too large , the agency generally requests repayment over 12 to 36 months . ( 2 ) what are ssa's policies and procedures for performing enforcement work cdrs , including potential di program vulnerabilities that may contribute to work - related overpayments ? in conducting our review we analyzed di overpayment debt collection and enforcement work cdr performance data , policies and procedures for conducting work cdrs , prior reports by ssa and its office of the inspector general , external research studies , relevant federal laws and regulations , and our prior reviews of the program . in addition , we interviewed ssa officials responsible for di overpayment debt collection policy and operations , as well as enforcement work cdr processing management , policy , and oversight . we randomly selected 15 cases from each of four processing centers we visited ( baltimore , maryland ; chicago , illinois ; kansas city , missouri ; and queens , new york ) , which were closed in fiscal year 2009 with an overpayment . together , the selected processing centers received almost 80 percent of ssa's enforcement alerts referred for work cdrs in fiscal year 2009 . we reviewed each of these 60 randomly selected cases to determine whether the case had been administered in accordance with ssa program guidelines for processing of work cdrs . we used random selection procedures to help ensure that we drew a wide range of cases for our review ; however , the results from our randomly selected sample of cases cannot be generalized to the population of all work cdr cases due to our limited sample sizes . finally , we conducted in - depth interviews with ssa management and line staff at headquarters and four of ssa's eight processing centers . in our site visits and interviews , we examined work cdr and overpayment debt recovery procedures ; elicited management and staff views on the effectiveness of the work cdr processes in detecting and preventing earnings - related overpayments ; and discussed the processing of selected work cdr cases , including debt recovery cases , and potential improvements to existing policies , processes , and systems . we assessed the reliability of all databases used in our review , primarily ssa's disability control file , master beneficiary record ( mbr ) , and recovery of overpayment , accounting , and reporting ( roar ) system .