debt ceiling options . gao / aimd - 96-20r . washington , d.c.: december 7 , 1995 . civil service fund: improved controls needed over investments . gao / afmd - 87-17 . washington , d.c.: may 7 , 1987 . opinion on the legality of the plan of the secretary of the treasury to disinvest the social security and other trust funds on november 1 , 1985 , to permit payments to beneficiaries of these funds . b - 221077.2 . washington , d.c.: december 5 , 1985 . a new approach to the public debt legislation should be considered . fgmsd - 79-58 . washington , d.c.: september 7 , 1979 . this was consistent with its standard redemption policies and procedures . however , on june 3 , 2002 , when treasury redeemed 10 reinvestments , it did not consider accrued interest . instead , the june 3 , 2002 , redemption followed the practices used in the 1995 / 1996 debt issuance suspension period . regarding the third instance , the classification of $1.2 million of losses incurred , treasury did not agree that its classification of this amount as interest losses was in error . as discussed in our report , the dual set of accounts maintained by treasury's new financial management system — one that tracks actual debt issuance suspension period transactions and one that tracks transactions that would have occurred had there not been a debt issuance suspension period — clearly showed that the principal balances in the civil service fund differed by $1.2 million on june 28 , 2002 . as such , we concluded that when treasury restored the losses incurred by the civil service fund , it misclassified about $1.2 million of principal losses as interest losses . as stated in our report , these errors were not significant and were subsequently corrected as necessary ; however , we believe that had treasury established documented policies and procedures and effectively implemented them , the likelihood of these errors would have been greatly reduced . specific technical comments provided orally by treasury were incorporated in this report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on appropriations ; the senate committee on governmental affairs ; the senate committee on the budget ; the subcommittee on treasury and general government , senate committee on appropriations ; the senate committee on finance ; the house committee on appropriations ; the house committee on government reform ; the house committee on the budget ; the house committee on ways and means ; and the subcommittee on treasury , postal service , and general government , house committee on appropriations . we are also sending copies of this report to the under secretary for domestic finance , the inspector general of the department of the treasury , the director of the office of management and budget , and other agency officials . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c .