oversight . the evaluation of the model to help ensure it works as intended . see gao - 10-782 for more detailed descriptions of the seven factors . in addition to the individual named above , karen tremba ( assistant director ) , rachel demarcus , patrick dynes , matthew keeler , patricia moye , barbara roesmann , and jessica sandler made key contributions to this report . competition . the extent to which the compensation model creates an environment in which nrsros compete for customers by producing higher - quality ratings at competitive prices . transparency . the accessibility , usability , and clarity of the compensation model and the dissemination of information on the model to market participants . feasibility . the ease and simplicity with which the compensation model can be implemented in the securities market . market acceptance and choice . the willingness of the securities market to accept the compensation model , the ratings produced under that model , and any new market players established by the compensation model . pub . 109-291 , 120 stat . 1327 ( 2006 ) ( amending the securities exchange act of 1934 and codified at various sections of title 15 of the u.s. code ) . reduce conflicts of interest and ways to increase nrsro incentives to produce accurate ratings . more recently , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) imposed new self - executing requirements on nrsros , required sec to adopt certain rules for nrsros , and required sec to conduct certain studies . sec must periodically review the implementation of policies that nrsros must establish concerning evaluations of possible conflicts of interest related to former employees . other requirements relate to disclosures of performance statistics , credit ratings methodologies , third - party due diligence for asset - backed securities , and analyst training and testing standards . in addition , section 939f requires sec to study , among other things , the credit rating process for structured finance products and associated conflicts of interest , the feasibility of establishing a system in which a public or private utility or a self - regulatory organization assigns nrsros to determine the credit ratings of structured finance products , and alternative means for compensating nrsros that would create incentives for accurate credit ratings ( hereafter referred to as the 939f study ) . section 939f requires sec to submit to congress the findings of the study and any recommendations for regulatory or statutory changes sec determines should be made to implement the findings by july 21 , 2012 . pub . 111-203 , §§ 931-939h , 872 stat 1376 , 1872-1890 ( 2010 ) . in addition to provisions related to oversight , the dodd - frank act requires every federal agency to review regulations that require assessments of the creditworthiness of a security or money market instrument and any references to credit ratings in such regulations ; to modify such regulations to remove any reference to , or requirement for , reliance on credit ratings ; and substitute a standard of creditworthiness an agency deems appropriate . § 78o - 7 note . statutory changes that would facilitate the use of such an alternative model .