both options are not attractive . slowing down production raises unit costs due to smaller annual quantities . analysis indicates that , once closed , it would not be feasible or cost effective to restart production due to costs for hiring and training a new workforce , reinstalling tooling , and reestablishing the supply base . therefore , careful planning to firmly and timely establish future c - 17 fleet requirements is important to avoid unnecessary costs associated with a slowdown or a premature shutdown . our review of contractor and air force plans identified the following major challenges and substantial costs for restarting production: a workforce of nearly 3,100 people would have to be hired and trained following a complete shutdown . boeing officials believe that the vast majority of its current workforce will not be available for reemployment 1 year after the shutdown . a union representative stated that workers , whose average age is around 57 years , will either retire or find other jobs during the shutdown period . boeing does not have the ability to move its workers to other production lines at its long beach , california , plant because the c - 17 is the last aircraft being built at that facility . production tooling would need to be dismantled , stored , and maintained for the entire length of the shutdown . tooling would then have to be reinstalled and restored to its original working condition , which officials believe would be no small feat considering the significant amount of automation involved in the production process . in addition , new tooling may need to be procured depending on design changes that may occur during the shutdown period . suppliers would have to be identified and their processes and parts would have to be qualified . boeing officials stated that some suppliers it deals with now may not be available and many other suppliers may not participate in the c - 17 production program because they may develop alternative business ventures following the shutdown . suppliers of certain specialty parts are of utmost concern . cost estimates to shut down and restart the c - 17 production line are very substantial . in 2006 , when various shutdown options were being evaluated , boeing estimated that the cost to shut down and restart would be about $918 million ; the air force estimated $2 billion . table 4 shows the main assumptions used to develop these estimates . boeing and the air force used different cost - estimating assumptions when completing their production shutdown and restart estimates , and neither estimate reflects all potential costs . for example , boeing's estimate only addresses mothballing the production facility in anticipation of restarting production , whereas the air force's estimate includes the costs to stop and restart production as well as a final shutdown that would occur after a second production run is completed . neither boeing nor the air force included costs to hire and train approximately 3,100 workers or to make configuration changes that may have occurred to the aircraft during the time period when the line was shut down .