most agencies agreed with the recommendations or had no comments . as of february 2019 , 11 of these recommendations remained open . in april 2015 , we reported on actions needed by 26 federal agencies to ensure portfolio savings were realized and tracked . we noted that these agencies had decreased their planned portfoliostat savings by at least 68 percent from what they reported to us in 2013 . specifically , while the agencies initially had planned to save at least $5.8 billion between fiscal years 2013 and 2015 , these estimates were decreased to approximately $2 billion . we made recommendations to omb and the department of defense aimed at improving the reporting of achieved savings , documenting how savings are reinvested , and establishing time frames for portfoliostat action items . as of february 2019 , omb had addressed one of the five recommendations . our september 2016 report on application inventories noted that most of the 24 agencies in the review fully met at least three of the four practices we identified to determine if agencies had complete software application inventories . additionally , six of the agencies relied on their investment management processes and , in some cases , supplemental processes to rationalize their applications to varying degrees . however , five of the six agencies acknowledged that their processes did not always allow for collecting or reviewing the information needed to effectively rationalize all their applications . we made recommendations that 20 agencies improve their inventories and five of the agencies take actions to improve their processes to rationalize their applications more completely . agencies had addressed four of the 25 recommendations as of february 2019 . usda employed a centralized software license management approach by establishing a category management team . in addition , dhs implemented a process that included a review of investment risks , ensured that the risks were current , and that risk mitigation plans were in place . we previously reported that gsa and usaid had centralized the management of their software licenses . our assessments generally showed more risk than the associated cio ratings . we also issued a series of reports about the it dashboard that noted concerns about the accuracy and reliability of the data on the dashboard . in total , we have made 25 recommendations to omb and federal agencies to help improve the accuracy and reliability of the information on the dashboard and to increase its availability . federal data center consolidation initiative we have reported annually on agencies' efforts to meet fitara requirements related to the federal data center consolidation initiative . for example , in march 2016 we reported that , as of november 2015 , the 24 agencies participating in the initiative had identified a total of 10,584 data centers , of which they reported closing 3,125 through fiscal year 2015 . in total , 19 of the 24 agencies reported achieving an estimated $2.8 billion in cost savings and avoidances from fiscal years 2011 to 2015 . we recommended that 10 agencies take action to address challenges in establishing , and to complete , planned data center cost savings and avoidance targets . we also recommended that 22 agencies take action to improve optimization progress , including addressing any identified challenges .