interoperability can be achieved at different levels . at the highest level , electronic data are computable ( that is , in a format that a computer can understand and act on to , for example , provide alerts to clinicians on drug allergies ) . at a lower level , electronic data are structured and viewable , but not computable . the value of data at this level is that they are structured so that data of interest to users are easier to find . at a still lower level , electronic data are unstructured and viewable , but not computable . with unstructured electronic data , a user would have to find needed or relevant information by searching uncategorized data . beyond these , paper records can also be considered interoperable ( at the lowest level ) because they allow data to be shared , read , and interpreted by human beings . since 1998 , va and dod have relied on a patchwork of initiatives involving their health information systems to achieve electronic health record interoperability . these have included efforts to: share viewable data in existing ( legacy ) systems ; link and share computable data between the departments' modernized health data repositories ; establish interoperability objectives to meet specific data - sharing needs ; develop a virtual lifetime electronic health record to track patients through active service and veteran status ; and implement it capabilities for the first joint federal health care center . while , collectively , these initiatives have yielded increased data - sharing in various capacities , a number of them have nonetheless been plagued by persistent management challenges , which have created barriers to achieving the fully interoperable electronic health record capabilities long sought . among the departments' earliest efforts to achieve interoperability was the government computer - based patient record ( gcpr ) initiative , which was begun in 1998 with the intent of providing an electronic interface that would allow physicians and other authorized users of va's and dod's health facilities to access data from either of the other agency's health facilities . the interface was expected to compile requested patient health information in a temporary , “virtual” record that could be displayed on a user's computer screen . however , in reporting on this initiative in april 2001 , we found that accountability for gcpr was blurred across several management entities and that basic principles of sound it project planning , development , and oversight had not been followed , thus , creating barriers to progress . for example , clear goals and objectives had not been set ; detailed plans for the design , implementation , and testing of the interface had not been developed ; and critical decisions were not binding on all partners . while both departments concurred with our recommendations that they , among other things , create comprehensive and coordinated plans for the effort , progress on the initiative continued to be disappointing . the department subsequently revised the strategy for gcpr and , in may 2002 , narrowed the scope of the initiative to focus on enabling dod to electronically transfer service members' electronic health information to va upon their separation from active duty .