( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of our report to the department of veterans affairs ( va ) for its review and comment . the timeliness values we calculated may include additional time needed to request and receive contractors' corrections or clarifications on previously submitted exam reports . in our report , we refer to these exams as “insufficient exams.” vba officials acknowledged that due to data limitations the new exam management system is intended to resolve , vba's caats system did not retain data on the number of exams that were once marked as insufficient or how long they remained in that status . officials said they were working to address these issues . more broadly , as described in va system documents , the new system is designed to allow vba to track more detailed data on exam completion dates and on other points throughout the exam process , such as dates for initial requests for clarification from contractors , and dates when appointments are scheduled . however , vba is in the early stage of this transition , and agency officials stated that unexpected technical issues have affected communication between the new exam management system and other vba systems . while they work to resolve the issues , vba officials said that they have been manually moving some exam requests through the system each day . further , vba has not documented how it plans to ensure the additional data is accurate and use it to oversee contractor performance as outlined in the contracts , particularly for insufficient exams . federal internal control standards state that management should use quality information to achieve key objectives . in addition , management should formulate plans to achieve those objectives . for example , agencies should assess collected data and ensure it is accurate so that it can be used to provide quality information to evaluate performance . in the absence of a plan for how it will capture and use data in its new exam management system to assess performance , vba risks overpaying contractors for insufficient exams and continuing to inaccurately measure contractor timeliness . further , according to agency officials , vba has not conducted comprehensive analyses of performance data that would allow it to identify and address higher - level trends and program - wide challenges across contractors , geographic districts , exam types , or other relevant factors . agency officials told us they have no plans to conduct such analyses . federal internal control standards state that management should establish and operate monitoring activities and evaluate the results of those activities . in addition , management should evaluate deficiencies both at the individual and aggregate level . while vba officials acknowledged that higher - level analyses could improve program oversight , they explained that analyzing performance data has been challenging due to the limitations of the exam management system . thus , vba has prioritized addressing contractor - specific problems and resolving long - standing pending exams over in - depth analysis of the performance data .