required to respond to the incident . the imat may support first responders in providing shelter , emergency food and supplies , and restoration of government services . imat team members may also help state and local officials in obtaining temporary housing or counseling for disaster victims and providing estimates for replacement of damaged infrastructure . imat teams have responded to a range of disasters including hurricanes isaac and sandy in 2012 ; the 2013 floods in colorado ; and the 2014 mudslide in oso , washington . the imat program was historically staffed by permanent full time fema employees , whose salaries and benefits were supplemented by funds from the disaster relief fund for expenses when the teams were deployed to specific disasters . after fema used nearly all of its imat teams in response to hurricane sandy , the agency increased the number of imat staff . fema increased total program staffing by replacing its 97 permanent full time employees in fiscal year 2010 with 255 new core positions for fiscal year 2015 . core imat employees are hired on 4-year contracts , and the positions may be renewed if there is ongoing disaster work and funding is available . under the new team composition , the 3 national imat teams grew from 16-member teams staffed by permanent full time employees to 32-member teams staffed by core employees . at the same time , the regional imat teams grew from teams of 4 permanent full time employees to teams of 12 core employees ( see appendix iv for national and regional imat position organizational charts ) . in establishing the core teams , fema shifted all program funding to the disaster relief fund and program expenditures increased from approximately $13 million in fiscal year 2010 to $35 million obligated from the disaster relief fund for fiscal year 2015 ( to include all salaries and benefits and available program costs , but not including disaster - specific costs ) . ( see appendix v for detailed imat positions and program funding. ) as of july 2015 , all imats have transitioned to the new core teams . figure 3 shows the evolution of fema's incident response teams and changes in imat size and composition since 2006 . emergency evacuations are the responsibility of state and local governments . however , fema is responsible for providing direction , guidance , and technical assistance on state and local evacuation plans that contain integrated information on transportation operations , shelters , and other elements of a successful evacuation . fema provides evacuation support and response through its office of response and recovery primarily through three programs: the national hurricane program , the national evacuations contracts , and nmets , a database tool that is intended to support state transportation - assisted evacuees and facilitate data sharing among declared and host states or jurisdictions . in fiscal year 2007 , fema developed nmets with initial program funding of $2 million .