( recommendation 3 ) . the department stated that , in line with these recommendations , it will continue its proactive efforts related to the mobility on demand program , and continue to share information about public transit partnerships . dot also provided technical comments , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of transportation and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact mark goldstein at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . project description from january 2017 through june 2018 , lavta's godublin project provided first - and last - mile service for trips that begin and end within the city limits of dublin , ca . lavta paid half of the fare of a ridesourcing ride , up to a maximum of $5.00 . the service included a service option for paratransit - eligible riders . the overall goal of the pilot project was to see if rideshare programs reduce congestion and parking issues in dublin . lyft line , via mobility services , denver south transportation management association , conduent ( formerly xerox ) gocentennial , a demonstration project that operated from august 17 , 2016 through february 17 , 2017 , was intended to increase rail ridership by providing first - and last - mile lyft line rides ( microtransit ) and accessible transportation service to and from the denver regional transportation district rail station located in centennial , co . the service included a transportation option for paratransit - eligible riders . beginning in september 2017 wmata's abilities ride program provides riders that are eligible for wmata's metro access paratransit program the option to use on - demand taxi service for trips that originate and end in wmata's maryland service area at a discounted rate . the metro access customer pays the first $5 of the fare ; then wmata pays up to the next $15 . for a trip requiring a wheelchair accessible vehicle , wmata pays an extra $10 to the vendor for that trip . beginning in december 2017 , psta's mobility on demand sandbox project provides same day , on - demand door - to - door service to a small subset of paratransit - eligible customers in pinellas county , fl . beginning in february 2016 , psta's direct connect program provided first - and last - mile service , initially within two pilot zones . psta expanded the program to eight zones in pinellas county in january 2017 . as of april 2018 , users can travel to or from 24 locations throughout pinellas county . psta pays the first $5 of the ride and the customer pays the rest . the service includes a transportation option for paratransit - eligible riders .