gao 10-123 . washington , d.c.: october 7 , 2009 . homeland defense: u.s. northern command has a strong exercise program , but involvement of interagency partners and states can be improved . gao - 09-849 . washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2009 . the department generally concurred with these recommendations . these reports are listed in the related gao products section at the end of this report . you asked us to assess dod's planning and capabilities for a complex catastrophe . this report examines the extent to which dod has ( 1 ) planned for and identified capabilities to respond to complex catastrophes , and ( 2 ) established a command and control construct for complex catastrophes and other multistate incidents . to determine the extent to which dod has planned for and identified capabilities to respond to complex catastrophes , we assessed dod civil support planning documents , guidance , and after action reports from civil support incidents and exercises that have occurred since 2011 ; and we met with office of secretary of defense , joint staff , combatant command , military service , defense agency , and reserve officials . we also met with several defense coordinating officers and federal emergency management agency ( fema ) officials to determine what planning was being conducted at the regional level . we also met with officials at northcom and u.s. pacific command ( pacom ) to determine how the commands are incorporating a complex catastrophe scenario into civil support plans by the september 2013 and 2014 deadlines . we assessed planning guidance issued by the joint staff and secretary of defense and dod joint doctrine against interviews with dod and combatant command officials to determine how dod was incorporating a complex catastrophe into civil support plans . to determine the extent to which dod has established a command and control construct for complex catastrophes and other multistate incidents , we analyzed dod doctrine and plans related to operational planning and command and control . we also reviewed laws and national - level policy pertaining to disaster response coordination and planning , and met with officials from the office of the secretary of defense , the joint staff , northcom , pacom , the military services , and the national guard bureau to determine dod's existing command and control structure . in addition , we reviewed relevant documentation — including briefings , analyses , and after action reports related to hurricane sandy and national level exercise 2011 — and met with office of the secretary of defense , joint staff , combatant command , military service , and national guard officials to determine the extent to which dod had identified and analyzed multistate command and control issues . we also assessed dod and interagency guidance and other documents including northcom's civil support plan , dod's civil support joint publication and joint action plan for developing unity of effort , and dod after action reports from hurricane sandy to determine how the existing command and control construct addressed complex catastrophes and other multistate incidents . we conducted this performance audit from august 2012 to september 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .