implemented ? gao - 01-525: information technology: architecture needed to guide modernization of dod's financial operations . may 17 , 2001 . ( 1 ) the secretary immediately issue a department of defense ( dod ) policy that directs the development , implementation , and maintenance of a business enterprise architecture ( bea ) . dod has developed the information technology portfolio management policy . while this policy , in conjunction with the overarching global information grid policy , assigns responsibilities for the development , implementation , and maintenance of the bea , it does not provide for having accountability for and approval of updates to the architecture processes for architecture oversight and control and architecture review and validation , and it does not address the issuance of waivers for business systems that are not compliant with the bea but are nevertheless justified on the basis of documented analysis . program officials stated that the department plans to revise this policy , but they did not provide a time frame for doing so . ( 2 ) the secretary immediately modify the senior financial management oversight council's charter to designate the deputy secretary of defense as the council chair and the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) as the council vice - chair ; and empower the council to serve as dod's bea steering committee , giving it the responsibility and authority to ensure that a dod bea is developed and maintained in accordance with the dod command , control , communications , computers , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( c4isr ) architecture framework . we previously reported that dod had established the executive and steering committees , which were advisory in nature . the department also had established the domain owners integration team ( do / it ) and stated that these three bodies were responsible for governing the program . however , these groups had not been assigned responsibilities for directing , overseeing , and approving the bea . according to key department officials , these three entities will be replaced . specifically , in february 2005 , dod established the defense business systems management committee ( dbsmc ) , which replaced the executive and steering committees . according to its charter , the dbsmc is accountable and responsible for the program . the department plans to establish an underlying management structure to support the dbsmc in carrying out its roles and responsibilities . in addition , program officials have stated the department's intention to replace the do / it with the dod enterprise transformation integration group whose roles and responsibilities and concept of operations have yet to be defined . implemented ? yes partial no dod comments and our assessment ( 3 ) the secretary immediately make the assistant secretary of defense ( command , control , communications & intelligence ) , in collaboration with the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , accountable to the senior financial management oversight council for developing and maintaining a dod bea . the assistant secretary of defense ( networks and information integration ) / chief information officer ( asd ( nii ) / cio ) is a member of the recently established dbsmc ; however , it is not known how this committee will operate .