we do not agree with irs on this point . rda does not distinguish between leased and owned space , and in our view , it is as important to consider costs and other factors regardless of whether space is leased or owned , particularly considering that many leases are for long time periods . on july 3 , 2001 , we received written comments from the u.s. customs' director , office of planning , which are reprinted in appendix ix . the director responded that customs concurred with the report's recommendation to gsa to revise its guidance on federal facilities and stated that information in the report about customs' facility acquisition process and factors used by customs to select the sites in our survey was correct . ( 4 ) what functions lend themselves to being located in rural areas ? to answer the first question , we used a questionnaire and follow - up interviews to survey agency officials regarding 115 sites acquired during fiscal years 1998 though 2000 by the general services administration ( gsa ) or other agencies that exercised their independent statutory authority to acquire sites . we agree and acknowledged in this report that agency mission requirements primarily dictated the location of the sites in our survey . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 21 days after its issue date . at your request , we excluded moves to washington , d.c. , and the 10 federal cities . we chose space of 25,000 square feet or larger in order to review decisions with more significant economic importance . to determine what federal laws and policies govern facility location , we interviewed gsa and other agency officials and reviewed relevant laws and policies . ( 3 ) what lessons can be learned from private sector site selections ? we contracted with a consultant who surveyed 52 private sector companies and reviewed real estate - related literature discussing private sector site selections to determine what lessons the public sector could learn from private sector site selections . to determine which functions lend themselves to locations in rural areas , we used results from our questionnaire survey , interviews with real estate and other officials at 13 cabinet agencies , and observations from the consultant's survey . for this survey , we defined rural area as an area having a population of 25,000 and under . we had to select a threshold because rda is unclear as to which population size to use for facility siting . the prior threshold , which was eliminated in 1996 , used a population threshold of 50,000 and included a population density requirement . population density data were not readily available ; therefore , it was not feasible for us to use this definition . we chose 25,000 or less because it was used to define rural areas by several federal agencies for purposes other than federal siting under rda and private sector organizations that we identified . the 25,000 population threshold resulted in the identification of 32 of the 115 sites in our survey as rural sites .