testing . the program also requires testing to verify and validate the crew transportation system . agency officials emphasized the importance of testing to safety , stating that testing reduces uncertainty about a system's performance and can uncover unknown problems . as noted above , both contractors will be conducting an uncrewed and a crewed flight test prior to being certified . while a certain level of risk needs to be accepted to conduct human spaceflight , these flight tests help to mitigate this risk by validating the integrated performance of the hardware and software . agency and program officials stated that the contractors' flight tests are critical evidence to support certification of a safe and reliable system . as evidenced by the data above , the program still has a significant amount of work ahead with respect to approving certification packages and closing hazard reports and verification closure notices . we have previously found that the program's workload was an emerging schedule risk , and the contractors have continued to express concern about program officials' ability to process and approve certification paperwork in a timely manner . workload has also been a concern for two of nasa's independent review organizations . for example , the aerospace safety advisory panel noted in its january 2018 annual report that the sheer volume of work that remains for the program in terms of closing hazard reports and verification closure notices is significant . in addition , the program's safety and mission assurance office identified the upcoming bow wave of work in a shrinking time period as a top risk to achieving certification . one mechanism the program put in place to assess the overall safety of each spacecraft — loss of crew — has been a focus of the aerospace safety advisory panel , members of congress , our prior work , and the program itself . loss of crew captures the probability of death or permanent disability to one or more crew members . it has received a lot of attention , in part , because it has been a top risk for the program since 2015 . specifically , the program has been concerned that neither contractor would be able to meet the contract requirement of a 1 in 270 probability of incurring loss of crew . we identified two key concerns with how nasa is using the loss of crew metric: ( 1 ) inconsistent approaches to assess the loss of crew metric and ( 2 ) no identified plan to share lessons learned about using the loss of crew metric as a safety threshold . a loss of crew value is generated through a probabilistic safety analysis , which models scenarios that could result in the loss of crew using various inputs . according to the program's analysis , the probability of on - orbit debris damaging the vehicle has the greatest effect on a loss of crew value . this probability is informed by an orbital debris ( debris ) model , which was updated in 2014 , after the loss of crew requirement was established . the updated debris model makes it harder to meet a loss of crew value , in part , because the modeling environment where the contractors' systems will operate has changed .