staff training . although the wia section 188 regulations do not specifically require that one - stop staff , other than the equal opportunity officer and his or her staff , receive training on disability , the wia section 188 checklist includes training as one example of how one - stops can ensure compliance with wia's comprehensive access requirements . one - stop staff in the majority of the local areas we visited had received some disability - related information and training , but the range of topics covered varied across sites . for example , officials in at least one local area told us that they were still focusing on providing staff with disability awareness training , while officials , staff , and staff training providers in other locations described a wider range of training topics , such as: disability awareness or sensitivity training ; types of services that vr provides , and the agency's eligibility rules and criteria ; types of disability - related agencies in the community , as well as who they serve , the types of services they offer , and their contact information ; how to identify certain disabilities , including hidden disabilities such as mental illness or learning disabilities ; and wia section 188 training . we also found that a few local areas and one - stops created comprehensive training programs or targeted their training to identified staff needs . for example , one local area created an extensive disability - training program that provides online and in - class training on a range of relevant disability - related issues and discusses these issues in the context of particular disabilities . this training program has been made available on a statewide basis . also , in one state , staff at the three one - stops we visited had undergone , or were scheduled to undergo , an assessment of their training needs . these assessments were then going to be used to develop training plans for each of these one - stops . some officials and staff stated that the available disability - related staff training was beneficial and provided positive outcomes . for example , some officials and staff said that the available training made staff more comfortable interacting with , and providing services to , persons with disabilities and helped them learn about the range of disability - related services that vr and other agencies in the community offer . however , other officials and staff expressed some concerns about the available training . for example , a few of these officials and staff said that they would like training on specific disability - related topics to be available , and in at least one case , local area and one - stop officials had concerns about how well their limited training prepared staff for providing services to persons with disabilities . additionally , some of the officials , staff , and staff training providers we interviewed said that their training efforts were affected by high staff turnover and the prospect of staff forgetting the information learned in training if it is not used very often .