burundi . one government organization — humara center — responsible for investigating cases of sexual violence and rape received 197 cases of sexual and gender - based violence through early december 2017 , according to state . observers stated many women were reluctant to report rape , in part due to fear of reprisal , according to state . in addition , un entities reported the following case - file data about sexual violence in the drc: drc . in 2017 , the united nations organization stabilization mission in the drc verified 195 cases of conflict - related sexual violence , with illegal armed groups responsible for 80 percent of the cases and drc security forces responsible for the remaining 20 percent . united nations officials we interviewed raised concerns about a resurgence of sexual violence in certain regions in the drc due to a variety of factors , including political instability arising from the government's postponement of the presidential election originally scheduled to take place in november 2016 . we provided a draft of this report to the sec , state , and the u.s. agency for international development for comment . sec provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . state and usaid did not provide comments . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and to the chairman of the securities and exchange commission , the secretary of state , and the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development . the report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8612 or gianopoulosk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in this report , we provide information about ( 1 ) companies' disclosures filed with the u.s. securities and exchange commission ( sec ) in 2017 compared with disclosures filed in the prior 2 years and ( 2 ) the rate of sexual violence in the eastern democratic republic of the congo and neighboring countries published in 2017 and early 2018 . to examine the fourth annual company disclosures filed with the sec in 2017 in response to the sec disclosure rule , we downloaded the specialized disclosure reports ( form sd ) and conflict minerals reports ( cmr ) from sec's publically available electronic data gathering , analysis , and retrieval ( edgar ) database in september 2017 . we downloaded 1,165 filings identified as form sds and the cmrs included in edgar . to review the completeness and accuracy of the edgar database , we reviewed relevant documentation , interviewed knowledgeable sec officials , and reviewed prior gao reports on internal controls related to sec's financial systems . we determined that the edgar database was sufficiently reliable for identifying the universe of sd filings .