may . as such we are not making recommendations in this report . however , it will be important for the congress to carefully study the army's efforts and assess its transformation progress and priorities when deliberating future budget requests and to ensure that the army is following a knowledge - based approach in making acquisition decisions . the technology did not mature as planned for either system . the comanche helicopter will be in development for about 23 years and the crusader system will be in development for over 16 years before their planned fielding dates . a critical requirement for both interim vehicles and future combat systems is the ability to see and understand the battlespace . however , the army is already facing challenges in developing technologies needed in this area . the battlefield survivability of both the family of interim armored vehicles and the future combat systems depends upon situational understanding — that is , the capability to “see” and understand the battlespace in all its dimensions , precisely locate and track critical targets , conduct operations with lethal and non - lethal means , recognize and protect friendly forces , and provide a common operational picture of the situation . this engine also would be used in the crusader system . the entire transformation is not expected to be completed until about fiscal year 2032 . by that time , the objective force will have replaced both the interim and legacy forces . the interim force will bridge the gap between the capabilities of today's force and the objective force . the army originally had planned to equip the first interim brigade combat team with interim vehicles by march 2001 and reach initial operational capability with that team by december 2001 . after that and continuing through fiscal year 2010 , the army plans to equip from five to eight interim brigade combat teams with these vehicles . according to army staff officials , this could be from 2,131 to 2,791 interim armored vehicles depending on the number of brigades the army equips . to ensure near - term warfighting readiness and improve existing warfighting capabilities , the army has concluded that it must sustain and selectively modernize and recapitalize the legacy force . the army plans to enhance key armored and aviation systems in both active and reserve components . legacy force systems include those weapon systems that the army has fielded such as the abrams tank or bradley fighting vehicle and that were under development before the transformation was announced such as the crusader artillery system . the army's transformation plans include legacy force investments to ensure that heavy combat systems can maintain their superiority over potential enemy systems during the transformation period . as the objective force units are equipped , the army plans to phase out the legacy force units and then the interim force units . the army has made some difficult trade - off decisions on programs that will and will not be funded and transformation efforts that will and will not be immediately undertaken in order to fit its near - term transformation efforts within available funding . as the transformation proceeds , the army will likely need to make more trade - offs .