( see app . i for more information about our methodology for selecting and contacting hospitals and physicians and the information we obtained. ) for consumers with health insurance , their out - of - pocket costs for a health care service is determined by the amount of cost sharing specified in the benefits of their health insurance plan for services covered by the insurer . for consumers who lack health insurance , they are often billed for the full amount charged by the provider , such as a billed charge from a hospital . the estimated out - of - pocket cost for an uninsured consumer will typically be the billed charge for a health care service minus any charity care or discounts that may be applied by the provider . providers and payers often price health care services using the various codes used by health care professionals . for example , physicians may bill for their services based on current procedural terminology ( cpt ) codes developed by the american medical association . individual health care services , such as those referred to by individual cpt codes , can be grouped or bundled together into an episode of care , which refers to a group of health care services associated with a patient's condition over a defined period of time . an episode of care for a knee replacement , for example , includes multiple services such as those provided during the actual surgery , as well as preoperation and postoperation consultations . the episode of care would also include services provided by various providers who typically bill separately , such as a hospital , surgeon , and anesthesiologist . ppaca requires hhs to develop a national pilot program , which may include bundled payments for episodes of care surrounding certain hospitalizations , in order to improve the coordination , quality , and efficiency of health care services . according to researchers , it is important for consumers to have access to quality of care and other information to provide context to the price information and help consumers in their decision making . for example , according to the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) , appropriate quality of care information for consumers may include the mortality rates for a specific procedure , the percentage of patients with surgical complications or postoperative infections , or the average length of stay , among other measures . by combining quality and price information , some researchers argue that consumers can then use this information to choose providers with the highest quality and the lowest price — thereby obtaining the greatest value when purchasing care . furthermore , some research suggests that information on volume ( the number of services performed ) may be used as an indication of quality for certain procedures . this assumes a positive association between the number of times a provider administers a service and the quality of the service provided . information about previous patients' satisfaction with a provider's service can also help consumers make decisions about their health care .