vol . 3 ( august 2005 ) . la raja , ray j. , and mathew saradjian . squire , peverill . “legislative professionalization and membership diversity in state legislatures.” legislative studies quarterly , vol . xvii , no . 1 ( february 1992 ) . thompson , joel a. , and gary f. moncrief , eds . campaign finance in state legislative elections . washington , d.c.: congressional quarterly , inc. , 1998 . washington , d.c.: cato institute and brookings institution press , 2006 . mcdonald , michael p. , alan abramowitz , brad alexander , and matthew gunning . “drawing the line on district competition / drawing the line on district competition: a rejoinder.” ps , political science & politics , vol . 1 ( january 2006 ) . mcdonald , michael p. , and john samples , eds . the marketplace of democracy , electoral competition and american politics . washington , d.c.: cato institute and brookings institution press , 2006 . miller , michael . “gaming arizona: public money and shifting candidate strategies.” ps online , vol . 3 ( july 2008 ) . miller , michael g. “the fifth source and the ballot box: public money , candidate time , and changing american elections.” paper presented at the annual meeting of the midwest political science association , chicago , april 2009 . moncrief , gary f. , richard g. niemi , and lynda w. powell . “time , term limits , and turnover: trends in membership stability in u.s. state legislatures.” legislative studies quarterly , vol . xxix , no . 3 ( august 2004 ) . niemi , richard g. , simon jackman , and laura r. winsky . “candidacies and competitiveness in multimember districts.” legislative studies quarterly , vol . xvi , no . 1 ( february 1991 ) . primo , david m. declaration to the united states district court district of arizona . cv - 08- 01550-phx - ros . samples , john , ed . welfare for politicians ? taxpayer financing of campaigns . washington , d.c.: cato institute , 2005 . we did not receive any comments from the other agencies . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and subcommittees . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or jenkinswo@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . illiam o. jenkins , jr .