relative to what a couple needs . moreover , the proportion of dual - earner wives who are projected to not receive a survivor benefit — because of their relatively high earnings compared to their deceased husbands' — is expected to increase from 18 percent of wives who were born from 1936 to 1945 to 34 percent for wives born from 1966 to 1975.of survivor benefits generally may affect women for a longer period of time than men , due to women's longer life expectancy . however , working women's increased earnings and personal savings may potentially offset the lower level of survivor benefit , mitigating this issue to some extent . past gao work has identified a number of options suggested by experts to improve the retirement security of populations vulnerable to poverty by changing the social security eligibility rules or benefit structure , although each option has limitations . some of these options focus specifically on modifying benefits for spouses and survivors , while others would affect broader populations of vulnerable individuals , and may also benefit those affected by changing marital patterns . for example , one option would change the eligibility requirements for divorced spousal benefits by reducing the required length of marriage from 10 to 7 years , with the goal of helping more of the divorced elderly remain out of poverty . another option would increase benefit amounts for widow ( er ) s from the current maximum of 67 to 75 percent of the combined amount the couple had this received , with the aim of preventing poverty among widow ( er ) s.option could be targeted specifically toward low - income survivors by capping the surviving spouse's benefit amount at the average retired worker benefit . however , concerns have been raised that these options may not effectively target other economically vulnerable groups like low - income social security retired worker recipients who never married . further , both of these options could provide benefits to higher - income elderly who may not be particularly economically vulnerable . other reform options target the vulnerable population of low - income people who do not qualify for spousal or survivor benefits , such as those who never marry , and who would otherwise receive retired worker benefits . retired worker benefits are generally calculated on the basis of a worker's average indexed monthly earnings for the worker's highest 35 years of earnings . while social security's benefit structure is progressive , meaning that its retirement benefits replace a higher percentage of earnings for lower - income workers , a lifetime low - wage worker would still have correspondingly low benefits . furthermore , the current benefit formula does not distinguish between low average wages caused by low lifetime earnings or low average wages caused by years of unemployment . one set of proposed options aims to increase benefit adequacy for lifetime low wage workers by increasing the level of the special minimum primary insurance amount ( also referred to as the “special minimum benefit” ) — a minimum social security benefit that is based on the number of years a worker has spent in social security - covered employment .