monitoring . eaef and taef have reported to external parties , including congress , usaid , and the public , on their use of resources , with additional accountability actions under way . for example , both funds submitted reports to congress that detailed their administrative expenses for 2013 , and both funds have submitted quarterly financial reports to usaid for its review . with regard to performance planning and reporting , eaef officials said that the fund is in the process of developing its required performance monitoring plan . in november 2014 , taef developed a solicitation for firms based in tunisia to develop its performance monitoring plan . in terms of audits , the funds are responsible for appointing independent certified or licensed public accountants , approved by usaid , to complete annual audits of the fund's financial statements . according to the grant agreements , the audits will be conducted within the scope of u.s. generally accepted auditing standards . according to usaid officials , the funds plan to have their 2013 and 2014 financial statements audited . human capital management cornerstones of human capital management include leadership ; acquiring , developing , and retaining talent ; and building a results - oriented culture . the funds are meeting their initial human capital needs through hiring of a limited number of personnel to occupy key positions , such as a managing director . according to the eaef and taef chairmen , they envision their organizations as having a small number of personnel . accordingly , both funds have recruited a limited number of employees to support their administrative operations and initial investment planning . specifically , eaef has hired one employee as its chief of staff and director of policy planning . taef has hired three employees to include a managing director based in washington , d.c. ; a chief operating officer and managing director based in tunis , tunisia ; and an executive assistant based in tunis . the funds took steps to recruit and hire their initial staff , such as by interviewing potential candidates and reviewing their resumes . the funds have generally outsourced their accounting and legal functions . both funds have created job descriptions for their employees . to build a results - oriented culture , the funds have established guidelines for providing compensation to their employees . for example , contingent upon usaid approval of a compensation framework , the funds may enter into bonus or incentive compensation arrangements with their employees . the eaef and taef grant agreements state that the salaries and other compensation of any of the directors , officers , and employees of the funds shall be set at reasonable levels consistent with the nonprofit and public interest nature of the funds . eaef hired companies to do an executive compensation study and to administer its human capital policies , including terms of recruitment , hiring , and employee benefits . while the funds have generally met their obligations under the grant agreements , neither fund has submitted the performance monitoring plans required under the grant agreements . usaid has also not tracked the funds' use of cash in a way that allows the agency to monitor whether eaef and taef are spending it in a timely manner .