portal monitors . these detectors , which are not yet in place in ports or other points of entry , are larger than those on x - ray machines and are capable of screening the entire contents of containers , cars , or trucks . customs is now completing a pilot test of such a monitor at one border crossing , and customs officials told us that they plan to purchase up to 400 portal monitors by the end of fiscal year 2003 . according to customs , about 5,000 of its approximately 7,500 inspectors have been trained to identify materials and components associated with the development and deployment of nuclear weapons . customs also plans to give specialized training in the detection of nuclear material to as many as 140 of its inspectors , in cooperation with the department of energy's national laboratories . however , customs has not yet developed an overall plan that coordinates equipment purchases and personnel training . such a plan would also address such things as vulnerabilities and risks ; identify the complement of radiation - detection equipment that should be used at each type of border entry point — air , rail , land , and sea — and determine whether equipment could be immediately deployed ; identify longer - term radiation - detection needs ; and develop measures to ensure that the equipment is adequately maintained . customs has methods and machines that , although directed more broadly at various types of hazardous or illegal cargoes , can be useful in finding radioactive and nuclear materials . these efforts are based largely on an approach of targeting a small percentage of containers for in - depth screening . with more than 6 million containers a year entering u.s. ports , examining them all has not been possible . instead , customs has acknowledged that its approach relies on reviewing shipping manifests , invoices and other commercial documents , and intelligence leads to target approximately 2 percent of the containers that enter the country nationwide for physical inspection , though the actual percentage varies from port to port . to better address terrorist threats , customs is modifying its targeting approach , which was originally designed for counter - narcotics efforts . customs officials told us that one of their greatest needs was for better information to more accurately target shipments . in a separate effort , gao is conducting a review of customs' processing of sea - borne containerized , bulk , and break - bulk cargo bound for the united states,focusing on targeting criteria , procedures , and the use of screening technology . on the basis of our preliminary work , gao has identified a number of challenges related to the implementation and effectiveness of customs' initiatives to ensure the security of cargo entering u.s. seaports . customs has deemed the information we are collecting about that work as law - enforcement sensitive , which precludes our discussing it in an open hearing such as this . to inspect the containers they target for closer scrutiny , customs inspectors use gamma ray and x - ray machines that are capable of scanning the interior of a 40-foot container in less than a minute .