( see fig . specifically , each agency consults its various awarding components to develop research topics that further the agency's mission , and periodically announces sbir project opportunities through a solicitation to seek funding for research on those topics . before the date applications are due , both agencies encourage potential applicants to contact agency staff to discuss any questions they may have , including questions about their eligibility . as of december 2005 , both agencies require applicants to file electronically , and to register with the central contractor register database . submitted applications are reviewed internally for administrative completeness , and those that do not comply with the requirements may be rejected or take longer to review . however each agency operates its program differently . for example , to qualify for dod's fast track awards , firms that have received phase i awards must obtain commitments for outside funding that dod will match while nih's program considers information on phases i and ii simultaneously and does not involve matching funds . in addition , the two agencies account for their fast track awards differently . nih maintains data on fast track awards separately from its data on phase i and ii awards . at dod , fast track awards are included in the phase i and phase ii awards data . funding for fast track awards , which comprise a small portion of each agency's sbir awards , are not subject to specific dollar limits . funds for all awards are dispersed contingent upon the awarded firm successfully achieving planned milestones . receipt of a phase ii award is contingent upon successful completion of a phase i award . firms may receive phase ii awards from the same agency that funded their phase i award or from a different participating agency . see appendix i for more details about our scope and methodology . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . of the eleven agencies that currently have sbir programs , two — nih and dod — account for the largest share of awards . large agencies , such as nih and dod , generally rely on the various components within the agency such as the 23 participating institutes and centers within nih and the 10 participating military and defense components within dod , to help implement the sbir program and make funding decisions . agencies decide what type of research to fund , solicit and review applications for technical and scientific merit , verify that the applicant meets eligibility criteria , select which projects to fund , and decide the size of the award . awards can be made to successful applicants in the form of grants , contracts , or cooperative agreements . sba plays a key administrative and oversight role , such as issuing policy directives and annual reports for the program and monitoring agencies' annual funding allocations . once an award has been issued , awarding agency staff monitor the progress of work on the project . the small business innovation development act of 1982 established a three - phased structure for the sbir program .