policy . policy changes such as changes to underwriting standards may result in new loans having a different default risk than loans made before the change . for instance , changes to loan - to - value ratios or maximum borrower debt ratios allowed by the program may result in borrowers participating in the program who present a different level of risk than previous borrowers . composition of borrowers . even without policy changes , the composition of the borrowers receiving rhs guarantees may change from year to year . for example , the geographic dispersion , average credit scores , or other characteristics of borrowers may shift . these changes may result in changed expectations for the future performance of the loans , which would not be reflected in the loss rates calculated using only historical data . the firm was contracted to develop the econometric models to estimate the likelihood of claims and prepayments on rhs guaranteed loans — key inputs into estimates of future cash flows used to develop rhs credit subsidy estimates and reestimates . according to the contractor , the models will incorporate rhs's historical loan performance and borrower data , and economic data that may be predictive of loan performance , such as macroeconomic forecasts and home price forecasts . rd officials indicated that omb has reviewed and approved the contractor's models and that rd plans to use the models to develop its initial credit subsidy cost estimate for the 2017 cohort and the 2016 reestimate . additionally , rd noted that based on its preliminary analysis , the new models will correct for the overestimation of future losses that resulted from using the historical method in recent years . as a result , rhs expects the 2016 reestimate to be a downward reestimate . according to federal guidance , econometric models have a number of advantages over other methods for estimating credit subsidy costs , such as historical averages and informed opinion . the auditor reported that the historical averages method may not adequately take into account changes in the composition of borrowers or economic conditions that could materially affect the future performance of the program relative to its historical performance . furthermore , the auditor said that using an econometric modeling methodology would allow rd to improve the quality of its estimates . the quality of the credit subsidy cost estimates produced by rd's econometric models will depend on many factors . in a march 2004 report on another federal guarantee program , we found that the choice of which variables to include in an economic model is based on professional judgement , statistical testing , and economic theory . excluding key predictive variables can reduce model quality . in addition , model validation is important to help ensure the models continue to be appropriate for the purpose they are intended and are calculating correctly . further , once the models are developed , regularly updating them is important to help ensure their continued reliability . in addition to estimating credit subsidy costs , rhs program management may be able to use the econometric models for other risk - management functions .