gao - 07-140 . washington , d.c.: december 7 , 2006 . all states have been invited to participate in this effort . gao - 06-758 . washington , d.c.: august 4 , 2006 . the partnership held its first meeting in august 2006 . students with limited english proficiency are a diverse and complex group . they speak many languages and have a tremendous range of educational needs and include refugees with little formal schooling and students who are literate in their native languages . accurately assessing the academic knowledge of these students in english is challenging . if a student responds incorrectly to a test item , it may not be clear if the student did not know the answer or misunderstood the question because of language barriers . title i of nclba requires states to administer tests in language arts and mathematics to all students in certain grades and to use these tests as the primary means of determining the annual performance of states , districts , and schools . these assessments must be aligned with the state's academic standards — that is , they must measure how well a student has demonstrated his or her knowledge of the academic content represented in these standards . states are to show that increasing percentages of students are reaching the proficient level on these state tests over time . nclba also requires that students with limited english proficiency receive reasonable accommodations and be assessed , to the extent practicable , in the language and form most likely to yield accurate data on their academic knowledge . in addition , for language arts , students with limited english proficiency who have been in u.s. schools for 3 years or more must generally be assessed in english . finally , nclba also created a new requirement for states to annually assess the english language proficiency of students identified as having limited english proficiency . accurately assessing the academic knowledge of students with limited english proficiency has become more critical because nclba designated specific groups of students for particular focus . these four groups are students who ( 1 ) are economically disadvantaged , ( 2 ) represent major racial and ethnic groups , ( 3 ) have disabilities , and ( 4 ) are limited in english proficiency . these groups are not mutually exclusive , so that the results for a student who is economically disadvantaged , hispanic , and has limited english proficiency could be counted in three groups . states and school districts are required to measure the progress of all students in meeting academic proficiency goals , as well as to measure separately the progress of these designated groups . to make adequate yearly progress , each district and school must generally show that each of these groups met the state proficiency goal and that at least 95 percent of students in each group participated in these assessments . students with limited english proficiency are a unique group under nclba because once they attain english proficiency they are no longer counted as part this group , although education has given states some flexibility in this area .