ipa rotators . nsf enters into written agreements with rotators' home institutions for all ipa assignments . the agreements detail rotators' salaries and health , retirement , and other fringe benefits at their home institutions , as well as the cost - sharing amounts nsf and home institutions are to pay during rotators' assignments . nsf reimburses its cost - sharing amounts to home institutions , which continue to pay rotators' full salaries and benefits . nsf does not cap the salaries of ipa rotators ; as a result , ipa rotators may receive salaries that exceed the maximum federal salary for the position they hold at nsf . in contrast , if an ipa rotator's salary is less than the minimum federal salary for the position , nsf will supplement the salary to the minimum rate . vsee rotators . nsf appoints vsee rotators as federal employees on a nonpaid leave of absence from their home institutions . vsee rotators receive their salaries directly from nsf but are not eligible for certain federal benefits , such as retirement ; instead , nsf reimburses home institutions for the employer's share of retirement , life insurance , and health benefits that would otherwise be discontinued . nsf's policy is to set salaries for vsee rotators that are generally comparable to the salaries the rotators would receive at their home institutions . in setting salaries , nsf also takes into account other sources of income , such as consulting , and allows for locality pay adjustments applicable to employees in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area . however , because vsee rotators are federal employees , nsf caps their salaries at the federal maximum for the position they hold at nsf . both ipa and vsee rotators are eligible for certain other types of reimbursement . in particular , rotators have the option of having nsf pay their moving expenses to and from washington , d.c. , or receiving per diem allowances in accordance with federal travel regulations for up to 2 years . in addition , nsf may reimburse rotators for travel - related expenses related to their participation in nsf's independent research and development program , which enables nsf staff to maintain their involvement with their professional research and research - related activities at their home institutions . table 1 shows additional information on ipa and vsee rotator expenses . rotators are generally assigned to one of nsf's seven directorates that support science and engineering research and education ( see table 2 ) . each directorate is headed by an assistant director and deputy assistant director . directorates are further subdivided into divisions , offices , or sections . the committee's membership includes nsf's chief human capital officer , who serves as the chair , and several other nsf officials . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . nsf relies on two programs for bringing rotators into the agency: ( 1 ) the ipa program and ( 2 ) the vsee program . the office of personnel management develops policies on agencies' use of the ipa program and promulgates program regulations .