provider or supplier . according to our physical observation , 11 of the 30 locations appeared to be vacant ; 6 appeared to be ineligible cmras ; and 11 locations were inconclusive because we were not able to find the providers or suppliers at the address . of these 30 , we were able to confirm that 2 housed a legitimate we also identified 25 applicants out of our generalizable sample of 496 addresses that the usps address - management tool flagged as a cmra and that our additional research found to be located in places advertised as “virtual offices.” mailboxes , telephone - answering services , and a dedicated workspace to clients who are not physically located on the premises . while , according to cms , a virtual office may be appropriate for some suppliers , it may not be appropriate for other types of providers and suppliers , since cms requires the practice location to be open to the public for purposes of providing health care – related services and properly staffed , equipped , and stocked to furnish services or items . the 30 locations were selected based on the geographic proximity to the three macs and the nsc we visited , and to gao offices . these locations were selected independently of our generalizable sample of 496 addresses , and this selection is not generalizable to any set of addresses . these addresses were flagged as cmra because they serve as a third party that handles their customers' mail . we visited 5 of the 25 providers and suppliers in maryland , texas , and california that our research indicated were located in places advertised as virtual offices . based on our observational visits , the 5 providers and suppliers were located in places that were advertised as virtual offices . in one instance , we took pictures of an office space in texas that a provider had listed as its practice location . as previously noted , cms requires the practice location to be open to the public for purposes of providing health care – related services and properly staffed , equipped , and stocked to furnish services or items . as shown in figure 7 , at the time of our visit there was no actual office operating at the practice location address provided to cms . as of may 2015 , this provider had not updated its practice location address in pecos or received a site visit because the provider falls into the limited - risk category . cms agreed to implement our recommendations . since 2012 , cms has taken several actions to improve its oversight of the enrollment process , such as conducting an in - depth review of nursing - home chains and reviewing sample applications once a year rather than every 5 years .