iii. ) dental services cover an array of procedures , from preventive services , such as cleanings , to more complex services , such as root canals ( see table 1 ) . most individuals with dental coverage have private dental insurance . private dental insurance plans may be a stand - alone plan or be included as a part of medical insurance . stand - alone dental plans require individuals to enroll separately ; they are not a part of the individual's medical insurance plan . the types of dental services covered by dental plans vary widely among private plans . for example , one plan may include “comprehensive” care such as routine diagnostic and preventive services , restorative services , and oral surgery , while another may cover more limited services such as emergency care only . cost sharing for dental services usually involves an annual deductible — and according to a bureau of labor statistics survey of employers , in 2008 , the median deductible was $50 per person . after the individual meets the deductible , dental plans may pay a percentage of covered services up to a maximum annual benefit . in 2008 , the reported median annual maximum was $1,500 . individuals may also obtain dental coverage in other ways , such as through federal programs . federal programs may cover dental services as a required benefit , support purchase of stand - alone dental coverage for eligible beneficiaries , or support coverage of dental services as part of broader coverage under individuals' medical coverage plans , for example . benefits included in these types of coverage may vary widely depending on factors such as type of plan purchased , family income , or veteran's status ( see table 2 ) . hhs's hrsa reported that in 2011 , over 4 million patients used dental services at federally funded health centers . under the health center program , health centers — which must be located in federally designated medically underserved areas or serve a federally designated medically underserved population — are required to provide pediatric dental screenings and preventive dental services , as well as emergency medical referrals , which may also result in the provision of dental services . health centers may provide required services , including required dental services , directly or via formal contract or referral agreements . however , health centers are not required to provide a full range of dental services . a health center must establish a fee schedule for its services that is consistent with locally prevailing rates and reflects the health center's reasonable costs of providing services . a health center must also establish a sliding fee schedule for individuals who earn annual incomes equal to or less than 200 percent of the fpl . 2011 , over 92 percent of the more than 20 million patients served by health centers nationwide had income less than or equal to 200 percent of the fpl ( and were eligible for a sliding scale fee based on income and family size ) . the 2013 federal poverty guidelines state that a family of four at 200 percent of the poverty level has an income of $47,100 per year .