comment 1 . as the integrity committee stated , the information related to its activities in this report was obtained in connection with our separate ongoing audit of the activities and operations of the integrity committee . the following are gao's comments on the nasa inspector general's letter dated october 14 , 2008 . the meetings referred to by the ig do not result in an endorsement of the oig's work plans but rather are discussions between the nasa oig and gao for purposes of coordination and cooperation . our review of the nasa oig's strategic and annual plans on this audit was in response to our findings regarding the need for additional oversight of nasa's economy and efficiency and measurable potential cost savings from oig audits . we are encouraged by the nasa ig's intent to benchmark with the pcie community to provide assurance that audits addressing program effectiveness , economy , and efficiency fulfill the oig mission . therefore , we have modified our report recommendation to have the oig work closely with an objective outside party to include audits of nasa's economy and efficiency with potential monetary savings in strategic and annual plans . the ig's comments do not cite any specific recommendations that are targeted toward economy and efficiency with potential cost savings . in addition , we reviewed all the recommendations in the oig's audit products issued during fiscal years 2006 and 2007 and found only one report with these types of recommendations . by providing the titles of oig reports , the ig provides little if any additional information on whether economy and efficiency issues were addressed by the outcomes of the reports . therefore , our report continues to focus on the oig's lack of economy and efficiency audit results with measurable cost savings as well as the lack of a strategy for dealing with these types of objectives in the annual and strategic audit plans . the oig's audit of nasa's plan for space shuttle transition concluded that nasa's transition plan did not comprehensively address all elements critical for a successful transition and recommended that the planning be enhanced and that the transition be recognized as an agency management challenge . neither this report nor any other oig report issued during fiscal years 2006 and 2007 had any specific recommendations to improve nasa's economy and efficiency with measurable cost savings related to this important and costly transition program . we did not include the percent of oig recommendations implemented as part of our review . we evaluated the substance of the recommendations to determine whether they identified opportunities for improvements to nasa's economy and efficiency with measurable potential cost savings . this investigation was a coordinated effort by several offices including those from nasa , components of the department of defense , and academia , but was not performed by the nasa oig . our scope was to review the results of audits and investigations by the oig and thus,we did not include it in our review . the ig also provided the title of an investigative report regarding allegations that nasa had suppressed climate change information as an example of an accomplishment .