, the initiatives ) . in our october 2014 management letter to a senior osd official and our january and february 2015 reports , we found that while the 2014 strategy and accompanying plans serve as a corrective action plan , there was not a clear link between the initiatives and the strategy's goals and objectives . we recommended that dod clearly specify the linkage between the goals and objectives in the strategy and the initiatives intended to implement the strategy . dod implemented our recommendation in its 2015 strategy , which includes matrixes that link each of dod's ongoing initiatives intended to implement the strategy to the strategy's overarching goals and objectives . one report was not completed by the component . two reports did not follow the format identified in the 2015 strategy , and we could not determine whether the intent and outcomes based on performance measures for the initiative had been achieved . based on our analysis , it appears that while the asset visibility working group closed 20 initiatives , it generally did not have information related to performance measures to assess the progress of these initiatives when evaluating and closing them . specifically , the after - action reports for 11 of 20 initiatives did not include performance measures that showed whether the initiative had met its intended outcomes in support of the department's strategies . officials from the asset visibility working group stated that they generally relied on the opinion of the component's subject matter experts , who are familiar with each initiative's day - to - day performance , to assess the progress of these initiatives . while including the input of the component's subject matter experts for the initiative in the decision to close the initiative is important , without incorporating after - action reports information relating to performance measures into the information considered by the asset visibility working group , dod does not have assurance that closed initiatives have been fully assessed and whether they have resulted in achieving the goals and objectives of the strategies . dod has fully met three of our criteria for removal from the high risk list by improving leadership commitment , capacity , and its corrective action plan , and it has partially met the criteria to monitor the implementation of the initiatives and demonstrate progress in improving asset visibility . table 4 includes a description of the criteria and our assessment of dod's progress in addressing each of them . dod continues to fully meet our high - risk criterion for leadership commitment our high - risk criterion for leadership commitment calls for leadership oversight and involvement . dod has taken steps to address asset visibility challenges , and we found — as we had in our february 2015 high - risk report — that dod has fully met this criterion . senior leaders at the department have continued to demonstrate commitment to addressing the department's asset visibility challenges , as evidenced by the issuance of dod's 2014 and 2015 strategies . the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for supply chain integration provides department - wide oversight for development , coordination , approval , and implementation of the strategies and reviews the implementation of the initiatives .