availability . the coast guard reported that no existing heavy icebreakers were available to lease or purchase that met both its legal and operational requirements . specifically , to meet legal requirements , the coast guard would need to either purchase or demise charter the icebreaker , as legal requirements associated with several coast guard missions prohibit a short - term lease . specifically , under federal law , to be capable of conducting all of its statutory missions , the coast guard must use a public vessel , which federal law defines as one that the united states owns or demise charters . for example , federal law states that the coast guard's ports , waterways , and coastal security mission may be carried out with public vessels or private vessels tendered gratuitously for that purpose . further , federal law provides that no coast guard vessel may be constructed in a foreign shipyard . according to the coast guard , besides the polar star and the polar sea , the only existing icebreakers powerful enough to meet the coast guard's operational requirements were built in and are owned by russia and would not comply with this legal requirement . budgeting and total cost . budget requirements also affect the coast guard's ability to acquire an icebreaker . for example , office of management and budget ( omb ) guidelines require federal agencies to acquire assets in the manner least costly overall to the government . specifically , for a large acquisition like a heavy icebreaker , omb circular a - 94 requires the coast guard to conduct a lease - purchase analysis based on total lifecycle costs of the asset . to proceed with a lease , the coast guard would need to show that leasing is preferable to direct government purchase and ownership . budget scorekeepers — specifically , omb , the congressional budget office , and the house and senate budget committees — score purchases and capital leases at the outset of the acquisition . a 2011 preliminary cost analysis prepared for the coast guard indicated that the lease option would be more costly to the federal government over an icebreaker's expected 30-year service life . according to this analysis , the prospective ship owner's profit rate would increase the overall expense as this profit rate is priced into the lease , such that government ownership would be less costly in the long run . moreover , because a demise charter requires the lessee to operate and maintain the vessel , the coast guard would not be able to outsource crewing or maintenance activities to reduce its operating costs . previous gao work on the question of leasing versus buying an icebreaker identified important assumptions in comparing the costs to the federal government and suggested that outright purchase could be a less costly alternative than a long - term vessel lease . assuming that the cost of building and operating the vessel was the same under both the buy and the lease scenarios , the cost advantage to government purchase over leasing in our previous work was based on two factors .