available . device manufacturers often require hospitals to sign purchasing agreements that contain confidentiality clauses restricting them from revealing to third parties the prices they paid for medical devices . to the extent that information on imd prices in the market is not disclosed , the ability of hospitals to bring comparative price information to bear in imd purchasing negotiations and decisions may be limited . without such competitive pressure , the prices hospitals pay for imds may be higher than they otherwise would be . in an environment of increasing health care costs , the efficiency of the imd market has implications for medicare cost containment . policymakers are concerned that the lack of price transparency inhibits competition in the device market , leading to higher costs for hospitals , and ultimately higher spending in medicare . you asked us to examine various issues regarding medicare spending and the prices of implantable medical devices . in this report , we examined: ( 1 ) how medicare's hospital payment systems account for the prices hospitals pay for imds , ( 2 ) the spending and utilization trends for procedures involving imds provided to medicare beneficiaries , and ( 3 ) what available information shows about the prices hospitals pay for imds and any factors particular to the imd market that influence those prices . to describe how medicare's payment systems account for the prices hospitals pay for imds , we reviewed annual regulations for the inpatient prospective payment system and outpatient prospective payment system . we also interviewed officials from cms and the medicare payment advisory commission . to identify the medicare spending and utilization trends for imd procedures provided to medicare ffs beneficiaries , we analyzed the most recently available medicare inpatient and outpatient hospital claims for a 6-year period , from fiscal years 2004 through 2009 . using procedure and payment codes obtained from cms and industry sources , we identified 364 inpatient and 85 outpatient procedure codes that were generally associated with an imd . we matched these procedure codes with 115 inpatient and 30 outpatient “device dependent” payment codes in each claim . because our list of imd - dependent codes represented procedures performed almost exclusively in a hospital setting , we excluded procedures performed in other facilities ( eg , ambulatory surgical centers ) . we only included services and expenditures when the imd - dependent procedure code was the primary procedure associated with the payment for the claim submitted to medicare . we examined the extent to which changes in expenditures were explained by changes in utilization or average cost . we determined that the claims data we used were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our analysis by performing appropriate electronic data checks . to determine what information is available on the prices hospitals pay for imds , we selected five specific devices used in the five imd - related procedures that ranked highest in terms of medicare spending in 2009 . the five devices were primary total knee implants , primary total hip implants , coronary drug - eluting stents , automated implantable cardioverter defibrillators ( aicd ) , and cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillators ( crt - d ) .