and training . however , since its creation in april 2007 , fema's gpd has been responsible for the program management of dhs's preparedness grants . gpd consolidated the grant business operations , systems , training , policy , and oversight of all fema grants and the program management of preparedness grants into a single entity . gpd works closely with other dhs entities to manage several grants , including the uscg for the psgp and tsa for the tsgp . from fiscal years 2002 through 2011 , dhs distributed approximately $20.3 billion through four grant programs: shsp , uasi , psgp , and tsgp . see table 1 for a breakdown of the funding for these programs . federal grants , including shsp , uasi , psgp , and tsgp generally follow the grant life cycle shown in figure 1 of announcement , application , award , postaward , and closeout . a grant program may be established through legislation – – which may specify particular objectives , eligibility , and other requirements — and a program may also be further defined by the grantor agency . for competitive grant programs , the public is notified of the grant opportunity through an announcement , and potential grantees must submit applications for agency review . in the application and award stages , the agency identifies successful applicants or legislatively defined grant recipients and awards funding to them . the postaward stage includes payment processing , agency monitoring , and grantee reporting , which may include financial and performance information . the closeout phase includes preparation of final reports and any required accounting for property . audits may occur multiple times during the life cycle of the grant and after closeout . shsp , uasi , psgp , and tsgp are specific grant programs nested under a larger framework of national preparedness . the broader initiatives described below , some of which are in development , are intended to help determine preparedness goals and the capabilities necessary to achieve these goals . grants programs such as the four we reviewed can then help facilitate specific investments to close identified capability gaps . the purpose and status of the larger preparedness framework affects shsp , uasi , psgp , and tsgp in a number of ways , including the development of grant performance metrics to assess the effectiveness of the programs . in december 2003 , the president issued homeland security presidential directive - 8 ( hspd - 8 ) , which called on the secretary of homeland security to coordinate federal preparedness activities and coordinate support for the preparedness of state and local first responders , and directed dhs to establish measurable readiness priorities and targets . in october 2006 , the post - katrina emergency management reform act was enacted , which requires fema to develop specific , flexible , and measurable guidelines to define risk - based target preparedness capabilities and to establish preparedness priorities that reflect an appropriate balance between the relative risks and resources associated with all hazards . in september 2007 , dhs published the national preparedness guidelines .