doe agreed with our recommendations . moreover , since our september 2012 testimony , doe's office of independent oversight has raised concerns about ongoing safety issues , including reluctance by workers at nnsa's pantex plant to raise safety problems for fear of retaliation and a perception that cost took priority over safety , as well as inadequate controls to protect workers or the public in the case of earthquake , fires , or radiation exposures at the y - 12 national security complex . in addition , a march 2013 independent evaluation of safety culture at doe's office of health , safety , and security ( hss ) — which generally provides policy direction and independent oversight of safety and security at doe sites — found that hss staff raised concerns that the shift in recent years toward a more collaborative oversight relationship with site management had weakened hss's effectiveness in providing independent oversight and enforcement . for more than a decade , we have reported that doe has not produced reliable enterprise - wide management data needed to , among other things , prepare its budget requests , identify the costs of its activities and ensure the validity of its cost estimates . some recent examples include: in june 2013 , we reported that nnsa's m&o contractors differ in how they classify and allocate indirect costs at nnsa laboratories . although different approaches are allowed by cost accounting standards , these differences limit nnsa's ability to assess cost data and meaningfully compare cost management performance across laboratories , potentially impeding nnsa's efforts to oversee m&o contractors' costs . this work built on the report we issued in june 2010 , in which we found that nnsa could not accurately identify the total costs to operate and maintain weapons facilities and infrastructure because of differences among contractors' accounting practices . we concluded that , without the ability to consistently identify program costs , nnsa did not have the ability to adequately justify future presidential budget requests and risked being unable to identify both the return on investment of planned budget increases and opportunities for cost savings . as a result , we recommended that nnsa require m&o contractors report to nnsa annually on the total costs ( i.e. , both direct and indirect costs ) to operate and maintain weapons facilities and infrastructure . in july 2012 , we reported that nnsa did not comply with doe's order that defines budget formulation because the agency believed the order expired in 2003 and no longer applied to nnsa budget activities . doe's order on budget formulation outlines the requirements for the department's annual budget formulation process , including that budget requests shall be based on cost estimates that have been thoroughly reviewed and deemed reasonable . however , we found that nnsa is guided by its own policy for its planning , programming , budgeting , and evaluation ( ppbe ) process and its associated activities , and found significant deficiencies in nnsa's implementation of the process .