( fig . 6 shows the distribution of overall performance ratings for claims processors in each office. ) central and regional office managers noted that , in particular , it is difficult for staff to receive an overall rating of excellent . managers in one office said there are staff whose performance is better than fully successful but not quite outstanding , but under the formula it is difficult for these staff to be placed in the excellent category as the managers feel they should be . an excellent rating requires exceptional ratings in all the critical elements and a fully successful rating in at least one non - critical element . however , according to staff we interviewed , virtually all staff who are exceptional in the critical elements are also exceptional in all non - critical element ( s ) , so they appropriately end up in the outstanding category . and ( 3 ) to what extent is the performance management system for claims processors consistent with generally accepted performance management practices in the public sector ? to address these objectives , we collected documents and data from vba central office and interviewed central office staff . in addition , gao experts on training reviewed vba documents related to training curriculum , lesson plans , and course evaluations . we conducted site visits to 4 of vba's 57 regional offices — atlanta , baltimore , milwaukee , and portland , oregon . these offices were selected to achieve diversity in geographical location , number of staff , and officewide accuracy in claims processing . while we examined vba - wide policies and requirements , we primarily assessed how the training and performance management systems are implemented at four sites . therefore , our results may not be representative of how these systems are implemented across all regional offices . we assessed vba's training and performance management practices by comparing them to certain generally accepted practices for federal agencies in these areas that have been identified by gao . we conducted this performance audit from september 2007 through may 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ( see app . i for more detailed information on our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) in fiscal year 2007 , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) paid about $37.5 billion in disability compensation and pension benefits to more than 3.6 million veterans and their families . through its disability compensation program , the vba pays monthly benefits to veterans with service - connected disabilities ( injuries or diseases incurred or aggravated while on active military duty ) . monthly benefit amounts vary according to the severity of the disability . through its pension benefit program , vba pays monthly benefits to wartime veterans with low incomes who are either elderly or permanently and totally disabled for reasons not service - connected .