equipment . in the march 2000 survey , a wide range of equipment needs was reported for rural systems , including communication equipment ( 73 percent of respondents ) , medical equipment ( 68 percent of respondents ) , ambulances ( 54 percent of respondents ) , and buildings ( 34 percent of respondents ) . for example , one survey respondent cited a rural county that had one operational ambulance for 6,500 residents ( the state average was 1 per 4,600 residents ) and only three hand - held portable radios were available for the six medical personnel on call . asked to estimate the costs of addressing the capital needs for rural ems systems in their states , only 28 of the 41 state ems directors responding to the survey said they had enough information to provide an estimate . the average state cost , based on the figures from 27 of these states , was $12.2 million . for urban systems , no similar survey or set of estimates is available . officials we spoke with indicated that urban systems also face equipment needs . financing . both urban and rural systems reported examples of tenuous financing . in rural areas , officials reported that it is difficult to fully support the high fixed cost of operating around - the - clock ems services because the number of calls is generally smaller in sparsely populated areas , limiting the opportunities to bill for services . this difficulty has resulted in some communities going without local ems coverage . for example , one county reported going without the services of a dedicated ems provider for the past several years and instead relied on ambulance response from other communities that may be located as far as 20 miles away . according to officials , this county — with a population less than 3,000 , no industry , and a relatively small number of businesses — has an insufficient tax base to support such services . other states have reported increased response times in their rural areas due to lack of funds to maintain greater capacity . urban systems reported financing problems caused by a growing demand for services combined with tight community budgets . officials of systems that relied heavily on local government funds and levies to support their operations said they were considering billing health insurers to supplement the income of their ems services . at the same time , some systems that were relying on income from billing health insurers reported concerns about declining reimbursement levels from these sources due to possible changes in reimbursement rules . medical oversight . both rural and urban ems officials we spoke with expressed a need for improved medical oversight , but this need took different forms . officials from two urban systems pointed to the need to centralize and standardize medical direction . one official said his system was trying to provide consistent medical direction to ems providers in the field by centralizing the medical direction in one location , rather than having it provided by six different hospitals . systems in other locations may face different challenges . for example , a rural state reported that in most communities , physicians providing medical direction were as far as 100 miles away .