fps does not have this capability . fps relies on its 11 regions to manage its contract guard program , including the collection and analysis of performance information . however , each of the 11 regions differs in how it manages , collects , and reports contract guard information . without the ability to access contract guard information on a real - time basis , fps cannot ensure appropriate oversight and accountability , or that the agency's facility protection mission is accomplished . in addition , since 2002 , we and dhs's inspector general have reported that oversight of the contract guard program is a challenge for fps . for example , in 2008 , we reported on the poor quality of contract guards and the lack of guard inspections . however , fps has only recently begun addressing some of these challenges and has not undertaken a comprehensive review of the agency's use of contract guards to protect federal facilities since the bombing of alfred p. murrah federal building in 1995 . we also identified a number of changes that have had a cascading impact on fps's management of the contract guard program . chief among them is fps's decision to move to an inspector - based workforce . under this approach , fps eliminated its police officer position and is primarily using about 752 inspectors and special agents to oversee its 15,000 contract guards , provide law enforcement services , conduct building security assessments , and perform other duties as assigned . these evaluations were for 38 contractors . eighty - two of the 99 contract performance evaluations showed that fps assessed the quality of services provided by the majority of its guard contractors as “satisfactory,” “very good,” or “exceptional.” for the remaining 17 evaluations , 11 showed that the contractor's performance was “marginal,” 1 as “unsatisfactory,” and assessments for 5 contractors were not complete . according to applicable guidance , a contractor must meet contractual requirements to obtain a satisfactory evaluation and a contractor should receive an unsatisfactory evaluation if its performance does not meet most contract requirements and recovery in a timely manner is not likely . nevertheless , we found instances where some contractors received a satisfactory or better rating although they had not met some of the terms of the contract . for example , contractors receiving satisfactory or better ratings included the 7 contractors that had guards with expired certification and training records working at federal facilities . in addition , some performance evaluations that we reviewed did not include a justification for the rating and there was no other supporting documentation in the official contract file to explain the rating . moreover , there was no information in the contract file that indicated that the cotr had communicated any performance problems to the contracting officer . fps's contracting officials told us that the contract files should contain annual performance evaluations . in addition , if a contractor has not met the terms of the contract , the contract file should also contain guard inspection reports and correspondence between the contracting officer and contractor , and any other written reports that can be used to evaluate the contractor's performance in meeting the terms of the contract .