six of these suits have been settled , and the other is pending . for further information on this testimony , please contact david g. wood at ( 202 ) 512-8678 , or harry medina at ( 415 ) 904-2000 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included jason bromberg , randall c. fasnacht , jr. , elizabeth olivarez , and paul thompson . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . my statement today is based on the report on predatory lending that you requested and are releasing today . consistent observational and anecdotal evidence , along with some limited data , indicates that , for a variety of reasons , elderly homeowners are disproportionately the targets of predatory lending . for example , a joint report on predatory lending by the department of housing and urban development and the department of the treasury noted that predatory brokers and home improvement contractors have collaborated to swindle older consumers . a contractor may come to a homeowner's door , pressure the homeowner into accepting a home improvement contract , and arrange for financing of the work with a high - cost loan . the contractor then does shoddy work or does not finish the agreed - on repairs , leaving the borrower to pay off the expensive loan . federal agencies , states , nonprofits , and trade organizations have conducted and funded financial education for consumers as a means of improving consumers' financial literacy and , in some cases , raising consumers' awareness of predatory lending practices . because the elderly may be more susceptible to predatory lending , government agencies and consumer advocacy organizations have focused some of their education efforts on this population . for example , the department of justice offers on its web site the guide “financial crimes against the elderly,” which includes references to predatory lending . the department of health and human services' administration on aging provides grants to state and nonprofit agencies for programs aimed at preventing elder abuse , including predatory lending practices targeting older consumers . aarp , which represents americans age 50 and over , sponsors a number of financial education efforts , including a borrower's kit that contains tips for avoiding predatory lending . however , federal consumer protection and fair lending laws that have been used to address predatory lending do not generally have provisions specific to elderly persons . for example , age is not a protected class under the fair housing act , which prohibits discrimination in housing - related transactions . in addition , the home mortgage disclosure act ( hmda ) — which requires certain financial institutions to collect , report , and disclose data on loan applications and originations — does not require lenders to report information about the age of the applicant or borrower .