partnerships . although partnerships can help whd leverage resources and reach potential complainants , some of whd's partners , including state labor agency officials , told us that whd does not always provide adequate support to its partnerships . first , some state officials said that whd does not notify them of the status of complaints or of actions taken . for example , one state official told us about a case in which an employer violated state and federal labor laws , but whd settled with the employer without consulting state officials . the state officials said they were unhappy with the settlement , mainly because it resulted in the employer paying less in back wages . second , whd has not allowed its investigators to take part in some joint investigations with state labor agencies or send investigators to events intended to help educate the worker community . third , several of whd's partners told us that the agency has not provided adequate financial support for outreach events , leaving the funding to nonprofit organizations . for example , whd officials in houston told us that , although one of its partnership's billboards advertising a hotline for latino workers needed to be replaced , the office was unable to provide any funding to replace them because whd headquarters had not approved the funds . in california , whd officials told us they do not support expanding the agency's employment , education , and outreach ( empleo ) partnership — which received an award from harvard university's kennedy school of government for successful innovation — to other areas of the state or hold certain outreach events because these efforts would generate more referrals than the agency could handle . the extent to which whd's activities have improved flsa compliance is unknown , because whd frequently changes both how it measures and how it reports on its performance . when agencies provide trend data in their performance reports , decision makers can compare current and past progress in meeting long - term goals . while whd's long - term goals and strategies have generally remained the same since 1997 , whd often changes how it measures its progress , keeping about 90 percent of its measures for 2 years or less . according to whd officials , the agency decided to discontinue some of its measures either because they had been met or because whd realized they were not appropriate . in addition , while whd specified a number of performance measures each year in its planning documents , it included less than one - third of them in its annual performance reports . moreover , although whd established a total of 131 performance measures throughout the period from 1997 to 2007 , it reported on 6 of them for more than 1 year . this lack of consistent information on whd's progress in meeting its goals makes it difficult to assess how well whd's efforts are improving compliance with flsa . since the first time labor was required to report on it performance in 1999 , whd has included similar performance goals and strategies related to its flsa compliance activities in its annual performance reports .