2 for examples ) . this determination would have applied to controls for which we received sufficient documentation to assess the control's operation and for which the divisions and offices did not execute all control activities in most instances . changes to sec's control framework since our last review ( which focused on fiscal years 2013 – 2015 ) include revisions to key guidance documentation and reclassification of some controls ( as nonsupervisory controls ) . the working group revised elements of its control framework documentation since our last review . first , the working group streamlined the reference guide for compliance with section 961 by removing direct guidance — for example , steps staff should take to assess the design and operation of internal supervisory controls — and replaced it with references to the risk management and internal control review reference guide . second , the working group also updated other information such as the agency's definition for internal supervisory control . third , some divisions and offices changed which controls they considered to be internal supervisory controls subject to section 961 assessments . agency management is responsible for adapting the framework for an agency . furthermore , an agency may use the framework to organize its development and implementation of internal controls and implement its standards throughout the agency or at an office level . five interrelated components and associated principles establish requirements for developing and maintaining an effective internal control system: control environment: the control environment is the foundation for an internal control system . it provides discipline and structure , which affect the overall quality of internal control . it influences how objectives are defined and control activities are structured . the oversight body and management establish and maintain an environment throughout the entity that sets a positive attitude toward internal control . risk assessment: management assesses the risks facing the entity as it seeks to achieve its objectives . this assessment provides the basis for developing appropriate risk responses . management assesses risks the entity faces from external and internal sources . control activities: control activities are the actions management establishes through policies and procedures to achieve objectives and respond to risks in the internal control system , which includes the entity's information system . information and communication: management uses quality information to support the internal control system . effective information and communication are vital for an entity to achieve its objectives . entity management needs access to relevant and reliable communication related to internal and external events . monitoring: internal controls are dynamic and have to be adapted continually to risks and changes an entity faces . monitoring the internal control system is essential in helping internal control remain aligned with changing objectives , environment , laws , resources , and risks . internal control monitoring assesses the quality of performance over time and promptly resolves the findings of audits and other reviews . corrective actions are a necessary complement to control activities to achieve objectives . to be effective , an agency's internal control system must incorporate the five components of internal control in an integrated manner throughout its operations and on an ongoing basis . once in place , internal control provides reasonable , not absolute , assurance of meeting agency objectives .