we are not making recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of this report to omb , gsa , dol , irs , ssa , dhs , and fiscal service for review and comment . ” or “which of the following is your previous address ? ” irs's taxpayer protection program database includes data from lexisnexis and equifax . if the individual's identity cannot be authenticated , irs removes the tax return from processing , an action designed to prevent the agency from issuing a fraudulent tax refund . the irs officials we spoke with indicated that using these web and phone based services likely required fewer irs resources than authenticating identities in person at an irs office . further , the irs officials we spoke with as part of this review also stated that using commercial data services to provide web and phone - based services to authenticate taxpayers' identities may reduce the burden on taxpayers who live far from an irs office or are otherwise unable to visit an office in person . factors agencies may consider in determining whether data from nongovernmental data services meet their information requirements for conducting program integrity activities include the accuracy of data ; the currency and timeliness of data ; the completeness of data ; and technical aspects of using the data for these purposes , according to officials we spoke with . as mentioned , our work was based on a nonprobability sample of agencies and nongovernmental entities , and the information and perspectives that we obtained are not generalizable to other federal agencies and data service providers . officials from dol , ssa , and dhs told us that these federal agencies consider the accuracy of data and related laws and policies when determining whether commercial data meet their information requirements for conducting program integrity activities . for example , dol officials noted that individuals who are legitimately eligible for federal programs could be unfairly denied program benefits if agencies rely on inaccurate data to make a determination about their eligibility for a program . ssa officials stated that using less accurate data in making eligibility and payment determinations could also place undue burdens on applicants and payment recipients and increase the agency's appeals workload , which could create inefficiencies in the agency's program integrity efforts . at the same time , representatives of some commercial data service providers we spoke with stated that they work continuously to ensure the accuracy of their data , but also acknowledged that it is unreasonable to expect all data to be perfectly accurate . as part of our review , omb staff described provisions of the computer matching and privacy protection act of 1988 ( “computer matching act” ) designed to mitigate the risk of agencies using inaccurate data in conducting program integrity activities . specifically , omb staff noted that the computer matching act generally requires that agencies independently verify information produced through data matching and provides due process rights to individuals whose benefits may be affected by the data obtained through computer matching activities . omb staff emphasized that agencies must consider relevant provisions of the computer matching act when using commercial data to conduct program integrity activities .