courthouse . while all circuits reported a decrease in the use of traditional library space due to digital technology , use of appellate courtrooms and chambers varies across circuits due to factors unique to each circuit — including geographic size , case filings , oral argument practices and tradition , and the space available for use in each courthouse . circuits' use of appellate courtrooms depends upon a variety of factors , including the circuit's caseload and traditional oral - argument - scheduling practices ( eg , how often sittings occur and the number of cases heard per sitting ) , as well as how many courtrooms are available to hear oral arguments . table 3 shows for each regional circuit the number of appellate courtrooms , oral argument sittings , and cases heard by oral argument in fiscal year 2015 . according to officials we interviewed , since most appeals filed are decided based upon written briefs as opposed to oral arguments , appellate judges generally spend less time in courtrooms than they do in chambers , and according to aousc officials , in recent years appellate case filings have remained relatively stable . for those appeals requiring a courtroom , appellate court staff schedule oral arguments before panels of at least three judges in courtrooms on schedules that are at the discretion of the circuit , and which therefore vary by circuit . based on our review of data and interviews , the circuits' scheduling of oral arguments affects how often appellate courtrooms are used . for example , the second circuit hears oral arguments every week except one for 11 months out of the year in one or both appellate courtrooms in its circuit headquarters in new york , ny . fig . 1 shows the areas that comprise the 12 regional circuits , which include the first through eleventh circuits and the district of columbia circuit . in addition , the federal circuit and u.s. supreme court are located in washington , d.c . the 12 regional circuit courts of appeals hear challenges to decisions made by district courts located within their respective circuits . unlike trial courts , which determine the factual issues in a case and apply legal principles , in most situations , appellate courts determine only whether the lower courts correctly applied the law . there are no juries or witnesses in appellate courts . rather , parties generally file written briefs and may present oral arguments to a panel of three judges focusing on the questions of law in a case . the court of appeals decision is usually the final word on a case , unless it sends a case back to the trial court or the case is heard by the u.s. supreme court . in some cases , a decision may be reviewed “en banc,” that is , by a larger group of appellate judges — typically all of the appellate judges in a particular circuit . appellate caseloads vary by regional circuit , and most appeals filed are decided based upon written briefs as opposed to oral arguments . appendix ii provides information on case filings per regional circuit for fiscal year 2015 .