mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the committee may have . these 42 million people represent a heterogeneous population . as we noted in our testimony before your committee earlier this week , the majority of the uninsured are working , often for small businesses or in certain industries such as agriculture or construction that are less likely to offer health insurance , or are low - income persons who are ineligible for or not enrolled in public programs . a disproportionate share of young adults , hispanics , and residents of southern or western states are uninsured . but the uninsured population also includes people employed by larger - sized firms and other industries as well as those of all income levels , ages , races and ethnicities , and geographic locations . given the heterogeneity of this population , a variety of approaches have been proposed in the congress and by proponents to increase private or public health insurance coverage in ways that may match the needs of different uninsured persons and maximize the potential impact for expanding coverage . several recent congressional efforts represent important steps toward increasing the availability of health insurance for workers and low - income families , including improving the availability of private health insurance for individuals changing jobs or with preexisting health conditions , increasing the percentage of health insurance premiums that self - employed individuals can deduct from their taxable income , giving additional flexibility to states to expand medicaid eligibility to a larger group of low - income children and their parents , and establishing the new federal - state state children's health insurance program ( schip ) , which had already enrolled more than 3 million low - income children in 2000 . these steps help millions of americans , and the full effect of some of these actions likely has not yet been realized . despite these efforts , however , millions of americans remain uninsured . to assist the committee as it considers the variety of proposals offered to expand coverage to the uninsured , my remarks today will provide an overview of potential approaches for increasing private or public coverage and considerations that could impact their effectiveness in reaching significant numbers of the uninsured . specifically , i will focus on proposed additional tax incentives , such as deductions or credits , to encourage individuals to purchase private health insurance or employers to offer coverage ; proposed expansions to public programs , including expanding medicaid and schip to additional low - income children and adults , and allowing near - elderly individuals not yet 65 to “buy in” to medicare ; and the potential for unintended consequences of private and public coverage expansions on existing private health insurance coverage . my comments are based on our prior and ongoing work on the uninsured population , private health insurance , medicaid , and schip , as well as other published research . we reviewed key elements of major proposals that have been introduced in the 106th and 107th congresses , as well as several put forth by various proponents .