state's estimates of its passport execution costs . state , through an independent contractor , conducts cost studies for its consular services , including passport execution , to determine the full costs for providing these services . figure 1 depicts the execution process . state reported that there were 8,583 active acceptance facilities nationwide as of september 30 , 2006 ( see table 1 ) — post offices comprised almost two - thirds of all active facilities . according to consular officials , for fiscal year 2006 , post offices executed about 72 percent of applications for minors and for adults applying for the first time ; nonpostal facilities executed about 25 percent . acceptance facilities retain the execution fee for this service . the remainder ( 3 percent ) were executed by 14 of state's passport offices . in recent years , state has expanded its network of acceptance facilities to accommodate increasing passport demand . we reported previously that there were approximately 7,000 acceptance facilities as of march 2005 . in fiscal year 2006 , state added 753 new locations to its network of acceptance facilities , of which 636 are post offices , and 117 are nonpostal facilities . state requires that acceptance agents be u.s. citizens , permanent employees , 18 years or older , and have successfully completed a training program . according to state , passport cards , like passport books , would be issued for a 10-year validity period for u.s. citizens 16 years and older and for a 5-year validity period for u.s. citizens under 16 years of age . state considered several factors , including congressional interest in having a low - cost travel document and its own estimated execution costs , when setting the proposed execution fee . based on an interagency agreement , state also reviewed information from usps on its estimated passport execution costs . according to state , the information from its cost of service study supported the fee - setting process in 2006 , but the proposal to reduce the execution fee was not based solely on full cost recovery considerations . consular officials told us that they considered several factors when setting the proposed execution fee . these include: commitment to congress to issue a low - cost document . according to consular officials , the department made a commitment to issue an alternative document to meet whti requirements that would be , at most , one - half the cost of the passport book , which currently costs $97 . consular officials stated that the department's policy is to review these fees on a periodic basis , rather than biennially , due to the length of time it takes to complete the cost of service studies . because omb guidance states that subject to exceptions , user charges will be sufficient to recover the full cost to the federal government , consular officials told us that the department decided to not lower the execution fee below the amount estimated in the most recent cost of service study . maintaining state's network of acceptance facilities .