privacy . cios are responsible for their agencies' compliance with the privacy act and related laws . statistical policy and coordination . cios are responsible for their agencies' statistical policy and coordination functions , including ensuring the relevance , accuracy , and timeliness of information collected or created for statistical purposes . information disclosure . e - government initiatives . various laws and guidance direct agencies to undertake initiatives to use it to improve government services to the public and internal operations [44 u.s.c . 3506 ( h ) ( 3 ) and the e - government act of 2002] . the agency cios were generally responsible for most of the 13 key areas we identified as either required by statute or among those critical to effective information and technology management , and most of these cios reported directly to their agency heads . we found that only 2 of these 13 areas were cited as the responsibility of fewer than half of the cios , and 19 of the cios reported directly to their agency heads . their median tenure was about 2 years — less than the 3 to 5 years that cios and former senior agency it executives said were necessary for a cio to be effective ; this gap could be problematic because it could inhibit cios' efforts to address major challenges , including it management and human capital . as figure 1 illustrates , cios were responsible for key information and technology management areas . in particular , 5 of the 13 areas were assigned to every agency cio . these areas were capital planning and investment management , enterprise architecture , information security , it / irm strategic planning , and it workforce planning . however , of the other 8 areas , 2 of them — information disclosure and statistics — were the responsibility of fewer than half of the cios . disclosure is a responsibility that has frequently been assigned to offices such as general counsel and public affairs in the agencies we reviewed , while statistical policy is often the responsibility of separate offices that deal with the agency's data analysis , particularly in agencies that contain principal statistical agencies . nevertheless , even for those areas of responsibility that were not assigned to them , the cios generally reported that they contributed to the successful execution of the agency's responsibility . in those cases where the cios were not assigned the expected responsibilities , and they expressed an opinion about the situation , more than half of the cio responses were that the applicable information and technology management areas were appropriately held by some other organizational entity . moreover , one of the panels of former agency it executives suggested that not all 13 areas were equally important to cios . a few of the former agency it executives even called some of the areas relating to information management a distraction from the cio's primary responsibilities . those sentiments , however , are not consistent with the law , which envisioned that having a single official responsible for the various information and information technology functions would provide integrated management .