surveys . from january through march 2013 , we conducted two separate self - administered web - based surveys of all 2,439 listed employees ( nonsupervisors and supervisors ) in four occupational categories and six divisions , and all 86 senior officers in six divisions . that is , we performed one survey of supervisory and nonsupervisory staff and one of senior officers . select “not applicable” if you work in that office or division in your regional office. ) in the past 12 months , how often did employees in the other division within your regional office get back to you promptly in response to requests for assistance with work - related issues such as to coordinate activities or provide expert advice ? ( select one response per item . select “not applicable” if you work in that office or division or if you did not communicate with that division or office in the past 12 months. ) if there are any other issues , details , or information concerning communication between and within divisions and offices that you would like us to know about , please use the space below to provide this information . we will not present detailed comments . to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements regarding the quality of management and leadership in your division / office . ( select one response per item. ) supervisors and managers in my division / office are held accountable for achieving results that help sec meet its goals and priorities . b . in my division / office , the roles and responsibilities of supervisors and managers are clearly defined . c. supervisors and managers in my division / office are genuinely interested in the opinions of their staff . d. 360 degree feedback is an effective way for employees to provide feedback on the performance of their supervisors . e. promotion to management is mostly based on technical skills . f. promotion to management is mostly based on the ability to manage people effectively . g. promotion to management is mostly based on connections that staff have with management . h. there is not much incentive to get promoted into a management position because the salary increase is minimal . over the past 3 years , i have seen sec staff leave due to being dissatisfied with a supervisor or manager . d. employees in my division / office are currently given the same opportunities to participate in training programs and events . e. management in my division / office needs to do more to address skills gaps . f. over the past three years , sec's leadership training has been effective in improving the management skills of supervisors and managers in my division / office . for those training opportunities that you have been involved with over the past three years , to what extent , if at all , have the following types of training provided information and knowledge that is directly relevant to your work ? ( select one response per item. ) over the past three years , how satisfied have you been with initiatives management developed to improve communication , the performance management system , and training opportunities ? ( select one response per item. )