institutions of higher education . types of institutions include: less than 2- year public , 2-year public , 4-year and above public , less than 2-year private not - for - profit , 2-year private not - for - profit , 4-year and above private not - for - profit , less than 2-year private for - profit , 2-year private for - profit , and 4-year and above private for - profit . a report that shows how students' success later in the education / workforce pipeline is related to the status of the same students earlier in the pipeline . we considered the district of columbia to be a state . we excluded alabama , new mexico and california from our review because neither alabama nor new mexico received a slds or a wdqi grant and because california chose not to participate in dqc's 2013 survey . we excluded the u.s. virgin islands and puerto rico because , while these territories received slds grants , dqc did not include them in its survey . we analyzed data on slds and wdqi grantee states because the slds and wdqi grant programs provide federal funds for developing longitudinal data systems and are complementary . we considered a grantee as matching data between sectors if a grantee matched data from at least one program between sectors ( for a list of programs included in the dqc survey , see questions 1 , 4 , 7 , and 10 in table 8 in appendix ii ) . we considered a grantee as sharing data if a grantee matched data according to our definition and also reported exchanging at least one data element between sectors , in either direction ( for a list of data elements , see questions 2 , 5 , 8 , and 11 in table 8 in appendix ii ) . we also analyzed data from another twelve survey questions to identify how grantees are using longitudinal data to help improve education and workforce outcomes ( see table 9 in appendix ii ) . we conducted a data reliability assessment by reviewing the survey instrument and related documentation , interviewing officials responsible for administering the survey , and testing the data for obvious inaccuracies . we determined that these data are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . a report designed to identify students who are most likely to be at risk of academic failure or dropping out of school . information on outcomes for students after they graduate from a school or district . a report that shows changes in the achievement of the same students over time . elementary and secondary education . reliably connecting the same individual record in two or more databases . the percent of unique individual records reliably connected across databases . exchanging data between two databases , in either direction .