navigation . the president's budget requested $908 million for 20 corps construction projects in the navigation business line , which were located in coastal , inland , and intracoastal navigation systems in california , georgia , illinois , louisiana , missouri , new jersey , new york , ohio , oregon , south carolina , texas , virginia , washington , and wisconsin . according to corps' budget guidance , these projects are intended to provide safe , reliable , cost - effective and environmentally sustainable waterborne transportation systems for the movement of commercial goods . for example , the corps' olmsted locks and dam project is located on the ohio river , which connects to the tennessee , cumberland , and mississippi rivers and is considered critical for commercial navigation . according to the corps , the project consists of two 110-foot by 1,200-foot locks , which are located adjacent to the illinois bank , and a dam comprising of five tainter gates , which control the amount of water that flows downstream . according to a corps document , over the last several years , approximately 80 million tons of bulk commodities ( for example , coal , grain , rock , and sand ) per year , on average , have passed through navigation structures that are part of the project . the corps estimates that this project has been under construction for nearly 30 years . according to corps documents and headquarters officials , the project became operational as of september 2018 , with a total estimated cost of $3 billion by the time of project completion . to prioritize construction projects to recommend for inclusion in the president's budget requests for fiscal years 2008 through 2017 , the corps used a process involving the three levels of its organization — districts , divisions , and headquarters . to begin the process , corps district officials divided projects into work packages — increments of work that can be considered for inclusion in the budget . according to corps policy guidance for budget development ( budget guidance ) , these work packages should contribute to the overall project and be executed without being dependent on the funding of additional work packages . according to a district official , district officials then assigned one of six priority levels to indicate the order in which work packages for the same project should be completed for that fiscal year . priority levels are categories used to differentiate work packages within the same project . corps budget guidance instructed district officials to assign priority levels based on criteria including whether a project is new or continuing and where a work package falls within a project's overall work plan . corps budget guidance also instructed officials to group work packages either by business line or appropriations account , depending on the fiscal year , based on the budget guidance for that fiscal year . corps districts , divisions , and headquarters consecutively ranked the work packages , as shown in figure 5 . in doing so , they established criteria specific to the business line for each project . corps budget guidance provided instructions on which criteria to use for each business line to determine rankings in a particular year .