pt . 158 ; department of defense instruction 3020.41 , operational contract support ( ocs ) ( dec. 20 , 2011 ) . collect information on certain contractor personnel , but it is not clear that it would ensure the collection of all personnel information required by section 844 . for example , it is not clear whether the collection of employee data based on the guidance would ensure the identification of contractor personnel performing security functions or the number killed or wounded . dod officials said that they have not updated their guidance to specifically address each data element and source because the 2011 instruction meets their needs , but commented that the instruction is undergoing a revision and it would be useful to update spot provisions during that process . without current and comprehensive guidance that identifies the data elements to collect , the systems with which to collect and report them , and relevant responsibilities and procedures , dod lacks assurance that its 2011 guidance provides the department the ability to ensure that it can take the steps necessary to collect and report on the eight required data elements . moreover , dod may find it more difficult to reconcile information when there are multiple sources for the same data element . for example , spot receives some information about contract numbers and about whether a contract was awarded competitively both from the government - wide fpds - ng and from contractors' manual entry . additionally , an update would also clarify current procedures to help ensure the collection of the total number and total value of contracts active as of a reporting date , as well as the number and value of contracts entered into as of the reporting date . usaid has published guidance about the use of glaas and spot to record data about contracts and contractor personnel , but this guidance may also not ensure that the agency has the capability to collect and report on the required data . usaid officials told us in may 2014 that they were not aware of guidance to implement the statutory requirement , and our review of agency guidance revealed no provisions specifically tied to section 844 . however , in november 2014 , officials added that usaid believed that its current policy and procedures related to data collection on contract support for contingency operations were sufficient . according to a usaid management official , the agency reports on data related to number , value , and competition of contracts through the reporting functionality of glaas , but it is not clear that the corresponding guidance identified by the official would ensure the collection of each data element . the official also cited two acquisition and assistance policy directives ( aapd ) , dated in 2009 and 2010 . these directives require usaid contracting officers to include a provision in certain contracts with performance in iraq and afghanistan that identifies spot as the required system to use for personnel data.contract provisions do not specifically address data collection on contractors who are killed or wounded , and do not address any future contingency operations beyond iraq or afghanistan .