vii ) . the commissioner concurred with our recommendations and stated that our report acknowledges the significant efforts taken by irs to control the innocent spouse program's workload . the commissioner also said that our methodology for determining the average time from receipt of a case to a notification decision on cases closed over a yearlong period is disproportionately drawn from older cases in irs's inventory . the database that we used reflected these corrections . we did not test the reliability of the other irs databases used in our analysis — the examination case reporting system and the work planning and control system — that maintain data on staff hours applied to examination programs , including innocent spouse case processing . we analyzed the direct staff hours that irs staff charged to conduct case evaluations for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 . irs did not have complete information for earlier periods . to assess the adequacy of irs's procedures to transfer liabilities between taxpayers when relief was granted , we reviewed the procedures and related guidance such as training materials and policy memoranda . we discussed the procedures and related guidance with the innocent spouse project manager , managers at the cincinnati processing site , and customer account services staff who are responsible for overseeing the process of transferring tax liabilities between tax accounts . we also compared our published guidance on internal control management for federal agencies with irs's procedures . we observed the process that irs had in place at the cincinnati processing site for transferring tax liabilities from taxpayers' joint accounts to their individual accounts . we discussed irs's procedures with taxpayer advocate service staff to determine whether they received any complaints from taxpayers that irs had incorrectly transferred liabilities in their innocent spouse cases . to assess irs's efforts to evaluate the usefulness of its innocent spouse program web site to taxpayers , we reviewed guidance from selected academic and industry experts on assessing web sites and we interviewed irs's electronic tax administration and innocent spouse program officials . we also examined irs's innocent spouse web site to determine the type and content of information available to the taxpayers . to determine the number and disposition of innocent spouse cases filed in u.s. federal courts , we obtained information from staff at treasury's office of chief counsel that identified court decisions on innocent spouse cases compiled from the lexisnexis database for the period june 1996 to june 2001 . the compilation excluded those cases that addressed only procedural issues such as whether a court had jurisdiction to hear the case . we also obtained information that was complied from irs's office of appeals database on innocent spouse cases scheduled for trial that were settled by the office of appeals or treasury's office of chief counsel from fiscal year 1999 , when irs began tracking these data , through may 2001 .