we revised the table . we added language to the report body . the final report notes that fha is developing guidance to clarify the circumstances under which management and marketing contractors can demand refunds from servicers for preservation and protection work that has not been completed according to standards . we have revised the report language . as stated in the report body , the section 601 authority may allow for unified property custody . while fha's accelerated claims disposition program could reduce the number of properties that fha acquires through foreclosure , it is too early to judge its ultimate success . further , as the fha commissioner states , even if the demonstration program is successful and expanded to the majority of defaulted mortgage loans , it will not eliminate fha's responsibility for acquiring and selling foreclosed properties entirely . we believe that fha should established unified custody as a priority for any such foreclosed properties for which it becomes responsible in the future . we disagree with fha that the draft report stated that fha does not retain data on the number of properties that are reconveyed due to irresolvable title defects . the draft report stated that fha does not collect data on the number of times that title insurance policies are used during the foreclosure process or the types of problems that require title insurance . therefore , we made no changes in response to this comment . as stated in the report draft , the debenture rate can significantly exceed servicers' cost of funds . this footnote has been deleted . the fha comment letter paraphrases our recommendation differently than the way the full recommendation was written in the draft report . we recommended that the hud secretary establish unified property custody as a priority for fha and determine the optimal method of unified property custody . fha paraphrased our recommendation as stating that hud should determine if unified property custody represents the optimal method of property custody and , if so , implement it after seeking any required statutory authority . we contacted a senior fha official to obtain clarification on fha's position on our recommendation . the fha official said that fha , in paraphrasing the recommendation in the draft report , did not mean to change the recommendation's meaning . fha agrees with our recommendation that it should establish unified property custody as a priority . fha is conducting analysis to determine the feasibility of establishing unified custody within the existing statutory framework and to identify regulatory and contractual changes that would have to be resolved to implement unified property custody . we do not agree with fha that actions taken to suspend foreclosure proceedings in these 7,800 cases contributed to the time taken to sell fha properties in 2000 . the timeline we provided measures from the date of the foreclosure sale until properties are sold to homebuyers or investors . because suspension of foreclosure proceedings on these mortgages occurred prior to the completion of the foreclosure sale , the suspension would not add time to the period measured in this report . we revised the figure . in fact , the debenture rate has exceeded servicers' cost of funds since 1985 .