thank you . for further information on this testimony , please contact thomas j. mccool on ( 202 ) 512-2642 or mccoolt@gao.gov . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . table 1 . tarp program description and total disbursements , as of september 11 , 2009 ( dollars in billions ) capital purchase program . to provide capital to viable banks through the purchase of preferred shares and subordinated debentures . targeted investment program . to foster market stability and thereby strengthen the economy by making case - by - case investments in institutions that treasury deems are critical to the functioning of the financial system . capital assistance program . to restore confidence throughout the financial system that the nation's largest banking institutions have sufficient capital to cushion themselves against larger - than - expected future losses , and to support lending to creditworthy borrowers . systemically significant failing institutions . to provide stability in financial markets and avoid disruptions to the markets from the failure of a systemically significant institution . treasury determines participation in this program on a case - by - case basis . asset guarantee program . to provide government assurances for assets held by financial institutions that are viewed as critical to the functioning of the nation's financial system . automotive industry financing program . to prevent a significant disruption of the american automotive industry . home affordable modification program . to offer assistance to an estimated 3 to 4 million homeowners through a cost - sharing arrangement with mortgage holders and investors to reduce the monthly mortgage payment amounts of homeowners at risk of foreclosure to affordable levels . consumer & business lending initiative . to support consumer and business credit markets by providing financing to private investors to issue new securitizations to help unfreeze and lower interest rates for auto , student , and small business loans ; credit cards ; commercial mortgages ; and other consumer and business credit . public - private investment program . to address the challenge of “legacy assets” as part of treasury's efforts to repair balance sheets throughout the financial system and increase the availability of credit to households and businesses . cpp continues to be the largest and most widely used program under treasury's tarp authority for stabilizing the financial system . over the last year , cpp has made significant capital investments in financial institutions , and although treasury has made progress in monitoring the activities of cpp participants , challenges remain in ensuring that participants comply with program requirements . as of september 11 , 2009 , cpp had provided more than $204 billion in capital to more than 670 institutions , about 56 percent of total tarp disbursements . the amount of disbursements has slowed significantly , in part , because the institutions receiving cpp capital in recent months are generally smaller than those that received capital in the beginning of the program .