hhs concurred . in conclusion , the current covid - 19 outbreak demonstrates that responding to the ever - changing nature and broad array of biological threats is challenging . the national biodefense strategy calls for the need to improve state , local , tribal , territorial , private sector , federal , regional , and international surveillance systems and networks to contain , control and respond to biological incidents . as the current coronavirus outbreak continues to cross regional and international borders , the federal government must take necessary steps to protect the american public . at the same time , we must not lose sight of the next threat . the national biodefense strategy and nspm - 14 put in place a framework to be able to assess threats and make difficult decisions about how to apply limited resources to achieve the best benefit . however , the strategy is only as good as its implementation . taking the necessary steps to address the recommendations we have made regarding managing this cultural change , analyzing data , ensuring sufficient resources to maintain implementation efforts , and clearly articulating roles and responsibilities for joint decision - making will better position our nation for the threats we face today and in the future . chairwoman maloney , ranking member jordan , and members of the committee , this concludes our prepared statement . we would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time . if you or your staff has any questions concerning this testimony , please contact christopher p. currie at ( 404 ) 679-1875 , curriec@gao.gov or mary denigan - macauley at ( 202 ) 512-7114 , deniganmacauleym@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement include kathryn godfrey ( assistant director ) , susanna kuebler ( analyst - in - charge ) , michele fejfar , eric hauswirth , tracey king , and jan montgomery . key contributors for the previous work that this testimony is based on are listed in each product . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . challenges adapting to new procedures . during our interviews , agency officials reported challenges they faced in the first - year's data collection effort . these challenges may have led to incomplete data collection , but are not wholly unexpected given they occurred in the context of the individual agencies and officials adapting to new procedures and a broader cultural shift from how they have approached their biodefense missions in the past . officials told us that because of the learning involved the first time through the process , agencies may not have submitted complete or detailed information about their biodefense programs .