5 for an example ) . obo and ds officials acknowledged that , at many locations , it is not feasible to increase the setback by acquiring land and closing off nearby streets . in other cases , officials stated the buildings themselves were not structurally capable of handling heavy forced entry / ballistic - resistant windows or other upgrades . and in other cases , officials commented that host nations or cities would not allow certain upgrades to be implemented , such as removing trees to create a clear zone around the embassy or changing the facade of historic buildings . finally , current plans for the nec program do not include the replacement of 61 of 262 embassies and consulates . several of these facilities were built after physical security standards were strengthened in response to terrorist attacks against u.s. facilities in beirut , lebanon , in the 1980s . state officials acknowledged that other facilities may not be replaced due to cost and political concerns . as a result , many buildings and their occupants may remain vulnerable to attack . the department of state provided written comments on a draft of this report , which are reproduced in appendix ii . state agreed with our findings , noting that the report accurately describes state's csup efforts . state also provided us with technical suggestions and clarifications that we have addressed in this report , as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested members of congress and the secretary of state . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact charles michael johnson , jr. , at ( 202 ) 512-7331 or johnsoncm@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . to discuss the factors that the bureau of overseas buildings operations ( obo ) considers as it plans and prioritizes compound security upgrades program ( csup ) projects , we reviewed department of state ( state ) prioritization and planning documents concerning the assignment of post threat levels , assessments of the security vulnerabilities of posts , and csup . we discussed csup prioritization and planning , as well as changes to those processes in response to recent attacks , with officials from obo and state's bureau of diplomatic security ( ds ) in washington , d.c , and overseas , including post officials , including deputy chiefs of mission , regional security officers , facilities managers , and general services officers , and with contractors overseas . in addition , we reviewed past gao audit work on related issues . ( see related gao products at the end of this report. )