innovation . the review noted that the center for development innovation had several achievements , including positive feedback from innovators who received technical assistance from the center as well as agency partners who received program design services . the challenges noted included the center's need for more engagement with key missions and for finding balance between advisory services and direct project implementation . partnerships . the review noted that the center for transformational partnerships had identified lessons learned in areas such as the center's ability to support missions by helping them to identify opportunities and determine when and where partnership makes sense . one challenge that the review identified was the possibility that the center's limited resources might inhibit technical assistance to missions and bureaus . planned adjustments included prioritizing advisory and liaison support to the regions that have lower capacity for private sector engagement . agency integration . in october 2017 , the lab implemented an evaluation , research , and learning plan that includes practices recommended for bureaus . according to lab officials , the lab's plan is intended to help build evidence within and across the centers and ensure that resources are prioritized to support evaluation and research . as part of this plan , the lab identified five key questions for all of the centers that evaluations , research , and learning efforts should attempt to help answer . according to lab officials , the lab began holding strategic learning reviews , beginning in spring 2018 , to help it address theories of change — that is , descriptions of how and why a result is expected to be achieved through a particular project or activity . the lab developed the reviews to complement its portfolio reviews , according to lab officials . the lab , led by the office of evaluation and impact assessment , completed its first cross - lab strategic learning reviews in the spring of 2018 , according to lab officials . the reviews focused on three of five key questions in the lab's evaluation , research , and learning plan: addressing adaptive management ; supporting innovators , entrepreneurs , and researchers ; and sustaining results . according to the lab , the 2-hour sessions , in which lab officials and other selected agency subject - matter experts participated , resulted in discussions about issues that the participants considered most important for the lab to address or improve in the future . technology . the review noted that the center for digital development achieved largely positive ratings for digital development training and for a substantial amount of technical assistance , trainings , and knowledge products . the review also noted that the center had faced some challenges , such as staffing constraints that limited staff's ability to prioritize both internal and external engagements . the review noted that the center for agency integration achieved several successes , including introducing the lab and stip to over 30 foreign service nationals ( i.e. as of october 2018 , the lab reported that it had completed 7 external performance evaluations of its programs or projects and had an additional 12 ongoing evaluations , both internal and external .