sec . 3729 to 3733 ) gives doj a powerful enforcement tool as it provides for substantial damages and penalties against providers who knowingly submit false or fraudulent bills to medicare , medicaid , or other federal health programs . doj has instituted a series of investigations known as national initiatives , which involve examinations of similarly situated providers who may have engaged in common patterns of improper medicare billing . as safeguard and enforcement actions have increased , so have provider concerns about their interaction with contractors . individual physicians and representatives of medical associations have made a number of serious charges regarding the following . inadequate communications from cms' contractors . providers assert that the information they receive is poorly organized , difficult to understand , and not always communicated promptly . as a result , providers are concerned that they may inadvertently violate medicare billing rules . inappropriate targeting of claims for review and excessive paperwork demands of the medical review process . for example , some physicians have complained that the documentation required by some contractors goes beyond what is outlined in agency guidance or what is needed to demonstrate medical necessity . unfair method used to calculate medicare overpayments . providers expressed concern that repayment amounts calculated through the use of samples that are not statistically representative do not accurately represent actual overpayments . overzealous enforcement activities by other federal agencies . for example , providers have charged that doj has been overly aggressive in its use of the false claims act and has been too accommodating to the oig's insistence on including corporate integrity agreements in provider settlements . lengthy process to appeal denied claim . related to this issue is that a provider who successfully appeals a claim that was initially denied does not earn interest for the period during which the administrative appeal was pending . we have studies underway to examine the regulatory environment in which medicare providers operate . at the request of the house committee on the budget and the house ways and means subcommittee on health , we are reviewing cms' communications with providers and have confirmed some provider concerns . for example , our review of several information sources , such as bulletins , telephone call centers , and internet sites , found a disappointing performance record . specifically , we reviewed recently issued contractor bulletins — newsletters from carriers to physicians outlining changes in national and local medicare policy — from 10 carriers . some of these bulletins contained lengthy discussions with overly technical and legalistic language that providers may find difficult to understand . these bulletins also omitted some important information about mandatory billing procedures . similarly , we found that the calls we placed to telephone call centers this spring were rarely answered appropriately . for example , for 85 percent of our calls , the answers that call center representatives provided were either incomplete or inaccurate . finally , we recently reviewed 10 internet sites , which cms requires carriers to maintain . we found that these sites rarely met all cms requirements and often lacked user - friendly features such as site maps and search functions .