rebuilding iraq . gao - 03-792r . washington , d.c.: may 15 , 2003 . we evaluated these as part of our review . even though state officials did not include these documents among those they identified as supporting the strategy . in addition , we reviewed other u.s. government documents that provided useful context and information , including two related reports issued by state in february 2006: ( 1 ) rebuilding iraq: u.s . achievements through the iraq relief and reconstruction fund ; and ( 2 ) advancing the president's national strategy for victory in iraq : funding iraq's transition to self - reliance in 2006 and 2007 and support for the counterinsurgency campaign . we acknowledge that the purpose of the nsvi was to provide the public with an overview of a multitiered , classified strategy and not to set forth every detail on information readily available elsewhere . our analysis was not limited to the publicly available , unclassified nsvi . with input from dod and state , we included in our assessment all the classified and unclassified documents that collectively define the u.s. strategy in iraq: ( 1 ) the national security presidential directive 36 ( may 2004 ) , ( 2 ) multinational forces - iraq ( mnf - i ) campaign plan ( august 2004 ) , ( 3 ) the mnf - i / u.s. embassy baghdad joint mission statement on iraq ( december 2005 ) , ( 4 ) the multinational corps - iraq operation order 05-03 ( december 2005 ) , ( 5 ) the national strategy for supporting iraq ( updated january 2006 ) , and ( 6 ) the quarterly state section 2207 reports to congress ( through april 2006 ) , and ( 7 ) the april 2006 joint campaign plan issued by the chief of mission and the commander of the mnf - i . collectively , these documents still lack all the key characteristics of an effective national strategy . however , we refined our recommendation to focus on the need to improve the u.s. strategy for iraq . we disagree with state's comment that helping restore essential services to prewar levels was not an assumption of the early u.s. reconstruction strategy . according to the key architects of the original coalition provisional authority plan , restoring essential services to a prewar level was a key assumption of the u.s. strategy . documents we received from state and the department of energy estimated that iraq's 2003 actual prewar crude oil production was 2.6 million barrels per day . state did not provide any additional documentation to support their contention . in addition , the 4,300 megawatts figure cited by state is below the postwar peak of 5,400 megawatts and the planned u.s. goal of 6,000 megawatts . we agree that it is not possible to make definitive statements about the number of people nationwide with access to clean drinking water during the prewar period because reliable data did not exist . we have noted this problem in previous reports and testimonies . this report describes u.s. mission efforts announced in december 2005 to develop an improved set of metrics to better estimate the potential impact of u.s. water and sanitation reconstruction efforts on iraqi households .