( see app . ii for dod's medical assessment form — dd form 2697. ) military medical personnel , who could include a physician , a physician's assistant , or a nurse practitioner , are required to review the questionnaire with the servicemember . if the questionnaire indicates the presence of an illness , injury , or other medical problem , the reviewer is required to ensure that the servicemember's medical or dental records document the problem . in addition , depending on the servicemember's responses or based on the reviewer's judgment that additional information is needed , the health assessment could result in a physical exam — one focused on a particular health issue or issues in order to supplement information disclosed on the questionnaire . furthermore , the medical assessment asks if the servicemember intends to file a claim for disability with va. servicemembers who answer “yes” on the assessment form will be given a clinically appropriate assessment or exam if the servicemember's last physical exam received during active duty is more than 12 months old or if new symptoms have appeared since the last active duty exam . in addition , the army , navy , air force , and marines require some of their servicemembers to undergo separation exams when they leave the military . separation exams consist of a clinical evaluation by a medical provider and could include various diagnostic tests , such as a urinalysis , a hearing test , and a vision test . separation exams , as well as other physical exams the military services conduct , are documented on a three - page standard dod form . ( see app . iii for dod's report of medical examination — dd form 2808. ) according to dod , the average cost for a physical exam given by the military services is about $125 , exclusive of any diagnostic tests that may also be conducted . the requirements determining which servicemembers must receive separation exams vary by military service and other factors . the army requires that its retirees receive separation exams , although the army does not usually require this for servicemembers who are completing their tours of active duty . the other military services do not require separation exams for most servicemembers , except for those whose last physical exam or assessment they received during active duty is out of date . ( see table 1 for each military service's medical evaluation requirements. ) further , all of the military services also require separation exams for certain occupational specialties . for example , the military services require separation exams for servicemembers who have worked with hazardous materials . finally , any servicemember can request and receive a separation exam . requirements for separation exams may be affected by planned changes to physical exam requirements for active duty servicemembers . the army and navy plan to change their physical exam requirements for servicemembers during active duty — replacing routine physical exams with periodic health assessments , thereby moving closer to the air force's requirements for active duty servicemembers .