forest service . according to forest service officials , most customer feedback was submitted , reviewed , and handled at the local unit level ( forests ) . for example , in comments visitors reported dangerous steps along the double arch trail in kentucky's daniel boone national forest , and in 2013 forest service repaired those steps . according to forest service officials , local customer feedback is only elevated to the attention of headquarters staff at the discretion of local management and stated that local management can use the monthly meetings with regional management to discuss any issues or problems . however , forest service officials did not provide us criteria or documentation for situations when local management would elevate such feedback to headquarters for additional review or input . in addition , forest service officials stated that there is no mechanism for collecting comments agency - wide . however , we found that the plans were in effect , static documents and did not reflect any updates to milestones or actions taken . we discussed the usefulness of the customer service plans with omb officials and they agreed that the departments could have implemented the plans more effectively . omb stated that moving forward , the cap goal implementation plan , which is discussed later , may better help provide additional focus on customer service government - wide . performance improvement council role . we also inquired about the role of the performance improvement council ( pic ) in helping agencies with their customer service efforts . the pic , however , did not have an active role in assisting agencies with the development of their plans . the pic , chaired by omb's deputy director for management and composed of performance improvement officers from various federal agencies , is charged with , among other responsibilities , facilitating the exchange of successful performance improvement practices among agencies , working to resolve government - wide or crosscutting performance issues , and assisting omb in implementing certain gprama requirements . further , the pic's role includes considering the performance improvement experiences of customers of government services . despite their designated role in improving customer experience , omb officials confirmed that the pic was not actively involved in the task force . however , moving forward , omb stated that if plans on involving the pic in the cap goal implementation plan for customer service . omb additional actions . although omb has taken action to move customer service forward government - wide , such as developing guidance and facilitating the task force , other steps were not completed because of budget limitations , according to omb officials . these uncompleted actions pertain to omb's prior effort to provide oversight and accountability of agencies' customer service metrics . in 2010 , we found that omb was developing a pilot dashboard that contained agency standards and some related measures , with links to agency web sites where customers could track their individual transaction status , where available . we found that omb had asked agencies participating in the pilot to identify metrics that were drivers of customer satisfaction , such as wait time , processing time , and first call resolution .