monitoring is key . weaknesses discussed in this report could have been identified and corrected if the corporation had been monitoring compliance with established procedures . for example , if fdic had a process to review all access authority granted to each user to ensure that the access was limited to that needed to complete job responsibilities , it would have been able to discover and limit the inappropriate access authority granted to hundreds of users , as discussed in this report . a program to regularly test information systems controls would also have allowed fdic to detect additional network security weaknesses . for example , using network analysis software designed to detect network vulnerabilities , we identified user accounts and services that could provide hackers with information to exploit the network and launch an attack on fdic systems . corporation staff could have identified this exposure using similar network analysis software already available to them . fdic had weaknesses in each of these areas . physical security controls are important for protecting computer facilities and resources from espionage , sabotage , damage , and theft . these controls involve restricting physical access to computer resources , usually by limiting access to the buildings and rooms in which they are housed and periodically reviewing access granted to ensure that it continues to be appropriate based on criteria established for granting such access . at fdic , physical access control measures ( such as guards , badges , and alarms , used alone or in combination ) are vital to safeguarding critical financial and sensitive personnel and banking information and computer operations from internal and external threats . although fdic took measures to improve its physical perimeter security and access to its computer rooms , its process for granting and reviewing physical access to the computer center is not adequately controlled . for example , there were instances in which records of access granted to staff were not available . further , staff who no longer required access to the computer center still retained such access . this included personnel who ( 1 ) had transferred out of computer operations , ( 2 ) no longer worked for fdic , or ( 3 ) never or rarely visited the computer room . fdic has neither established criteria for granting physical access to its computer center , nor developed procedures to periodically review staff access to determine continued need . without adequate criteria and periodic review , fdic increases the risk of unauthorized access to the corporation's systems and disruption of services . at our request , fdic reviewed its list of staff with access to the computer center , reducing the number of authorized staff from 270 to 227 . specifically , it determined that it had no record of access granted to 18 staff , and that access was no longer needed by 25 individuals . this provides overall security policy and guidance , along with the oversight to ensure compliance with established policies and procedures ; further , it reviews the effectiveness of the security environment . the following sections summarize the results of our review .