foreign nationals . usaid's foreign national employees are non – u.s . citizens who are locally employed at posts abroad . they may be direct hires or personal services contractors . usaid uses foreign nationals to manage mission operations and oversee development activities . according to its staffing report to congress , usaid had 4,712 foreign national employees at the end of fiscal year 2018 . while usaid collects demographic data on u.s. personal services contractors for its payroll processor , it does not analyze this information . usaid does not report these data , because usaid does not regard personal services contractors as u.s. government employees . usaid officials noted that current reporting requirements call only for demographics of direct - hire employees , which excludes a considerable portion of the agency's workforce . other categories of staff not directly employed by usaid , including institutional support contractors and staff detailed from other organizations and u.s. government agencies , also perform a wide range of services in support of the agency's programs . according to its staffing report to congress , usaid had 1,681 institutional support contractors at the end of fiscal year 2018 . pathways internship program . the pathways internship program provides targeted diversity recruitment , salaries , and payments for pathways interns , according to the usaid chief human capital officer's june 2019 testimony . the testimony states that the overall racial or ethnic minority representation rate in fiscal year 2018 for the pathways internship program was 69 percent and that hispanics , at 31 percent , represented the largest minority demographic . usaid officials said that the agency views its internship programs as a succession - planning tool designed to convert as many internships as possible into full - time positions . according to usaid , the agency had no pathways interns in 2019 , as a result of funding limitations , but as of april 2020 was planning 21 internships for 2020 . usaid provides training as well as a formal mentoring program intended to support diversity and inclusion , according to usaid officials . ocrd is responsible for providing mandatory agency - wide training on diversity awareness and equal opportunity . usaid officials stated that the agency has mandatory and nonmandatory training on diversity and inclusion issues . for example , usaid provides online mandatory training classes on the no fear act and sexual harassment . according to usaid data , 326 people took versions of these courses in 2019 . usaid also offers nonmandatory in - person classes such as eeo counselor training and unconscious bias training . in 2019 , 17 people took eeo counselor training , and 36 people took usaid's in - person unconscious bias training . additionally , usaid officials said that external partners of usaid have developed training related to diversity and inclusion , to which ocrd refers employees on request . according to usaid , the agency's mentoring programs build on informal mentoring efforts and support strategic human capital initiatives for recruitment and retention , employee development , succession planning , and diversity . usaid officials stated that the mentoring program includes a facilitated process for matching mentors and mentees , formal mentoring training , an established tracking system , and goals used to measure success .