madam chair this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512- 8979 or christoffj@gao.gov . other key contributors to this statement were stephen lord , david bruno , thomas costa , lynn cothern , mattias fenton , muriel forster , lisa helmer , dorian herring , patrick hickey , bruce kutnicky , tetsuo miyabara , judith mccloskey , and mary moutsos . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the benchmark requiring a review of the iraqi constitution has not yet been met . fundamental issues remain unresolved as part of the constitutional review process , such as expanded powers for the presidency , the resolution of disputed areas ( such as kirkuk ) , and power sharing between federal and regional governments over issues such as the distribution of oil revenue . in addition , five other legislative benchmarks requiring parliamentary action have not yet been met . figure 2 highlights the status of the benchmarks requiring legislative enactment and implementation . the increase in the number of monthly attacks generally continued through june 2007 . given the highly interdependent nature of the oil and electricity sectors , such a plan would help identify the most pressing needs for the entire energy sector and help overcome the daunting challenges affecting future development prospects . for fiscal years 2003 to 2006 , the united states made available about $7.4 billion and spent about $5.1 billion to rebuild iraq's oil and electricity sectors . however , production in both sectors has consistently fallen below u.s. program goals of 3 million barrels per day and 6,000 megawatts of electrical peak generation capacity . billions of dollars are still needed to rebuild , maintain , and secure iraq's oil and electricity infrastructure , underscoring the need for sound strategic planning . the ministry of electricity's 2006-2015 electricity master plan estimates that $27 billion will be needed to reach its goal of providing reliable electricity across iraq by 2015 . according to dod , investment in iraq's oil sector is “woefully short” of the absolute minimum required to sustain current production , and additional foreign and private investment is needed . for example , ministries within the iraqi government continued to be controlled by sectarian factions and are used to maintain power and provide patronage to individuals and groups . according to an august 2007 u.s. interagency report , the withdrawal of members of the iraqi cabinet ended the shi'a - dominated coalition's claim to be a government of national unity and further undermined iraq's already faltering program of national reconciliation . in late august 2007 , iraq's senior shi'a and sunni arab and kurdish political leaders signed a unity accord signaling efforts to foster greater national reconciliation .