iv ) . furthermore , at least one of the expected benefits of commercial acquisition — attracting new market entrants — has not materialized through the air force's use of sole - source commercial acquisitions for products in fiscal year 2004 . specifically , traditional defense contractors were used on 8 of the 10 fiscal year 2004 sole - source product awards . we considered the 11 contractors who did not perform military department contracts during this period to be new to dod . table 1 lists the 87 total traditional contractors and the 11 new contractors according to our analysis . we reviewed 20 larger air force commercial contracts awarded in fiscal year 2004 . we reviewed the contract files associated with these contracts at locations of the air force materiel command including ( 1 ) wright - patterson air force base , ohio ; ( 2 ) tinker air force base , oklahoma ; ( 3 ) robins air force base , georgia ; and ( 4 ) hanscom air force base , massachusetts . we held discussions with contracting officers and procurement management officials associated with most of the selected contracts . in three instances , parts for the c - 5 military transport aircraft were procured under a system in which contractors produced a prototype or unique first article because these replacement parts did not already exist . these first articles were then subject to successful testing before the contractor was given approval to produce the remaining articles . as part of each contract , the government paid for the manufacturers to construct the unique first article and the various machine tooling they needed to produce the articles . in two other cases , there were internal air force disagreements regarding determinations of commerciality . the items in question were c - 130e and c - 130h aircraft procured by foreign governments from a sole - source contractor , with the u.s. government ( via the air force ) acting as an intermediary . overall , 9.5 percent ( $2.6 billion ) of all air force contract dollars to major acquisitions were obligated under commercial acquisition from fiscal year 2004 through fiscal year 2005 . we considered programs listed on osd's selected acquisition report summary tables from fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2005 ( except research and development programs ) to be major acquisition programs . we also included joint programs from gao's 2006 defense acquisitions: assessments of selected major weapon programs ( gao - 06-391 ) for which the air force was listed as the lead buyer . we found three major acquisitions with air force involvement for which commercial actions constituted at least 75 percent of contract dollars obligated , and these acquisitions are shaded in table 3 . excluding these three acquisitions , commercial expenditures for the remaining 25 major acquisition programs with air force involvement constituted less than 1 percent of total program dollars spent . 1972 – commission on government procurement — see report of the commission on government procurement , vol . 3 , pt . d , “acquisition of commercial products,” ( dec. 1972 ) . 1984 – competition in contracting act of 1984 — pub . 98-369 , div . b , title vii .