we disagree . our draft discussed all of the initiatives for the ccdf and tanf programs that acf noted in its comments . we did , however , enhance portions of the discussion based on information provided by acf in its comment letter . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services and others who are interested . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact linda m. calbom on ( 202 ) 512-9508 or calboml@gao.gov or cynthia m. fagnoni on ( 202 ) 512-7215 or fagnonic@gao.gov . additional gao contacts and acknowledgments are provided in appendix iv . we designed our study to provide information on ( 1 ) what selected states have done to manage improper payments in the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) and child care and development fund ( ccdf ) programs , and ( 2 ) what the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has done to assess risk and assist states in managing improper payments in these programs . to obtain information about these objectives , we developed a data collection instrument for state tanf directors and a separate one for state ccdf administrators , conducted in - person interviews with state tanf and ccdf program officials and state fraud officials , conducted telephone interviews with state auditors , reviewed information from our prior work , and conducted work at the federal level . in addition , we interviewed or consulted officials with professional associations including the american public human services association and the united council on welfare fraud . we provided a draft of this report to aphsa and hhs . hhs's comments are included in appendix iii and technical comments from hhs and aphsa were incorporated as appropriate . we conducted our work from april 2003 through may 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to obtain information for this report , we judgmentally selected 16 states that reflect variations in the following characteristics: geographic location , level of tanf and ccdf program expenditures , and size of population . as part of our analysis , we sent data collection instruments to 11 states: california , colorado , florida , idaho , kansas , maryland , michigan , new mexico , new york , ohio , and pennsylvania . we also visited 5 other states: georgia , illinois , texas , virginia , and washington . table 9 provides information on the amount of tanf expenditures for the 16 states in our review and each state's tanf expenditure as a percentage of the u.s. total . the table also shows that together these states represent about 70 percent of total u.s. tanf expenditures .