safeguarding information . agencies are to establish appropriate administrative , technical , and physical safeguards to ensure the security and confidentiality of records and to protect against anticipated threats or hazards to their security or integrity that could result in substantial harm , embarrassment , inconvenience , or unfairness to any individual on whom information is maintained . accounting for disclosures of records . twenty - four of the 25 agencies sent a representative . ( the department of health and human services was not represented. ) the key results from the discussion of each question are presented below . the 24 agency representatives who attended our february 2003 forum on the survey results identified the following as the three most significant barriers to improving agency compliance: lack of sufficient office of management and budget ( omb ) leadership , oversight , and guidance on the privacy act ( first choice , with 50 points ) ; low agency priority on implementing the act , which adversely affected the level of resources devoted to it ( second choice , with 36 points ) ; and insufficient training to satisfy the wide range of employee involvement with the act ( eg , executives have different training needs than do persons designing information systems ) ( third choice , with 23 points ) . each of these barriers and the actions that could address them are discussed below . agency participants were in general agreement that omb officials had not provided sufficient leadership , guidance , and assistance to agencies on the privacy act . participants said that these shortcomings tended to adversely affect the resources and priorities those agencies assigned to the act . many representatives cited the lack of sufficient omb guidance as a significant barrier to compliance , particularly guidance on electronic records . among the views that participants expressed were the following: agencies do not know how to fit the “paper statute” into the electronic realm in which most agencies operate today . omb guidance is crucial to small agencies' successful implementation of the act , because they lack the legal resources of larger agencies . lack of sufficient omb guidance is particularly troublesome in areas where various courts have decided differently on privacy issues , and agencies need to know which legal ruling is correct . agency participants stated that the most important action to address this barrier was omb demonstrating more proactive leadership by publishing additional guidance in several areas and providing increased assistance to agencies . several participants noted the abundance of guidance available from the department of justice's office of information and privacy on the freedom of information act and wanted similar information available on the privacy act . it was also suggested that omb should convene periodic meetings of privacy act officers to discuss important areas where the guidance is not clear . participants saw such meetings as opportunities for agencies to let omb know where guidance and assistance were needed , to work together by pooling their knowledge , and to work with omb to leverage resources ( such as training information ) . another suggestion was that congress provide omb or the agencies with additional resources in the privacy area .