ntsb had no comments . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of transportation , the chairman of ntsb , the chairman of stb , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or flemings@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . delayed emergency response . according to national , state , and local officials we interviewed , longer trains pose concerns about the potential for emergency response delays if responders encounter a train blocking one or more crossings and cannot quickly find an alternate route around it . ( see fig . for example , officials in mount victory , ohio , reported that 22 freight trains travel through their town daily , including a 16,000-feet train , which is nearly 3 miles long . this train blocks 4-to - 5 grade crossings concurrently , which increases the time to access parts of the town , according to local officials . our prior work has found that blocked highway - railroad grade crossings can have significant impacts on emergency response time and outcomes . for example , we reported an instance of a fire that destroyed a house while train traffic blocked the only two crossings in the town and prevented fire crews from responding in time . in another example , a local official in texas said that one class i railroad assembles trains and conducts brake checks on the main line tracks because the trains are too long to fit into sidings and railyards . executing such procedures on mainline track has blocked grade crossings for up to several hours and poses safety challenges for surrounding communities , according to this local official . as a result of situations like these , communities are looking for ways to mitigate delays in emergency services when emergency vehicles must find ways around blocked grade crossings . for instance , some local officials in washington and ohio said they have revised their emergency response plans to avoid grade crossings that are likely to be blocked . motorist and pedestrian behavior . stakeholders we spoke with expressed concerns that longer trains may increase the likelihood of unsafe behavior among motorists and pedestrians . for example , fatalities can occur when motorists or pedestrians engage in risky behavior such as trying to make it across the tracks before an approaching train reaches the crossing . moreover , pedestrians have been known to crawl over , through , or under stopped trains ( see fig . for example , local officials in ohio and texas told us that they have witnessed children crawling through stopped trains to get to school .