( recommendation 5 ) . this report discusses: 1 . faa considers locations for inclusion in the rim inventory based on whether the location has a non - standard design and has experienced three or more incursions in a given calendar year , or averaged at least one incursion per year over the course of the rim program . what efforts have faa and others implemented to improve terminal area safety , and how does faa assess their effectiveness ? to address both objectives , we reviewed our prior work and other published work on faa's runway and taxiway safety efforts , including those from faa , the department of transportation's ( dot ) inspector general , and the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) . we interviewed officials from these agencies as well as the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) , airport and airline associations , and aviation safety organizations . we conducted semi - structured interviews with airport operators and air traffic controllers from 10 airports selected from certificated airports to include those with high runway incident rates in the last 3 years , certain runway safety technologies in place , and variation in geography . we interviewed officials in person and observed facility operations at 4 of these 10 airports — los angeles international airport ; ronald reagan washington national airport ( washington , d.c. ) ; san antonio international airport ; and william p. hobby airport ( houston , texas ) . the perspectives of officials at these 10 airports are not generalizable to those at other airports . however , they allow us to provide examples of how some air traffic controllers and airport operator officials manage terminal area safety . to assess the extent to which faa uses data to analyze terminal area - incidents , we reviewed faa data from fiscal years 2011 through 2018 on reported runway and taxiway incidents and calculated trends in incident types , severity , and aircraft involved . we selected 2011 because that is when faa began collecting data on runway “excursions” — incidents that occur when an aircraft veers off the side or end of a runway . to assess the reliability of these data , we reviewed faa documentation , interviewed faa officials , and reviewed incident data for errors such as duplicates or incomplete records . we also compared faa's processes for collecting and analyzing runway , taxiway , and ramp area data to gao internal control and data reliability standards . we found faa incursion data to be reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives but found limitations with faa excursion and ramp area data , which are discussed later in this report . to identify faa's and other stakeholders' efforts , including technologies , to improve terminal area safety and determine how faa assesses their effectiveness , we reviewed documentation of faa , airports' and airlines' current or planned terminal area initiatives . we analyzed the content of interviews with airport and air traffic officials and compared common themes to federal internal control standards , including those on information and communication . finally , we compared faa's assessment of its terminal area efforts and technologies to leading program evaluation practices .