this report summarizes the results of our work . appendix i contains the slides used to brief your offices , including detailed information on the specific properties that were part of our study . a glossary of terms that are used in this report begins on page 48 . to identify the potential benefits of allowing federal agencies to enter into public - private partnerships , we contracted with ernst & young llp , who , together with a subcontractor , signet partners , developed and analyzed hypothetical partnership scenarios for seven selected gsa buildings . these hypothetical partnership scenarios were developed especially for this assignment and are based on information that was made readily available by representatives of local real estate markets , city governments , and gsa . gsa had previously contracted with aew capital management , l.p. ( aew ) for a public - private partnership financial viability study for three properties in washington , d.c. we contracted with aew to update its work and included these three properties in our study . the properties included in our study were judgmentally selected to include properties that were diverse ( 1 ) geographically , ( 2 ) in type and size , and ( 3 ) in historical features . any actual partnerships involving these properties may be very different from these hypothetical partnership scenarios . in - depth feasibility studies would have to be done to evaluate partnership opportunities before they are undertaken . this study only looked at the potential benefits to the federal government and private sector of public - private partnerships as one management tool to address problems in deteriorating federal buildings . we did not evaluate the potential benefits of other management tools or methods of financing that may be available for this purpose , such as federal financing through appropriations or sales or exchanges of property . ultimately , all available alternatives would need to be evaluated to determine which could provide the best economic value for the government . the u.s. government is one of the world's largest property owners , with a real estate portfolio of over 400,000 defense and civilian buildings and over one - half billion acres of land . as we and others have previously reported , federal asset managers are confronted with numerous challenges in managing this multibillion - dollar real estate portfolio , including a large deferred maintenance backlog and obsolete and underutilized properties . these challenges must be addressed in an environment marked by budgetary constraints and growing demands to improve service . in response to this backlog and limited funding for repair and alteration requirements , we have suggested that the congress consider providing the administrator of gsa with the authority to experiment with funding alternatives , including public - private partnerships , when they reflect the best economic value available for the federal government . the congress has already enacted legislation that provides certain agencies with a statutory basis to enter into partnerships . this additional property management tool has been provided to the department of veterans affairs and the department of defense .