gao - 13-354 . washington , d.c.: april 26 , 2013 native american veterans: dol needs a clear plan to improve employment and training services on tribal lands . this is demonstrated in a number of ways . first , according to officials , the joint implementation task force has not created any written policy or guidance that specifically defines roles and responsibilities for agency staff under the mou . moreover , key members of the joint implementation task force attributed their lack of tracking and oversight of the mou activities in part to their perception that other work - related responsibilities had a higher priority than some of their mou related responsibilities . the leaders of the joint implementation task force from both agencies reported that mou responsibilities were not their top priority , and that resource constraints have affected their ability to focus attention on oversight of mou implementation . for example , officials from orh reported that , while it is the lead office within va responsible for mou - related activities , it is also responsible for many other initiatives . the office experienced staff turnover in 2012 and 2013 , replacing 4 of its 11 staff members , including members of the leadership team . as a result , current leadership and some staff have only been in their current positions since april 2013 or later and have not had time to fully focus on mou implementation and oversight . similarly , an ihs official stated that ihs has limited resources , that agency staff are stretched in order to complete their primary responsibilities , and that activities related to the mou are a part of their additional responsibilities . va and ihs officials reported that they have plans to examine efforts to implement the mou by looking at the effectiveness of the work group structure . specifically , va and ihs have entered into an agreement to have va's national center for organization development undertake an assessment of the views of work group members about their experience and about whether they think the goals of the mou are being met . the assessment is scheduled to be completed by may 2014 and , according to officials , will be used to identify best practices for improved efficiency and effectiveness , or the need for adjustments to organizational structure or processes . it is unclear at this point , however , whether this study will fully address the implementation and oversight shortcomings we have noted and whether it will spur greater focus on the leadership required to effectively implement the mou . although the majority of native american veterans and their representatives we contacted reported that they thought access to care for native american veterans had improved over the past 3 years , a number of others said either that they did not believe that access to care had improved during that time or they did not know whether it had . in addition , there were mixed perceptions about the degree to which va and ihs - funded facilities had made improvements in providing care that was culturally competent with regard to the needs of native americans or veterans .