pub . 104-201 §§1631-1632 ( 1996 ) , as amended by pub . 106-398 , § 1141 ( 2000 ) ( codified at 10 u.s.c . established by rater and approved by reviewer ( s ) work roles and occupations crosswalk to opm job titles / categories . final ratings will be inserted into compensation work bench — a software tool which utilizes an algorithm to determine salary increases and bonus awards.any changes to pay increases based on the algorithm , per dcips guidance , must be documented , justified , and approved by the pra ( see below ) final ratings are inserted into a total performance compensation spreadsheet — software tool which utilizes an algorithm to determine salary increases and bonuses . any changes to salary increases and bonuses , per guidance , must be documented , justified , and approved by boards , office level directors , and agency review authority . what safeguards will be in place to ensure that dcips rewards merit for merit's sake , and does not cater to nepotism and cronyism ? usd ( i ) officials stated that it has used several other mechanisms , including site visits and the annual intelligence community climate survey , to collect employee opinions on various management policies and practices . while these efforts are notable , these mechanisms do not comprehensively identify employee perceptions of dcips . however , usd ( i ) does have plans to implement additional mechanisms that will be discussed later in this report . the non - generalizable results of the discussion groups we conducted identified , among other things , mixed views about certain aspects of the system . specifically , our discussion groups identified areas that employees and supervisors found positive regarding dcips and several areas where they expressed a consistent set of concerns about dcips , some of which are listed below . our prior work , as well as that of the office of personnel management , has recognized that organizational transformations , such as the adoption of a new performance management system , often entail fundamental and radical changes that require an adjustment period to gain employees' trust and acceptance . as a result , we expect major change management initiatives in large - scale organizations to take several years to be fully successful . at 7 of the 13 locations visited , discussion group participants generally expressed positive views about the concept of pay for performance . for example , employees at one location stated they like the idea of linking pay to performance and think that there is more opportunity for financial growth . additionally , supervisors at another location stated they thought dcips is a better system than pay for tenure / time . at another location , supervisors stated they liked the concept of dcips because they felt pay for performance will reward the hard workers . however , participants in 9 of 13 discussion groups felt that dcips was being implemented too quickly . additionally , employees and supervisors at 9 of the 13 locations visited said too many questions about dcips went unanswered . for example , employees at one location felt that in - class instructors were unable to provide answers to basic questions about dcips and its implementation .