lack of independence . in seven audits , independence was compromised because auditors provided material nonaudit services to a contractor they later audited ; experienced access to records problems that were not fully resolved ; and significantly delayed report issuance , which allowed the contractors to resolve cited deficiencies so that they were not included in the audit reports . gagas state that auditors should be free from influences that restrict access to records or that improperly modify audit scope . insufficient testing . thirty - three of 37 internal control audits did not include sufficient testing of internal controls to support auditor conclusions and opinions . gagas for examination - level attestation engagements require that sufficient evidence be obtained to provide a reasonable basis for the conclusion that is expressed in the report . for internal control audits , which are relied on for 2 to 4 years and sometimes longer , the auditors would be expected to test a representative selection of transactions across the year and not transactions for just 1 day , 1 month , or a couple of months . however , we found that for many controls , the procedures performed consisted of documenting the auditors' understanding of controls , and the auditors did not test the effectiveness of the implementation and operation of controls at all . for example , dcaa's current approach of performing 30,000 or more audits annually and issuing over 22,000 audit reports with 3,600 auditors substantially contributed to the widespread audit quality problems we identified . within this environment , dcaa's audit quality assurance program was not properly implemented , resulting in an ineffective quality control process that accepted audits with significant deficiencies and noncompliance with gagas and dcaa policy . moreover , even when dcaa's quality assurance documentation showed evidence of serious deficiencies within individual offices , those offices were given satisfactory ratings . considering the large number of dcaa audit reports issued annually and the reliance the contracting and finance communities have placed on dcaa audit conclusions and opinions , an effective quality assurance program is key to protecting the public interest . such a program would report review findings along with recommendations for any needed corrective actions ; provide training and additional policy guidance , as appropriate ; and perform follow - up reviews to assure that corrective actions are taken . gagas require that each audit organization performing audits and attestation engagements in accordance with gagas should have a system of quality control that is designed to provide the audit organization with reasonable assurance that the organization and its personnel comply with professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory requirements , and have an external peer review at least once every 3 years . on september 1 , 2009 , the dcaa director advised us that dcaa needs up to 2 years to revise its current audit approach and establish an adequate audit quality control system before undergoing another peer review . for fiscal year 2008 , dod reported that it obligated over $380 billion for payments to federal contractors , more than double the amount it obligated for fiscal year 2002 .