logistics . fema's inability to effectively manage and track requests for and the distribution of water , ice , food , and other supplies came under harsh criticism in the wake of hurricane katrina . within days , fema became overwhelmed and essentially asked the military to take over much of the logistics mission . in the post - katrina reform act , congress required fema to make its logistics system more flexible and responsive . fema's ongoing improvements to its logistics strategy and efforts are designed to initially lean forward and provide immediate support to a disaster site mainly through fema - owned goods and assets , and later on to establish sustained supply chains with the private vendors whose resources are needed for ongoing response and recovery activities , according to fema officials . in addition , we recently examined fema logistics issues , taking a broad approach , identifying five areas necessary for an effective logistics system . however , no one in the nation has experience with such potential catastrophes as a dirty bomb detonated in a major city . in short , fema is taking action to transition its logistics program to be more proactive , flexible , and responsive . a new feature in the fiscal year 2006 dhs homeland security grant guidance for the urban area security initiative ( uasi ) grants was that eligible recipients must provide an “investment justification” with their grant application . states were to use this justification to outline the implementation approaches for specific investments that will be used to achieve the initiatives outlined in their state program and capability enhancement plan . these plans were multiyear global program management plans for the entire state homeland security program that look beyond federal homeland security grant programs and funding . the justifications must justify all funding requested through the dhs homeland security grant program . in the guidance dhs noted that it would use a peer review process to evaluate grant applications on the basis of the effectiveness of a state's plan to address the priorities it has outlined and thereby reduce its overall risk . for fiscal year 2006 , dhs implemented a competitive process to evaluate the anticipated effectiveness of proposed homeland security investments . for fiscal year 2007 , dhs continued to use the risk and effectiveness assessments to inform final funding decisions , although changes have been made to make the grant allocation process more transparent and more easily understood . dhs officials have said that they cannot yet assess how effective the actual investments from grant funds are in enhancing preparedness and mitigating risk because they do not yet have the metrics to do so . through its grant guidance , dhs has encouraged regional and multistate planning and preparation . planning and assistance have largely been focused on single jurisdictions and their immediately adjacent neighbors . however , well - documented problems with the abilities of first responders from multiple jurisdictions to communicate at the site of an incident and the potential for large - scale natural and terrorist disasters have generated a debate on the extent to which first responders should be focusing their planning and preparation on a regional and multi - governmental basis .