ii ) . there are also foia exclusions for specific , sensitive records held by law enforcement agencies . agencies have statutory timelines for determining whether to comply with foia requests , making determinations with respect to appeals of adverse determinations , and determining whether to provide expedited processing of foia requests . requesters are entitled to be told the reason for denials , to appeal denials , and to challenge them in court . under the act , agencies are required to submit annual reports on these foia activities to the attorney general . figure 1 provides an overview of a generic agency foia process , from receipt of a request to the release of records . a brief overview of agency foia processing is included as appendix ii . this change in reporting will be helpful in the long run , however , because it gives an overall look at an agency's foia operations as well as an in - depth look at its components' foia operations . during fiscal years 1999 through 2001 , a few agencies also changed how they process and report requests according to tracks . for example , the department of housing and urban development reported its processing times for fiscal years 1999 and 2000 on a single track . for fiscal year 2001 , it switched to multitrack processing and began reporting median times for both simple and complex requests . in fiscal year 2001 , the agencies whose annual data we reviewed reported receiving and processing a total of about 2 million foia requests , at an aggregate cost of over $270 million . the 1986 foia amendments established the current fee structure . agencies may assess three levels of fees , each with statutory limitations , according to the type of requester and the intended use of the information sought . the first level of fees includes charges for document search , review , and duplication . these charges apply when records are requested for commercial use , defined in the omb fee schedule guidelines as “a use or purpose that furthers the commercial , trade or profit interests of the requester or the person on whose behalf the request is being made.” the second level of fees exempts educational or noncommercial scientific institutions and representatives of the news media from being charged search and review fees when records are not requested for commercial use . in such instances , these requesters are charged only for document duplication . the third level of fees , which applies to all requesters who do not fall within either of the preceding two fee levels , consists of reasonable charges for document search and duplication . except for commercial - use requesters , agencies must provide the first 100 pages of duplication , as well as the first 2 hours of search time , without cost to the requester . agencies may not charge fees if the government's cost of collecting and processing the fee is likely to equal or exceed the amount of the fee itself . agencies also may not require a requester to make an advance payment ( i.e.