dhs concurred with the recommendations . in february 2017 when we followed up on the status of the recommendations , dhs officials stated that they have implemented 2 of the recommendations and initiated actions to address the other 4 recommendations . we are in the process of evaluating dhs's actions for the two implemented recommendations . in january 2016 , we also reported that federal agencies had adopted ncps to varying degrees . specifically , the 23 civilian agencies covered by the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act that were required to implement the intrusion detection capabilities had routed some traffic to ncps intrusion detection sensors . however , as of january 2016 , only 5 of the 23 agencies were receiving intrusion prevention services , due to certain policy and implementation challenges . for example , officials stated that the ability to meet dhs security requirements to use the intrusion prevention capabilities varied from agency to agency . further , agencies had not taken all the technical steps needed to implement the system , such as ensuring that all network traffic was being routed through ncps sensors . this occurred in part because dhs had not provided network routing guidance to agencies . as a result , it had limited assurance regarding the effectiveness of the system . we recommended that dhs work with federal agencies and the internet service providers to document secure routing requirements in order to better ensure the complete , safe , and effective routing of information to ncps sensors . dhs concurred with the recommendation . when we followed up with dhs on the status of the recommendations , dhs officials said that nearly all of the agencies covered by the cfo act are receiving at least one of the intrusion prevention services , as of march 2017 . further , the officials stated that dhs has collaborated with the office of management and budget ( omb ) to develop new guidance for agencies on perimeter security capabilities as well as alternative routing strategies . we will evaluate the network routing guidance when dhs finalizes and implements it . the cdm program provides federal agencies with tools and services that are intended to provide them with the capability to automate network monitoring , correlate and analyze security - related information , and enhance risk - based decision making at agency and government - wide levels . table 1 provides an overview of the einstein deployment stages to date . the overarching objectives of ncps are to provide functionality that supports intrusion detection , intrusion prevention , analytics , and information sharing . however , in january 2016 , we reported that ncps had partially , but not fully , met these objectives: intrusion detection: ncps provided dhs with a limited ability to detect potentially malicious activity entering and exiting computer networks at federal agencies . specifically , ncps compared network traffic to known patterns of malicious data , or “signatures,” but did not detect deviations from predefined baselines of normal network behavior . in addition , ncps did not monitor several types of network traffic and therefore would not have detected malicious traffic embedded in such traffic .