and these are only the reported attacks . the director of cert centers stated that he estimates that as much as 80 percent of actual security incidents goes unreported , in most cases because ( 1 ) the organization was unable to recognize that its systems had been penetrated or there were no indications of penetration or attack , or ( 2 ) the organization was reluctant to report . figure 1 shows the number of incidents reported to the cert coordination center from 1995 through 2002 . according to the national security agency , foreign governments already have or are developing computer attack capabilities , and potential adversaries are developing a body of knowledge about u.s. systems and methods to attack these systems . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , warnings of the potential for terrorist cyber attacks against our critical infrastructures have also increased . the benefits have been enormous . percentage of systems with security controls tested during fiscal year 2002 www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 03-564t . to view the full testimony , click on the link above . for more information , contact robert f. dacey at ( 202 ) 512-3317 or daceyr@gao.gov . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss the challenges that our nation faces concerning federal information security and critical infrastructure protection ( cip ) . federal agencies and other public and private entities rely extensively on computerized systems and electronic data to support their missions . cip involves activities that enhance the security of the cyber and physical public and private infrastructures that are essential to our national security , national economic security , and / or national public health and safety . accordingly , the security of these systems and data is essential to avoiding disruptions in critical operations , data tampering , fraud , and inappropriate disclosure of sensitive information . further , protecting against computer - based attacks on critical infrastructures is an important aspect of homeland security . the congress has continued to hold important hearings and has passed legislation that the president has signed into law to strengthen information security practices throughout the federal government and to better address threats to the nation's critical computer - dependent infrastructures . such legislation includes government information security reform provisions ( commonly known as “gisra” ) , which established information security program , evaluation , and reporting requirements for federal agencies ; the recently enacted federal information security management act of 2002 ( “fisma” ) , which permanently authorized and strengthened gisra ; and the homeland security act of 2002 , which , among other things , consolidated certain essential cip functions and organizations in the department of homeland security . in my testimony today , i will provide an overview of the increasing nature of cyber security threats and vulnerabilities and of the continuing pervasive weaknesses that led gao to initially begin reporting information security as a governmentwide high - risk issue in 1997 .