dts underutilization . our january 2006 and september 2006 reports noted the challenge facing the department in attaining the anticipated dts utilization . more specifically , as discussed in our september 2006 report , we found that the department did not have reasonable quantitative metrics to measure the extent to which dts was actually being used . the reported dts utilization was based on a dts voucher analysis model that was developed in calendar year 2003 using estimated data , but over the years had not been completely updated with actual data . the dts voucher analysis model was prepared in calendar year 2003 and based on airline ticket and voucher count data that were reported by the military services and defense agencies , but the data were not verified or validated . furthermore , pmo - dts officials acknowledged that the model had not been completely updated with actual data as dts continued to be implemented at the 11,000 sites . at the time , we found that the air force was the only military service that submitted monthly metrics to the pmo - dts officials for use in updating the dts voucher analysis model . rather than reporting utilization based on individual site system utilization data , dod relied on outdated information in the reporting of dts utilization to dod management and the congress . we have previously reported that best business practices indicate that a key factor of project management and oversight is the ability to effectively monitor and evaluate a project's actual performance against what was planned . in order to perform this critical task , best business practices require the adoption of quantitative metrics to help measure the effectiveness of a business system implementation and to continually measure and monitor results , such as system utilization . the lack of accurate and pertinent utilization data hindered management's ability to monitor its progress toward the dod vision of dts as the standard travel system as well as to provide consistent and accurate data to congress . dts's reported utilization rates for the period october 2005 through april 2006 averaged 53 percent for army , 30 percent for navy , and 39 percent for air force . because the pmo - dts was unable to identify the total number of travel vouchers that should have been processed through dts ( total universe of travel vouchers ) , we reported that these utilization rates may have been over - or understated . these are commonly referred to as “no touch” transactions . however , dod did not have a sufficient basis to estimate the number of transactions that would be considered “no touch” since the ( 1 ) estimated percentage of transactions that can be processed using “no touch” was not supported and ( 2 ) analysis did not properly consider the effects of components that use management fees , rather than transaction fees , to compensate the commercial travel offices for services provided . the weaknesses we identified with the estimating process raised serious questions as to whether dod would realize substantial portions of the estimated annual net savings of $31 million .