it uses a computer model to do this . the model takes war - planning guidance from the department of defense as well as army information on anticipated force structure . it combines this data with a list of the end items and associated spare parts planned to be used in war . for each end item or part , the model uses data on expected end - item use and spare parts consumption rates due to breakage , geography , and environment . also , the model uses data on rates of equipment loss due to battle damage . the most recent quarterly readiness report to the congress ( october - december 2000 ) indicates that the current status of the army's war reserve parts is of strategic concern . this strategic concern was raised for the first time in the unclassified version of this report , although prior reports' classified annexes a have addressed spare parts concerns . the report states that the army is between 85 and 95 percent filled in its prepositioned equipment , but shortages still exist in spare parts . the report points out that warfighting and functional commanders in chief of the unified commands continue to express strategic concerns over the status of some prepositioned stockpiles of spare parts . however , the report says that the department of defense has taken action to address the critical shortfalls in this area . we were told by a department official that the action referred to is the army's planned future funding for war reserve spare parts . the report concludes that forces can execute the national military strategy , but the risk caused by parts shortages and other problems to the first war is moderate and to the second remains high . the risk is defined as the likelihood of failing to accomplish theater objectives within planned timelines and means an increase in the potential for higher casualties to u.s. forces . during our review , we found army documents that provide more information on spare parts shortages . for example , in a may 2000 information paper , the chief of the army war reserve division in the office of the deputy chief of staff for logistics advised the office of management and budget that the planned funding for spare parts would result in moderate risk of not having the needed parts in the first major theater war and greater risk in the second . after we brought this condition to the army's attention , army officials in the war reserve division of the office of the deputy chief of staff for logistics and the army materiel command's readiness division told us that they plan to make all new factors available to those doing the calculations so that the fiscal year 2004 to 2009 program objective memorandum budget package will be based on more accurate data . we found that army - sponsored studies made in 1997 and 1998 showed that some requirements increased while others decreased when the new consumption factors were tested . for example , the coopers and lybrand study sampled various parts requirements and found that aviation parts requirements increased from $78 million to $160 million , while non - aviation parts requirements decreased from $531 million to $218 million .