for example , h.r . 5134 , introduced in the 108th congress , and h.r . 512 , which was introduced last week , have focused on the timeliness of the recognition process . bia's regulations outline a process for active consideration of a completed petition that should take about 2 years . in september 2002 , the assistant secretary for indian affairs estimated that three research teams could issue three proposed findings and three final determinations per year and eliminate the backlog of petitions in approximately 6 years , or by september 2008 . through additional appropriations in fiscal years 2003 and 2004 , the office of federal acknowledgment was also able to utilize two sets of contractors to assist with the tribal recognition process . the first set of contractors included two foia specialists / record managers . the second set of contractors included three research assistants who worked with a computer database system scanning and indexing documents to help expedite the professional research staff evaluation of a petition . both sets of contractors helped make the process more accessible to petitioners and interested parties , while increasing the productivity of the professional staff by freeing them of administrative duties . in addition , the september 2002 strategic plan , issued by the assistant secretary for indian affairs in response to our report , has been almost completely implemented by the office of federal acknowledgment . among other things , the office of federal acknowledgment has developed a cd - rom compilation of prior acknowledgment decisions and related documents that is a valuable tool for petitions and practitioners involved in the tribal recognition process . the main impediment to completely implementing the strategic plan and to making all of the information that has been compiled more accessible to the public is the fact that bia continues to be disconnected from the internet because of ongoing computer security concerns involving indian trust funds . even though interior's office of federal acknowledgment has increased staff resources for processing petitions and taken other actions that we recommended , as of february 4 , 2005 , there were 7 petitions in active status and 12 petitions in ready and waiting for active consideration status . eight of the 12 petitions have been waiting for 7 years or more , while the 4 other petitions have been ready and waiting for active consideration since 2003 . in conclusion , although interior's recognition process is only one way by which groups can receive federal recognition , it is the only avenue to federal recognition that has established criteria and a public process for determining whether groups meet the criteria . however , in the past , limited resources , a lack of time frames , and ineffective procedures for providing information to interested third parties resulted in substantial wait times for indian groups seeking federal recognition . while interior's office of federal acknowledgment has taken a number of actions during the past 3 years to improve the timeliness of the process , it will still take years to work through the existing backlog of tribal recognition petitions . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement .