difficulties contacting other states . the problems include the following . benefit workers in four of the five participating states that we visited said they have had difficulties contacting benefit workers in some other states to obtain information to resolve match hits or to get the evidence needed to take action against clients . submission of incomplete and incompatible data . we noted that some of the states submit data for matching that are likely to increase the number of invalid match hits and the amount of work other states will have to do to determine if match hits are valid . for example , we found that some states include closed cases among the active cases submitted for matching , cases with improper ssns , or cases that omit the dates clients started receiving benefits . uncertainties concerning responsibilities for collecting overpayments from individuals . paris officials from three states said it is not clear which state should assess and collect an overpayment when it is found that a client has been receiving tanf or food stamp benefits from two or more states . problems making contacts occur because the telephone numbers that states provide for obtaining information on individual cases are sometimes inaccurate or never answered or are central numbers that are just the starting point for finding the right person . for example , it is not clear if the state where the client does not reside should assess an overpayment because , as a nonresident , the client was not eligible to receive benefits from the state or if the state where the client does reside should assess the overpayment because it is much more likely to be able to collect the overpayment . also , it is not clear how to determine which state should assess an overpayment when the client claims two residences very near each other but in different states , and it is not known where the client actually lives . further , the project has no guidance or protocols for coordinating the assessment and collection of overpayments . however , acf , cms , and fns have not provided the management or administrative support — such as a formal focal point at the federal level — that would be needed to coordinate the project more effectively and help develop such guidance and protocols . in some states , management has given little or no attention to the paris interstate matches and has allowed match hits to go unresolved . this problem is more pronounced with medicaid match hits because , in some states , they are given a lower priority than match hits involving tanf or food stamps . we found evidence that in at least three states that have participated in the paris project since august 1999 , match hits for the entire state or for some densely populated areas were not being resolved . the paris coordinator in one state told us that match hits in his state have never been sent out to workers to be resolved . in a second state , a large metropolitan area had not received any match hits from its district office until shortly before our visit in february 2001 .