there are few easy solutions . like many other federal agencies , the service has limited funds with which to address these challenges . fortunately , many other organizations contribute resources to help species . the service maintains that its ability to be flexible in allocating its scarce recovery resources is the key to maximizing those contributions from other organizations . we agree that exercising flexibility in allocating recovery funds under its priority guidelines is important , but this needs to occur within the bounds of a systematic and transparent process . the service , however , does not have such a process . while the service acknowledges that it strays from its priority guidelines , it does not routinely analyze its allocation decisions to determine whether it is focusing on the highest priority species and , if not , why . such an analysis is important to ensure that the service continues to spend its recovery funds on the highest priority species over the long term . without this information , the service cannot show congress or the public the extent that it is focusing its resources on the highest priority species , or explain , in cases where it is not , that its resource decisions are still appropriate . to this end , we believe the service's priority guidelines provide it with the means to create a systematic and transparent allocation process while still allowing it needed flexibility . because the service already collects data , on a species by species basis , on how it spends its recovery funds , it would be a simple task to measure the extent to which it is spending its recovery funds on high - priority species . it could then make this information publicly available , thus providing the congress and the public a yardstick with which to judge the efficacy of the service's resource allocation decisions . to help ensure that the service allocates recovery resources consistent with the priority guidelines over the long term and in a transparent fashion , we recommend that the secretary of the interior require the service to take the following two actions: ( 1 ) periodically assess the extent to which it is following its recovery priority guidelines and identify how factors other than those in the guidelines are affecting its funding allocation decisions , and ( 2 ) report this information publicly , for example , in its biennial recovery report to congress . we received written comments on a draft of this report from the department of the interior . in general , the department agreed with our findings and recommendations but believes that we underestimated the extent to which the service's funding decisions are consistent with its recovery priority guidelines . because we found that the service spent its recovery funds in a manner generally consistent with species priority , we do not believe this is a significant issue . see appendix ii for the department's letter and our response to it . additionally , the department provided technical comments that we have incorporated into the report , as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .