the departments of justice and state had no comments . the department of transportation provided technical clarifications , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . the department of homeland security provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix ii . dhs concurred with our recommendation and agreed with our conclusions . however , while stating its commitment to working with the department of state and other stakeholders to better prevent these abductions , dhs also discussed challenges , including "potential constitutional , operational , privacy , and resource issues," to viably implementing a high - risk abductor list for u.s. citizens . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the secretaries of homeland security , justice , state , and transportation . the report is also available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in response to your request , this report provides ( 1 ) information on policies and measures airlines , federal agencies , and other entities have to prevent international parental child abductions involving airline flights and ( 2 ) options federal agencies , nongovernmental organizations , airlines , and others could consider to prevent international parental child abductions involving airline flights , as well as the advantages and limitations of those options . in determining policies and efforts federal agencies , airlines , and others have to prevent international parental child abductions , we examined relevant laws and regulations and met with and obtained and analyzed information provided by the federal agencies ( departments of homeland security , justice , state , and transportation ) and seven child advocacy associations . see our discussion later for more detail regarding the eight airline companies we surveyed . our focus was primarily on international parental child abductions that occur when a parent , family member , or person acting on behalf of the parent or family takes a child from the country violating the rights of the custodial parent or guardian left behind . in determining options federal agencies and others could consider to prevent international parental child abductions on airline flights including advantages and limitations of these options , we obtained a list of hypothetical options for preventing international parental child abductions on airline flights from federal agencies , child advocacy associations , and airline associations mentioned above . from the list of all hypothetical options , we identified two that directly addressed international parental child abductions on airline flights . we then designed and administered a web - based survey of domestic and foreign airlines and interviewed nongovernmental organizations representing child advocacy associations on their views regarding the effectiveness , key issues , advantages , and limitations of the two measures that directly address preventing international parental child abductions on airline flights .