we disagree . we recognized in the report that an unearned bonus occurs when a servicemember does not fulfill the service contract , causing all or a portion of the bonus to be unearned . we also pointed out that doing so has resulted in the largest amount of army military pay - related out - of - service debt . further , dod stated that our audit approach focused solely on the design of the controls without analysis of whether undetected errors exist and whether the recommended additional activities would efficiently detect any missed errors . dod is correct that the focus of this engagement was on the design of controls , as discussed in detail in the scope and methodology section of this report . however , because we identified flaws in the design of controls , we determined there would be little benefit in testing the implementation of a flawed control . further , as discussed in our report , because the flawed design of the ucfr process does not provide positive assurance that payroll errors will be detected and corrected , we reviewed the results of other processes , including dfas's debt and claims management information related to military payroll debt and army cid's investigations of potential fraud , to determine if those processes identified any errors or irregularities that went undetected for lengthy periods of time . with regard to our three recommendations to strengthen ucfr controls , dod partially agreed , stating that it concurred fully with the goal of improving the accuracy of military pay to the extent that cost - effective corrective actions are warranted . however , we continue to believe that the design of the ucfr process is not fully effective in providing positive assurance of military payroll accuracy . consequently , as discussed in our report , ucfr reviews do not provide an effective compensating control . accordingly , we believe that our recommendations in this area are appropriate and are intended to help strengthen the design of existing processes and controls to help improve dod's ability to rely on ucfr reviews as a compensating control . our first recommendation is directed at establishing a requirement for periodic monitoring of the effectiveness of ucfr reviews . because the current ucfr control as designed requires reporting only if deficiencies are found , it is not possible to monitor and test the extent to which required reviews were effective in identifying military payroll errors . our second recommendation to enhance the control design is directed at revising ar 37-104-04 , military pay and allowances policy , to require unit commanders to document completion of all monthly ucfr reviews , and our third recommended enhancement calls for the army to clarify the required time frame for submitting ucfrs . dod's response to all three recommendations was that by february 28 , 2013 , the army , working with dfas , will complete statistically valid tests to determine to what extent payroll errors occur and whether any identified errors can be efficiently detected and prevented before payment by implementing additional control activities . however , as discussed in our report , army and dfas systems and processes do not currently capture data on all errors and their causes .