dod has not implemented either recommendation . our previous work has found that hardrock mine sites present liabilities to the federal government when they are abandoned or have inadequate financial assurance . as we reported in july 2011 , the general mining act of 1872 encouraged the development of the west by allowing individuals to stake claims and obtain exclusive rights to the gold , silver , copper , and other valuable hardrock mineral deposits on land belonging to the united states . since then , thousands of operators have extracted billions of dollars worth of hardrock minerals from federal land managed by the department of the interior's bureau of land management ( blm ) and the department of agriculture's forest service — the two principal agencies responsible for federal lands open for hardrock mining . blm issued regulations in 1981 requiring all operators of these mines to reclaim the land when their operations cease , but some did not and abandoned these mines . as a result , thousands of acres of federal land previously used for mining and related operations now pose serious environmental and physical safety hazards . these hazards include toxic or acidic water that contaminates soil and groundwater and physical safety hazards such as concealed shafts , unstable mine structures , or explosives . our previous work had shown that there were no definitive estimates of the number of abandoned hardrock mines on federal and other lands . thus , in 2008 , we developed a standard definition for abandoned hardrock mining sites and used this definition to identify at least 161,000 abandoned hardrock mine sites in the 12 western states and alaska , where most hardrock mining occurs . at least 33,000 of these sites had environmental degradation such as contaminated water and arsenic - contaminated tailings piles . cleanup costs for these abandoned mines vary by type and size of the operation . for example , the cost of plugging holes is usually small , but reclamation costs for large mining operations can reach tens of millions of dollars . as we reported in march 2008 , from 1997 to 2008 , four federal agencies — blm , the forest service , epa , and the department of the interior's office of surface mining reclamation and enforcement — funded the cleanup and reclamation of some of these abandoned hardrock mine sites , spending at least $2.6 billion to reclaim abandoned hardrock mines on federal , state , private , and american indian lands . of this amount , epa spent $2.2 billion . epa's funding under the superfund program , among other things , focuses on the cleanup and long - term health effects of air , ground , or water pollution caused by abandoned hardrock mine sites — primarily those on nonfederal land . as we reported in july 2009 , from fiscal years 1983 through 2007 , epa added 33 nonfederal mining sites to the npl . one - third of these sites , the highest proportion of any other nonfederal site type , were megasites where actual or expected cleanup costs were expected to reach $50 million or more .