, for economic gain . washington , d.c.: february 2011 .  cder's secure supply chain pilot program . this program , which is in the process of being implemented , is intended to help the agency ensure the safety of imported drugs by enabling it to focus its resources on preventing the importation of drugs that do not comply with applicable fda requirements . the program is intended to allow a limited number of drug companies to import their products on an expedited basis if , among other things , they can meet fda criteria showing that they maintain control over their products from manufacture through entry into the united states . fda expects to announce the date on which it will begin accepting applications for the pilot by the end of 2011 . in addition to these broader efforts , some fda entities have undertaken efforts specific to economic adulteration . for example , in the aftermath of the melamine and heparin incidents , cder , ora , cfsan , and cber have taken the following steps to specifically address economic adulteration:  cder has developed a model to rank the 1,387 active pharmaceutical ingredients ( api ) known to be in current use according to their susceptibility to economic adulteration . according to cder officials , the ranking model incorporates various risk factors , such as estimates for volume of use , cost per unit of the api , and reliance on testing methods to check quality that are known to be less accurate than more modern methods developed for other apis . cder officials told us the center sampled and tested 20 of the 77 higher - ranked apis in 2010 and found no evidence of any significant contamination suggesting intentional adulteration . according to agency officials , after this pilot program is completed , fda will determine if the program was valuable and , if so , whether the model's risk factors may need to be adjusted .  cder is leading efforts to work with united states pharmacopeia ( usp ) to focus on the vulnerability of drugs to economic adulteration . usp is a nonprofit organization that sets standards for medicines , food ingredients , and dietary supplements . usp's drug standards are enforceable under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act . actions cder officials say they have taken include selecting 20 usp standards for updating that include certain over - the - counter drugs , inactive ingredients used in high volume , and apis that use outdated technology or for which there are no procedures to identify impurities . the goal of this modernization effort is to replace outdated usp standards with more modern , accurate , and specific ones . cder has also worked closely with usp in revising the heparin testing standard and the standards for glycerin and five other similar drug product ingredients to prevent economic adulteration with diethylene glycol , a cheaper , but deadly ingredient often substituted for glycerin .  ora , along with the department of homeland security and the department of agriculture's food safety and inspection service , contracted in 2010 with the university of minnesota's national center for food protection and defense to model risk factors for improved detection of economic adulteration .