we disagree . without the use of data based on a probability sample , it is impossible to know how to interpret the hsp data . in addition , dea seems to imply that we want the signature of untested exhibits to be imputed based on the results of actual analyses of tested exhibits . this is incorrect . we recommended the use of a probability sample and standard weighting procedures that would allow the estimation of the geographic source of all seized heroin . dea also said that it should implement a stratified sample similar to the one we proposed to ensure that a significant portion of the total weight of heroin seized by dea is sampled . however , dea did not want to use the stratified sample to produce estimates with the resulting data . we believe that by implementing a stratified probability sample , dea could produce estimates of the seized heroin , which would improve the overall data . furthermore , dea suggested expanding the number of dea and customs exhibits submitted for analysis . however , this method would increase reliability only if a probability sample were used . expanding the number of exhibits submitted without using a probability sample limits the interpretation of the data to the tested exhibits alone . finally , dea said that the estimation model proposed in our report was simplistic . we provided this straightforward model only as an example and strongly endorse any attempt dea might make to enhance the suggested model . dea concurred with the remainder of our recommendations , that it take action to ensure that dmp purchases are made according to dmp guidelines ; study the utilization of alternative data sources for an estimate of the total number of retail heroin purchases in an area ; and that the attorney general and the secretary of the treasury direct dea and customs to enter into discussions to determine whether additional seized heroin should be forwarded to dea by customs . dea concurred with our recommendation that it study the utilization of alternative data sources for the dmp . dea also commented that data sources do not exist that measure either the number of retail heroin purchases or the prevalence of heroin abuse in a metropolitan area . while we recognize that these data sources may not exist , we suggested that the dawn data could provide a useful surrogate measure ; without such a measure , the dmp data could be misleading . dea concurred with our recommendation that dea and customs discuss whether additional seized heroin should be forwarded to dea . however , dea incorrectly characterized our recommendation by saying we recommended they work to ensure that more seizures are sampled . we did not make this recommendation . we recommended only that dea and customs discuss whether additional heroin should be forwarded . dea officials also provided additional technical comments , which we have incorporated where appropriate . customs and ondcp said that they had no comments on the draft report . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date .