iv. ) we also generated cost ranges for each alternative of storing the waste for 100 years without including the cost of subsequent disposal in a geologic repository for storing 153,000 metric tons of waste on site for 500 years . for each model , which rely upon data and assumptions provided by nuclear waste management experts , the cost range was based on the annual volume of commercial spent nuclear fuel that became ready to be packaged and stored in each year . in general , each model started in 2009 by annually tracking costs of initial packaging and related costs for the first 100 years and for every 100 years thereafter if the waste was to remain on site and be repackaged . does your expertise allow you to comment on planning assumptions and costs of waste management related to storage , disposal , or transport ? if you were to classify yourself in relation to the yucca mountain repository , would you classify yourself as a proponent , an opponent , an independent , an undecided or uncommitted , or some combination of these ? we then narrowed our list down to those individuals who identified themselves or whom others identified as having current , nationally recognized expertise in areas of nuclear waste management that were relevant to our analysis . for balance , we ensured that we included experts who reflected ( 1 ) key technical areas of waste management ; ( 2 ) a range of industry , government , academia , and concerned groups ; and ( 3 ) a variety of viewpoints on the yucca mountain repository . ( see app . iii for 147 experts we contacted. ) once we developed our list of experts , we classified them into three groups: those whose expertise would allow them to provide us with specific information and advice on the processes that should be included in each alternative and the best estimates of expected cost ranges for the components of each alternative , such as a typical or reasonable price for a dry cask storage . those who could weigh in on these estimates , as well as give us insight and comments on assumptions that we planned to use to define our alternatives . those whose expertise was not in areas of component costs , but who could nonetheless give us valuable information on other assumptions , such as transportation logistics . to define our alternatives and develop the assumptions and cost components we needed for our analysis , we started with the experts from the first group who had the most direct and reliable knowledge of the processes and costs associated with the alternatives we identified . this group consisted of seven experts and included federal government officials and representatives from industry . we worked closely with these experts to identify the key assumptions that would establish the scope of our alternatives , the more specific assumptions to identify the processes associated with each alternative , the components of these processes that we could quantify in terms of cost , and the level of uncertainty associated with each component cost .