sffas no . 24 , effective in fiscal year 2002 , requires the statement of changes in cash balance from unified budget and other activities as part of the cfs . for fiscal year 2002 , the statement of changes in cash balance from unified budget and other activities reported a unified budget deficit of $157.7 billion , derived as the difference between reported actual unified budget receipts of $1,853.3 billion and actual unified budget outlays of $2,011 billion . both line items were material to this statement and were compiled from federal agencies' monthly reports to treasury in the star system . treasury was unable to explain material differences , totaling $231 billion ( absolute ) and $166 billion ( net ) , between the actual unified budget net outlays reported on this statement and the outlays reported on selected individual federal agencies' audited combined statement of budgetary resources . for example , we found one federal agency that reported net outlays for fiscal year 2002 as $479 billion on its audited combined statement of budgetary resources , while treasury's records showed $375 billion for fiscal year 2002 for this agency . this agency had received an unqualified auditor opinion on its financial statements . omb bulletin 01-09 , form and content of agency financial statements , states that outlays in federal agencies' combined statement of budgetary resources should agree with the net outlays reported in the budget of the u.s. government . in addition , sffas no . 7 , accounting for revenue and other financing sources and concepts for reconciling budgetary and financial accounting , requires explanation of any material differences between the information required to be disclosed ( including outlays ) and the amounts described as “actual” in the budget of the u.s. government . treasury believes its records for net outlays are reliable and accurate ; however , many federal agencies are reporting different net outlays and receiving clean opinions on their financial statements . treasury was unable to adequately explain the over $24 billion net difference between actual unified budget receipts of $1,853.3 billion and total operating revenue of $1,877.7 billion reported in the statements of operations and changes in net position . while these amounts are not expected to equal ( for example , operating revenues include accrued amounts , and budget receipts are reported on the cash basis ) , there is a relationship between operating revenues reported on the statement of operations and changes in net position and unified budget receipts reported on the statement of changes in cash balance from unified budget and other activities . therefore , the expectation is that differences between these amounts should be explainable . treasury was also not able to provide support for how the line items in the “other activities” section of this statement , totaling $13.5 billion , related to either the underlying balance sheet or related notes accompanying the cfs . we recommend that the secretary of the treasury direct the fiscal assistant secretary , working in coordination with the controller of omb's office of federal financial management , to develop and implement a process to ensure that the statement of changes in cash balance from unified budget and other activities properly reflects the activities reported in federal agencies' audited financial statements .