( see app . both doe and state provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . to review the progress of doe's fuel acceptance program , we analyzed program documentation including doe's february 1996 final environmental impact statement on a proposed nuclear weapons nonproliferation policy concerning foreign research reactor spent nuclear fuel , the may 1996 record of decision establishing the program , and the doe ig's february 2004 audit report on the program . in addition , we analyzed documents outlining the structure of fees doe imposes on research reactors in high - income countries for returning heu and leu fuel to the united states and how the fees were derived . we analyzed data from doe on the amount of heu and leu fuel returned to the united states , the plans of countries that still have u.s. - origin heu for participating in the program , and the amount of fees paid by research reactors in high - income countries . we also interviewed key officials at doe ; the state department ; the doe facilities in south carolina and idaho where heu and leu fuel from foreign research reactors is being placed in interim storage ; and doe's argonne national laboratory , which has expertise on the amount and type of u.s. - origin heu and leu at foreign research reactors . we visited five countries that have u.s. - origin heu — belgium , germany , the netherlands , portugal , and romania . we selected a nonprobability sample of countries based on a number of criteria . in particular , we selected three countries that have returned heu to the united states under the fuel acceptance program ( germany , the netherlands , and romania ) and two countries that have not returned heu to the united states ( belgium and portugal ) . in addition , we selected three high - income countries ( belgium , germany , and the netherlands ) , one non - high - income country ( romania ) , and one country that transitioned into a high - income country ( portugal ) . during our site visits , we met with research reactor operators and government officials responsible for regulating the research reactors and the disposal of spent research reactor fuel . we asked a standard set of questions concerning reasons for participating or not participating in doe's fuel acceptance program , plans for participating in the future , options for disposing of spent fuel other than returning it to the united states , and the potential extension of the fuel acceptance program beyond 2009 . in addition to visiting five countries with u.s. - origin heu , we interviewed representatives of the australian , jamaican , and swedish research reactor operators and the group of research reactors that petitioned doe to extend the fuel acceptance program beyond 2009 . we assessed the reliability of data obtained from doe on the amount of heu and leu fuel returned to the united states and the amount of fees paid by research reactors in high - income countries .