iii ) . moreover , we reviewed strategic plans of the foundation and its fund - raising goals . to determine the extent that contributions assisted the park service in addressing park priorities , we reviewed the foundation's available discretionary funds and grants to park service units and interviewed foundation officials about how these funds and grants are used to satisfy park requests . we also reviewed the foundation's processes over contributions . we analyzed the foundation's financial statements for fiscal years 1999 through 2003 , which received an unqualified opinion by independent auditing firms . we did not attempt to track each park's receipt and use of contributions due to the time that would be required . appendix i provides further details about the scope and methodology of our review . we agree that the foundation's charter and the positions held by the secretary of the interior and the director of the park service on the foundation's board are important elements of coordination between the foundation and the park service . this arrangement is an important part of the foundation's governance structure . because neither the secretary of the interior , nor the director of the park service , nor the appointed board members are responsible for , or involved with , daily operational relationships , additional safeguards are needed at the operational levels to help ensure effective communication and working relationships . we conducted our work from august 2003 through may 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the national park system is comprised of 387 parks , including a diverse array of national parks , military parks , national monuments , national historic sites , recreation areas , and other designations . the park service manages the park system and is charged with preserving and protecting these public lands for future generations . in commenting on the draft report , the park service also stated that such an agreement would enhance the communication between it and the foundation . the park service comments are contained in appendix vi , and the foundation comments are provided in appendix vii . other expenses were for general and administrative costs and fund - raising costs . these costs included rent payments , purchases of equipment and supplies , and salaries for administrative personnel . figure 2 shows the foundation's total revenues and expenses for fiscal years 1999 through 2003 , by category . the foundation has considerable discretion in raising and distributing private contributions to the park service . the foundation's chartering legislation does not prescribe a specific process to be used by the foundation in raising donations for the park service . the foundation has determined that systemwide projects that are unlikely to receive federal funding have the greatest potential for fund - raising success . the 1967 legislative charter provides the foundation with broad discretion in determining its fund - raising approach .