cyber threats can be unintentional or intentional . unintentional or nonadversarial threat sources include failures in equipment or software due to aging , resource depletion , or other circumstances that exceed expected operating parameters , as well as errors made by end users . they also include natural disasters and failures of critical infrastructure on which the organization depends , but that are outside of the control of the organization . intentional or adversarial threats include individuals , groups , entities , or nations that seek to leverage the organization's dependence on cyber resources ( i.e. , information in electronic form , information and communications technologies , and the communications and information - handling capabilities provided by those technologies ) . threats can come from a wide array of sources , including corrupt employees , criminal groups , and terrorists . these threat adversaries vary in terms of their capabilities , their willingness to act , and their motives , which can include seeking monetary gain , or seeking an economic , political , or military advantage . cyber threat adversaries make use of various techniques , tactics , and practices , or exploits , to adversely affect an organization's computers , software , or networks , or to intercept or steal valuable or sensitive information . these exploits are carried out through various conduits , including websites , e - mails , wireless and cellular communications , internet protocols , portable media , and social media . further , adversaries can leverage computer software programs as a means by which to deliver a threat by embedding exploits within software files that can be activated when a user opens a file within its corresponding program . reports of successfully executed cyber exploits illustrate the debilitating effects they can have on the nation's security and economy , and on public health and safety . federal and nonfederal entities have experienced security breaches in their networks , potentially allowing sensitive information to be compromised , and systems , operations , and services to be disrupted . the examples that follow illustrate that a broad array of personal information and critical infrastructures are at risk: in october 2016 , the international atomic energy agency reported that a cyber attack had caused a disruption to the operations of a power plant . the agency did not disclose details about the information gathered or what specific operations were disrupted . in september 2016 , yahoo incorporated , a multinational company , confirmed that 500 million user accounts were compromised . yahoo company officials reported that the account information may have included names , e - mail addresses , telephone numbers , and dates of birth . in august 2015 , the internal revenue service reported that approximately 390,000 tax accounts were potentially affected by unauthorized third parties gaining access to taxpayer information from the agency's “get transcript” application . according to testimony from the commissioner of internal revenue in june 2015 , criminals had used taxpayer - specific data acquired from nonagency sources to gain unauthorized access to information , although at that time , the commissioner reported that approximately 100,000 tax accounts had been affected . the data included social security information , dates of birth , and street addresses .