gsa leases . gsa leases differ substantially from typical commercial leases . for example , in a gsa lease , gsa — as the lessee — proposes the lease requirements . in a typical commercial office space lease , however , the lessor drafts the lease requirements and proposes them to the prospective tenant . for additional examples of the differences between gsa and typical commercial leases , see table 1 . gsa's lease reform efforts . in 2011 , gsa issued a lease - reform implementation plan in response to comments from lessors and tenant agencies . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or rectanusl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report examines ( 1 ) lease requirements selected stakeholders identified as affecting cost and competition and steps gsa has taken to address their concerns , and ( 2 ) how gsa has identified stakeholder concerns and evaluated its simplified lease model . to obtain information for both objectives , we reviewed laws , regulations , and executive orders covering gsa leases and gsa's leasing process . we also obtained data from gsa on each of the 1,618 leases it entered into between the beginning of fiscal year 2016 and the end of fiscal year 2018 , the most recent data available . this data included fields for the current annual rent , the size of the lease in rentable square feet , the lease model gsa used , the facility security level , the occupying agency , and the lease's effective and expiration dates , among others . we assessed the reliability of this data by reviewing documentation ; interviewing gsa officials ; electronically testing the data by , for example , examining missing values and outliers ; and verifying the accuracy of potentially erroneous data with gsa officials . we concluded that the data were reliable for the purposes of selecting a sample of gsa lessors and reporting on gsa's portfolio of leases and the general characteristics of the groups of leases that used different lease models . in addition , to address both objectives , we collected information from and interviewed a non - generalizable sample of 20 gsa lessors to obtain their perspectives on gsa leases and gsa's leasing process . in 2015 we reported that a significant number of gsa leases experience a holdover or short - term extension and that these can cause uncertainty for tenant agencies and lessors , increase gsa's workload , and delay the completion of building maintenance and other tenant improvements . lessor perspective on gsa leases “holdovers and short - term extensions diminish lessors' opinions of gsa.” reducing holdovers and short - term extensions is one of the key tenets of gsa's 2018 – 2023 lease cost avoidance plan .