ii ) . in commenting on the draft , va stated that it substantially agreed with our findings and conclusions and concurred with our recommendations . va also described steps it has taken and plans to take to respond to our recommendations , including steps it took in developing information for the president's fiscal year 2007 budget request and in monitoring the execution of its fiscal year 2006 resources . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of veterans affairs and the director of the office of management and budget , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 or at ekstrandl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . for fiscal years 2005 and 2006 , we examined: ( 1 ) how the president's budget requests for the department of veterans affairs ( va ) medical programs were formulated , ( 2 ) how va monitored and reported to congress on its budget execution , and ( 3 ) which key factors in the budget formulation process contributed to the requests for additional funding . our review of how va monitored its fiscal year 2006 budget includes the first 11 months of the fiscal year because the fiscal year was not over when we completed our work . for each of our reporting objectives , we interviewed senior officials in va and the office of management and budget ( omb ) to determine how the president's budget request for va medical programs for fiscal years 2005 and 2006 was formulated , and how va monitored and reported on its budget execution . we interviewed va officials in washington , d.c. from three primary offices responsible for budget issues related to va's medical programs: ( 1 ) va's office of the deputy assistant secretary for budget , ( 2 ) veterans health administration's ( vha ) office of the chief financial officer , and ( 3 ) vha's office of the assistant deputy under secretary for health for policy and planning . we also interviewed senior officials from omb responsible for va budget issues to obtain their perspective on the president's budget request for va's medical programs and the subsequent requests for additional funding for fiscal years 2005 and 2006 . for the purposes of our analysis , the president's budget request for va medical programs primarily concerned four appropriation accounts: ( 1 ) medical services , for direct patient care ; ( 2 ) medical administration , for administrative oversight and all information technology ; ( 3 ) medical facilities , for the maintenance and operation of hospitals and other structures ; and ( 4 ) medical research .