records . recorded 12 people — including the respondent , 10 other matched people , and the respondent's daughter who was not matched to census records . the field follow - up interview attempted to resolve the unmatched census and a.c.e . people . answers to questions on the field follow - up questionnaire verified that the daughter lived at the housing address on census day . however , the interviewer's notes indicated that the daughter and the respondent were living in a shelter on census day . the daughter was coded as not living at the household address on census day , while the respondent remained coded as matched and living at the household address on census day . according to bureau staff , the respondent should also have been coded as a person that did not live at the household address on census day , based on the notes on the field follow - up questionnaire . , census , or both counted people at the wrong address . the census counted two people — the respondent and her husband — twice ; once in an apartment and once in a business office that the husband worked in , both in the same apartment building . did not record anyone at either location , as the residential apartment was not in the a.c.e . interview sample . the respondent , during field follow - up , reported that they lived at their apartment on census day and not at the business office . the couple had responded to the census on a questionnaire delivered to the business office . a census enumerator , following up on the “nonresponse” from the couple's apartment , had obtained census information from a neighbor about the couple . the couple , as recorded by the census at the business office address , was coded as correctly counted in the census . regional offices exceeded the 5 percent requirement by selecting more than 7 percent of their workload for quality assurance review , and the national rate of quality assurance review was about 10 percent . the couple , as recorded by the census at the apartment address , was coded as living outside the sample block . according to bureau staff , the couple recorded at the business office address were correctly coded , but the couple recorded at the apartment should have been coded as duplicates . an uncooperative household respondent provided partial or no information . the census counted a family of four — the respondent , his wife , and two daughters . recorded a family of three — the same husband and wife , but a different daughter's name , “buffy.” the field follow - up interview covered the unmatched daughters — two from census and one from a.c.e . the respondent confirmed that the four people counted by the census were his family and that “buffy” was a nickname for one of his two daughters , but he would not identify which one . the interviewer wrote in the notes that the respondent “was upset with the number of visits” to his house .