2 and fig . 4 ) and inadequate roofing installations , which were similar to other deficiencies we identified . further , based on dod documentation , the nature of contract work in afghanistan has become more technical and complex , increasing the number of cors needed , the amount of time needed to award contracts , and the number of errors during the early stages of the contracting process ( eg , the requirements determination process ) . due to the complexity of construction projects in afghanistan , dod established an initiative in april 2011 to assign construction inspectors to assist cors in managing and overseeing construction projects . according to a dod memorandum , contracting officers should appoint construction inspectors , in addition to cors , when the nature of the project requires technical assistance to ensure proper performance of work and when such assistance is available . because this program was not in effect during the time of our visit in february 2011 , we are unable to assess the effectiveness of the use of construction inspectors . however , based on our observations in afghanistan , there is a shortage of subject area - related technical experts that can serve as construction inspectors in afghanistan . cors and other personnel that we interviewed in afghanistan acknowledged the benefit of having subject matter experts in construction as well as other specialty areas such as food - , fuel - , and electricity - related services . dod does not have a sufficient number of cors to oversee the numerous contracts in afghanistan and , according to some government officials , there are not enough cors in theatre to conduct adequate oversight . the centcom joint theater support contracting command requires the nomination of cors for all service contracts worth over $2,500 with significant technical requirements that require on - going advice and surveillance from technical or requirements personnel , unless exempted by the contracting officer . although there is no specific guidance on the number of contracts a single cor should manage , the centcom joint theater support contracting command requires that cors nominations signed by the unit commander contain a statement verifying that the cors will have sufficient time to perform assigned tasks . similarly , the defense contingency contracting officer's representative handbook states that the requiring unit must allow adequate resources ( time , products , equipment , and opportunity ) for the cors to perform their functions . in 2004 , 2006 , and again in 2010 , we reported that the dod did not have a sufficient number of trained oversight personnel , and during the course of our review we noted that this situation persisted . further , we found that cors do not always have the time needed to complete their oversight responsibilities . while available data do not enable us to determine the precise number of contracts that require cors , in fiscal year 2011 , dod completed over 35,000 contracting actions on over 24,600 contracts and orders that were executed primarily in afghanistan.cors we interviewed in afghanistan , some cors are responsible for providing oversight to multiple contracts in addition to performing their primary military duty .