all but 2 of these cases were filed in delaware . additionally , 8 relied on the affiliate filing rule , and 3 used principal place of assets as the basis for venue selection . in 12 cases filed outside of the headquarters location , data provided by the companies indicated that both place of incorporation and the affiliate filing rule were the bases for venue selection . we interviewed a total of 25 judges . of these , 11 judges presided over one or more cases subject to the guidelines , while 14 judges had not yet been involved with a guidelines case . with the exception of one judge who had been appointed to the bench in 2013 , all judges interviewed had presided over at least one case between october 2009 and october 2013 that met the guidelines thresholds of assets and liabilities each of $50 million or more . bankruptcy attorneys: to select attorneys to interview , we reviewed the guidelines case data provided by the ustp for all cases subject to the 2013 guidelines in fiscal year 2014 . we identified selected guidelines cases filed in bankruptcy courts in 12 of the 18 cities listed in table 2 and reviewed the related bankruptcy filing petitions to identify law firms that represented the debtor in these cases . we selected cases to provide variation in geographic location and in case size . to ensure that we included attorneys from firms with substantial experience with large chapter 11 cases , we cross - checked the list of firms with those identified as the top bankruptcy firms in the united states by two bankruptcy research websites , the university of california los angeles' ( ucla - lopucki ) bankruptcy research database and new generations ( bankrutpcydata.com ) . firms were not excluded if they did not appear on these lists , but we added several major firms that did not appear on our original list . see table 3 for a list of the 14 firms from which we interviewed attorneys . each of the firms represented companies in at least one 2013 guidelines case . in 4 of the 14 interviews we conducted , more than one attorney participated in the interview . however , because the opinions offered by attorneys in each of these individual interviews did not conflict or contradict one another , we counted each interview as one and refer to this group of stakeholders as 14 attorneys throughout this report . we asked all three groups about their general opinions of the 2013 guidelines and their opinions regarding the effects or potential effects , if any , of the 2013 guidelines on efficiency , transparency , or the professional fees awarded in chapter 11 cases . we focused on these three aspects because two of the goals of the 2013 guidelines are to increase the transparency and efficiency of the fee review process , and , as discussed earlier in this report , eoust officials reported that concerns about professional fees in large cases such as lehman brothers provided the impetus for developing the new guidelines .