the study did not address displacement . the department of labor study is ongoing , so its results are not yet available . the study is using in - depth interviews with 16 employers who hire a large number of employees under the wotc program to examine the hiring , retention , and career advancement experiences of wotc employers and employees . to obtain information on the characteristics of employers , we analyzed national tax data from the irs' statistics of income division for 1997 , the most recent year that data were available , and state wotc data from agencies in california and texas for 1997 through 1999 . to obtain information relating to the extent of displacement and churning , we surveyed a stratified probability sample of employers who have participated in the wotc program in california and texas . the participating employers that we surveyed are those with repeated and recent experience in the program in that they hired at least one wotc employee in 1999 and hired at least one wotc employee in another year . our sample is projectible to the entire population of 1,838 employers in california and texas who met these hiring criteria . for information relating to churning , we also analyzed wotc and unemployment insurance data for these states . with these data , we determined the total earnings and length of employment of wotc - certified employees and examined this information for evidence concerning the extent and likelihood of churning . for additional information relating to displacement , we analyzed national employment data in the commerce department's current population survey ( cps ) for 1995 through 1999 . we used the cps data to estimate employment rates for members of groups targeted by the credit and members of groups not targeted by the credit but who may substitute in employment for target group members . the absence of a centralized database containing the necessary detailed information precluded a nationwide survey of employers and analysis of employment practices . we chose california and texas because they are among the states that certified the largest number of employees to participate in the wotc program in fiscal year 1999 , have electronic databases of their wotc program data , and provided a somewhat geographically diverse population . together , california and texas certified about 12 percent of wotc - eligible individuals in fiscal year 1999 , ranking them second and fifth , respectively , in wotc certifications for that fiscal year . when reporting our estimates derived from the sample and our analysis of program and unemployment insurance data , we combined data from both states because the results in the two states were similar . furthermore , the confidence intervals for all point estimates in the letter of this report are no more than 10 percentage points on either side of the estimate . our survey and state agency data pertain only to participating employers in california and texas . however , to assure ourselves that our findings are likely to apply to wotc employers in the rest of the nation , we examined the federal laws and regulations related to the credit , surveyed state administrators responsible for the credit , and analyzed the data on participating employers .