eligibility . each of the three selected scholarship programs established eligibility criteria , such as income requirements , residency requirements , and grade point average ( gpa ) requirements among others , that reflect program objectives . for example , to ensure that the boston program serves the intended low - income population , the program requires students to be eligible for pell grants to receive funding . funding . while the selected scholarship programs have dedicated funding streams , their funding sources reflect the origins of each program . for example , boston's program was initiated by the city's mayor and is funded through a public charitable trust from fees for large - scale commercial building projects while the kalamazoo promise was initiated by a group of anonymous donors who have funded the program in perpetuity , according to program officials . alternately , the washington program was initiated through cooperation between the state government and private sector companies and is funded by private donations that are matched by state funds up to an annual maximum of $50 million . enrollment in dctag . dctag program data indicate that the number of dctag recipients remained relatively stable over the last decade . dctag provided awards to an average of about 4,750 recipients annually over academic years 2007−2016 ( see fig . while enrollment in dctag peaked in academic year 2012 , the number of dctag recipients in academic year 2016 , the last year in our period of review , was similar to the number of recipients in academic year 2007 , the first year in our period of review . enrollment in dctag by type of high school attended . dctag program data indicate the majority of recipients over academic years 2007 – 2016 graduated from d.c.'s public high school system — both traditional public schools and public charter schools . d.c.'s traditional public schools include six selective schools , or magnet schools , that limit admission to students that meet certain criteria or eligibility requirements . for example , in academic year 2016 , more than 70 percent of dctag recipients graduated from d.c.'s public high school system ( see fig . many dctag recipients have also graduated from private schools or schools outside d.c. , were home schooled , or attained their general equivalency diploma . for academic years 2007−2016 , between about 30 and 40 percent of dctag recipients came from high schools or programs outside the d.c. public school system . enrollment in dctag by taxable household income . although in 2007 federal law limited eligibility for dctag to students from families with annual taxable incomes less than $1,000,000 , dctag enrollment data show the program made awards to students from families with a wide range of household taxable incomes in academic years 2009−2016 . comments from the mayor are reproduced in appendix ii . in response to our recommendation , the mayor stated that osse plans to expand dctag's current annual reports to congress with direct links to dctag's annual strategic performance goals and the reports will combine data points to illustrate the program's performance . the mayor also raised a concern about the title of the draft report , stating that it implied osse is not meeting legislative requirements .