mspv - ng now restricts ordering to a narrow formulary . vha policy requires medical centers to use mspv - ng — as opposed to other means such as open market purchase card transactions — when purchasing items that are available in the formulary . leading hospital networks we spoke with have similar goals to va in managing their supply chains , including clinical standardization and reduced costs . these hospital networks reported they analyze their spending to identify items purchased most frequently , and which ones would be the best candidates to standardize first to yield cost savings . the hospitals' supply chain managers reported establishing consensus with clinicians through early and frequent collaboration , understanding that clinician involvement is critical to the success of any effort to standardize their medical supply chain . by following these practices , these hospital networks have reported they have achieved significant cost savings in some cases , and the potential for improved patient care , while maintaining buy - in from their clinicians . vha's implementation of the mspv - ng program — from its initial work to identify a list of supply requirements in early 2015 , through its roll - out of the formulary to medical centers in december 2016 — was not executed in line with leading practices . specifically , vha lacked a documented program strategy , leadership stability , and workforce capacity for the transition that , if in place , could have facilitated buy - in for the change throughout the organization . further , the initial requirements development process and tight time frames contributed to ineffective contracting processes . as a result , vha developed an initial formulary that did not meet the needs of the medical centers and has yet to achieve utilization and cost avoidance goals . because they were made on a non - competitive basis , the phase 1 agreements were established for a period of 1 year . in order to keep the full formulary available , the sac director said the staff must award 200 to 250 contracts before the phase 1 agreements expire later this year . sac officials acknowledged that it is unlikely that they will be able to award the contracts by the time the existing agreements expire . according to sac officials , they are in the process of hiring more staff to deal with the increased workload . further , the sac division director told us that they canceled all outstanding phase 2 solicitations in september 2017 due to low response rates , protests from service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses , and changes in overall mspv - ng strategy . in our november 2017 report , we recommended that the mspv - ng program office and sac should establish a plan for how to mitigate the potential risk of gaps in contract coverage while sac is still working to make competitive phase 2 awards , which could include prioritizing supply categories that are most likely to yield cost avoidance . va agreed with this recommendation and indicated it would provide this guidance to medical centers by december 2017 .