( app . i includes a complete list of the specific actions the working group identified for congress , tsa , and the aviation industry. ) in october 2005 , we reported that tsa had taken a number of actions intended to strengthen domestic air cargo security , but , as we reported , factors existed that may have limited their effectiveness . since our report was released , tsa has issued an air cargo security rule that revised some of the requirements air carriers are required to follow to ensure air cargo security , and has drafted new and revised security programs for domestic and foreign passenger and all - cargo carriers that contain more specific security requirements . however , more work remains to ensure that tsa has a comprehensive strategy to secure air cargo that fully incorporates risk management principles . tsa has taken steps towards applying a risk - based management approach to addressing domestic air cargo security , including conducting threat assessments . however , opportunities exist to strengthen these efforts . applying a risk management framework to decision making is one tool to help provide assurance that programs designed to combat terrorism are properly prioritized and focused . tsa has underscored the importance of implementing a risk - based approach that protects against known threats , but that is also sufficiently flexible to direct resources to mitigate new and emerging threats . according to tsa , the ideal risk model would be one that could be used throughout the transportation sector and applicable to different threat scenarios . as part of tsa's risk - based approach , tsa issued an air cargo strategic plan in november 2003 that focused on securing the domestic air cargo supply chain . tsa coordinated with air cargo industry stakeholders representing passenger and all - cargo carriers to develop this plan . tsa officials stated that they are revising their existing domestic air cargo strategic plan , but as of february 5 , 2007 , agency officials had not set a timeframe for when tsa will complete this revision . tsa's air cargo strategic plan describes , among other things , an approach for screening or reviewing information on all domestic air cargo shipments to determine their level of relative risk , ensuring that 100 percent of cargo identified as posing an elevated risk is physically inspected , and pursuing technological solutions to physically inspect air cargo . tsa officials anticipate that the agency's system for targeting domestic air cargo , referred to as freight assessment , will minimize the reliance on the random physical inspections currently conducted by air carriers . according to agency plans , air carriers would receive targeting information from tsa on specific cargo items identified as posing an elevated risk . upon notification by tsa's freight assessment system , air carrier personnel would be responsible for conducting the inspection of cargo identified as elevated risk . in october 2005 , we reported that although tsa had identified data elements that could be used in its freight assessment system , the agency had not yet ensured that these data are complete , accurate , and current .