iv. ) 106-113 sec . 504 ( e ) ) requires gao to report on the extent to which fund practices are consistent with u.s. policies set forth in federal law . in order to address this requirement , we ( 1 ) identified how the u.s. treasury and the u.s. executive director promote u.s. policies mandated by congress for the fund and ( 2 ) assessed whether treasury and the executive director have been able to influence fund operations and other members' policy positions in a direction that would be consistent with u.s. policy as set forth in law . to help answer these objectives , we analyzed the process by which treasury pursues its legislative mandates and conducted case studies of specific u.s. policies and treasury's efforts to promote them for individual countries' fund arrangements from 1998 through 2000 . the policy issues we selected for the case studies are ( 1 ) sound banking principles , ( 2 ) labor policies , and ( 3 ) audits of military expenditures . these policies encompass issues that are both central to the traditional focus of the fund's mission as well as issues that are not necessarily viewed by all fund members as a core part of the fund's mission . further , these policies represent both “voice” and “directed vote” provisions . for each policy issue , we reviewed fund practices with respect to five member countries that we selected based on a number of factors , including geographic diversity ; level of economic development ; type of fund arrangement , if applicable ; and range of issues connected to the policy concern . specifically , we selected 12 countries for our respective case studies: ( 1 ) for sound banking principles — india , mexico , romania , south africa , and thailand ; ( 2 ) for labor policies — argentina , ghana , kazakhstan , mexico , and thailand ; and ( 3 ) for audits of military expenditures — burkina faso , guinea - bissau , indonesia , kazakhstan , and rwanda . since we focused primarily on fund rather than country practices , we did not travel to any of these countries as part of this review . we spoke with fund officials who monitor developments in these countries as well as with several executive directors of the fund's executive board in washington , d.c. ( for more information on our scope and methodology , see app . vi. ) the international monetary fund is a cooperative , intergovernmental , monetary and financial institution , and as of november 2000 , it had 182 members . as part of the fund's mission to promote financial cooperation among its members , the fund may provide financial assistance to countries facing actual or potential balance - of - payments difficulties that request such assistance . the fund's approach for providing financial assistance to its members has two main components — financing and conditionality — that are intended to address both the immediate crises as well as the underlying factors that contributed to the difficulties . the access to and disbursement of fund financial assistance are conditioned upon the adoption and pursuit of economic and structural policy measures the fund and recipient countries negotiate .