it has now been deployed to six sites in all . according to the departments , a plan to export ldsi to additional locations has been approved . table 2 shows the locations at which it has been or is to be implemented . besides the near - term initiatives just discussed , va and dod continue their efforts on the longer term goal: to achieve a virtual medical record based on the two - way exchange of computable data between the health information systems that each is currently developing . the cornerstone for this exchange is chdr , the planned electronic interface between the data repositories for the new systems . the departments have taken important actions on the chdr initiative . in september 2004 they successfully completed phase i of chdr by demonstrating the two - way exchange of pharmacy information with a prototype in a controlled laboratory environment . according to department officials , the pharmacy prototype provided invaluable insight into each other's data repository systems , architecture , and the work that is necessary to support the exchange of computable information . these officials stated that lessons learned from the development of the prototype were documented and are being applied to phase ii of chdr , the production phase , which is to implement the two - way exchange of patient health records between the departments' data repositories . further , the same dod and va teams that developed the prototype are now developing the production version . in addition , the departments developed an architecture for the chdr electronic interface , as we recommended in june 2004 . the architecture for chdr includes major elements required in a complete architecture . for example , it defines system requirements and allows these to be traced to the functional requirements , it includes the design and control specifications for the interface design , and it includes design descriptions for the software . also in response to our recommendations , the departments have established project accountability and implemented a joint project management structure . specifically , the health executive council has been established as the lead entity for the project . the joint project management structure consists of a program manager from va and a deputy program manager from dod to provide day - to - day guidance for this initiative . additionally , the health executive council established the dod / va information management / information technology working group and the dod / va health architecture interagency group , to provide programmatic oversight and to facilitate interagency collaboration on sharing initiatives between dod and va. to build on these actions and successfully carry out the chdr initiative , however , the departments still have a number of challenges to overcome . the success of chdr will depend on the departments' instituting a highly disciplined approach to the project's management . industry best practices and information technology project management principles stress the importance of accountability and sound planning for any project , particularly an interagency effort of the magnitude and complexity of this one .