our report does not make this assertion . we state that the activity of contracts issued from 1998 through 2002 is consistent with earlier years , and in particular , that rhs has overestimated its spending needs in most years since 1990 . the $51 million overestimate does not stem from the inflation rate only . this is the lack of data to which we refer . it only affected our omb - based estimate of rhs expenditures by preventing us from backing out agency rates and replacing them with the inflation projections from the president's budget for years prior to fiscal year 2000 . we clarified the text on this point . our concern centers on the fact that the agency is using the highest of the most recent 3 months instead of an average of all 3 months , not on the use of 3 months of data versus 12 months of data . we concur that these rates are , in fact , an estimate , but as figure 6 illustrates , using these rates would have brought the agency's estimates closer to its actual expenditures . furthermore , as shown in figure 6 , budget estimates based on the inflation projections from the president's budget would still have been higher than actual program expenditures , which should alleviate usda's concern that using this method would underfund contracts . it also stems from rhs compounding the rate to the fifth power and then applying that rate back to each year of the contract . we concur that we will not know the outcome of the contracts issued in 2003 until 2008 or later . this is our best estimate based on data provided by the agency and following omb budgetary guidance . in addition to those named above , william bates , emily chalmers , jamila jones , austin kelly , marc molino , and julie trinder made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . we received oral comments from omb . omb representatives did not have comments on the specific findings or conclusions of this report . the forecasting model is currently in the testing phase .