however , more work remains to address the recommendations . the bureau agreed with our recommendations and has taken steps to address them . for example , in september 2014 , the bureau released a plan that identified inputs , such as research questions , design components , and testing , that were needed to inform the operational design decisions expected in the fall of 2015 . however , as we reported in february 2015 , the bureau had not yet determined how key it research questions that had been identified as critical inputs into the design decisions — estimating the internet self - response rate and determining the it infrastructure for security and scalability needed to support internet response — were to be answered . we therefore recommended that the bureau , among other things , develop methodologies and plans for answering key it - related research questions in time to inform key design decisions . while the recent 2020 census operational plan documents many key it - related decisions about the redesign of the census , other critical questions , including the ones identified in our february 2015 report , remain unanswered . of greater concern , the bureau does not intend to answer these and other questions until 2016 through 2018 . specifically , there are several significant it decisions that are being deferred , which have implications on the cedcap program's ability to have production - ready systems in place in time to conduct end - to - end testing . for example , the bureau does not plan to decide on the projected demand that the it infrastructure and systems would need to accommodate or whether the bureau will build or buy the needed systems until june 2016 , at the earliest ; the high - level design and description of the systems ( referred to as the solutions architecture ) until september 2016 — leaving about a year to , among other things , build or acquire , integrate , and test the systems that are intended to serve as the backbone to the 2020 census before preparations for end - to - end testing begins in august 2017 ; and the strategy for the use of mobile devices for field work until october 2017 . however , with less than 2 years remaining until the bureau plans to have all systems and processes for the 2020 census developed and ready for end - to - end testing , it faces challenges that pose significant risk to 2020 census program . these include the magnitude of the planned changes to the design of the census , the bureau's prior track record in executing large - scale it projects , and the current lack of a permanent chief information officer , among others . figure 2 shows the timeline for planned 2020 census research and testing . more detail on our scope and methodology is provided in each published report cited in this testimony . we also obtained and reviewed information on the bureau's actions in response to our previous recommendations . the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .