( fig . 1 illustrates where cbp's container security programs intersect with the key points of transfer in the global supply chain. ) data that cbp collects on u.s. - bound cargo containers and their contents are fed into the automated targeting system ( ats ) — a computerized model that cbp uses as a decision - support tool in targeting cargo containers for inspection . specifically , within ats , cbp uses various data elements to determine an overall risk score for a particular threat in a shipment . cbp officers use these scores to help them make decisions on the extent to which documentary reviews or nonintrusive inspections are to be conducted on cargo containers . in our september 2010 report on the implementation of the 10+2 rule , we recommended that cbp establish milestones and time frames for updating ats to use the 10+2 data in its identification of shipments that could pose a threat to national security . in response to this recommendation , cbp took steps in january 2011 to improve targeting efforts by updating its targeting criteria in to include risk factors present in the 10+2 data . we recently began a review of the effectiveness of ats as part of cbp's targeting efforts and plan to issue a report later this year . as we reported in september 2010 , dhs's science and technology directorate ( s&t ) initiated four container security technology projects , in part , in response to general mtsa requirements , as well as cbp's need for technologies to detect intrusion and track the movement of containers through the supply chain . specifically , a cbp study recognized that existing container seals provided inadequate security against physical intrusion ( eg , removing a container door to bypass a container seal ) and therefore cbp should develop a technology to monitor and record intrusions on any of the six sides of a container . in september 2010 , we reported that dhs had conducted research and development for these projects , but had not yet developed performance standards for them . specifically , each project had undergone laboratory testing , but s&t had not yet conducted testing in an operational environment to ensure that the prototypes for those projects that had passed laboratory testing would function as intended . furthermore , s&t's plans for conducting operational testing , did not reflect all of the operational scenarios being considered for implementation . we recognized that successfully testing the performance of these technologies is a precursor to developing performance standards for them ; therefore , we recommended that dhs test and evaluate the technologies within all of the operational scenarios dhs identified for potential implementation before s&t provides performance standards to the office of policy development and cbp — dhs concurred with our recommendation and has completed operational testing for two of the four container security technology projects in the maritime environment . s&t officials considered the laboratory and operational testing of both technology projects a success because they were proven to function under one operational scenario , which resulted in the development of performance standards that are necessary to pursue implementation of these technologies .