regulatory lists . ohio and oregon do not define noxious weeds in statute or regulation , but instead list specific noxious weeds in regulations . weed seed laws . eight states ( alaska , connecticut , georgia , maine , massachusetts , new hampshire , new jersey , and rhode island ) only use the term noxious weed with respect to their noxious weed seed laws . noxious weed seed laws generally restrict or prohibit the sale of the seeds of noxious weeds , either as a product in their own right or as contaminants of other seeds or agricultural products . alaska has a law providing for the eradication of “obnoxious weeds” in addition to its weed seed law , but has no statutory or regulatory list of such weeds . in addition to the states identified above as having statutory or regulatory lists rather than definitions of noxious weeds , most of the other states also have noxious weed lists . ( fig . 5 discusses a successful collaborative project in mississippi addressing invasive cogongrass. ) specifically , the department stated that the report contributes to the call for cooperation and collaboration across all government levels to control and eradicate invasive plants , and agrees with the attention it places on natural or nonproduction areas as significant contributors to our nation's biological and natural resources heritage . the department supported our recommendation regarding implementation of the noxious weed control and eradication act of 2004 . in addition , the department suggested that the issue be approached through the national invasive species council and that council's advisory committee . four interior bureaus ( the national park service , fish and wildlife service , bureau of land management , and the u.s. geological survey ) also reviewed the report and provided technical comments relating to funding data , the number of acres infested with weeds , and other issues . we have incorporated those comments where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we will plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to other interested congressional committees and the secretaries of agriculture and the interior . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi .