gao - 15-215 . washington , d.c.: february 9 , 2015 . crop insurance: considerations in reducing federal premium subsidies . gao - 14-700 . washington , d.c.: august 8 , 2014 . the provision would not have reduced subsidies for catastrophic coverage . s. 954 , 113th cong . § 11033 , ( as passed by senate , june 10 , 2012 ) . to be eligible for premium subsidies , crop insurance participants that plant certain crops on land that is prone to erosion must have a conservation plan , and participants must not convert wetlands for crop production . about 1 percent of crop insurance participants would have been affected if subsidies were reduced for the highest income participants . these participants had some characteristics that differed from other crop insurance participants but overall had characteristics similar to other participants . specifically , the highest income participants insured more farmland and were provided more in premium subsidies than other participants , on average . in general , however , the highest income crop insurance participants and other participants insured farmland in the same states , insured major crops most frequently , and made similar choices about insurance protection . about 1 percent of crop insurance participants that also applied for farm and conservation programs with income limits would have been affected if subsidies had been reduced for the highest income participants from 2009 through 2013 , based on our analysis of rma and fsa data . the number of highest income crop insurance participants was about 7,500 annually on average but , as shown in table 1 , the annual number decreased from 2009 through 2013 . we chose this time frame because fsa had implemented procedures to verify the income of program participants starting in 2009 , and 2013 was the most recent year available . we identified crop insurance participants that were in both the rma and fsa datasets , either directly or through an entity , to determine whether they exceeded income limits in effect for farm and conservation programs . for this group , which included about two - thirds of crop insurance participants , we determined the percentage of participants whose incomes exceeded limits in the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 . specifically , these limits included , depending on the program , average adjusted gross farm income of $750,000 ; average adjusted gross nonfarm income of $500,000 ; or average adjusted gross nonfarm income of $1 million , unless at least two - thirds of the average adjusted gross income was average adjusted gross farm income . for 2012 and 2013 only , there was an additional limit of average adjusted gross income of $1 million , including both farm income and nonfarm income , applied for certain farm payments . we identified the number of participants that fsa determined to be ineligible because their incomes exceeded statutory limits , and we considered those the “highest income participants.” we did not determine , for each statutory limit , the number of participants with incomes exceeding it because some participants were subject to multiple income limits , and fsa data did not always specify which limit or limits had been exceeded by a given participant .