census . the bureau created a new 2020 census directorate and a 2020 research and planning office to take the lead for 2020 preparations . furthermore , during the past year the bureau began a process of identifying the skills gap in its workforce in order to have the skills and competencies it needs for developing a more cost - effective 2020 census . as the bureau continues planning the 2020 census , it will be important that it implement leading management practices in each of these areas . instilling leading management practices will also be important for sustaining the bureau's transformation efforts and bringing about lasting reforms , especially given the turnover that has been occurring at the head of the agency over the last 40 years . as we noted in our april 2011 testimony , leadership continuity is critical to sustain efforts that foster change , produce results , mitigate risks , and control costs over the long term . than 5 years , and the rest — including the current director who recently announced plans to resign from the bureau in august 2012 — served an average term of about 3 years . however , since 1969 only one census director has served longer in this context , we were asked to assess the extent to which the bureau's 2020 census directorate and its 2020 research and planning office are taking steps consistent with leading practices for ( 1 ) organizational transformation , ( 2 ) long - term project planning , and ( 3 ) strategic workforce planning for the 2020 census . to meet these objectives , we reviewed existing leading practices for organizational transformation , long - term project planning , and workforce planning that we and other organizations have previously developed , and identified those that are most relevant to the bureau's early planning for the 2020 census . we also reviewed bureau documents and interviewed bureau officials involved in the early planning for the 2020 census . using these sources , we assessed the extent to which the bureau was implementing the leading practices . more information on our scope and methodology can be found in app . i. gao , 2010 census: preliminary lessons learned highlight the need for fundamental reforms , gao - 11-496t ( washington , d.c. , apr . we conducted this performance audit from august 2011 through may 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . for example , while the bureau has research and testing activity continuing until 2018 , it is not clear what specific activity must be completed to inform design decisions that need to be made before the next phase — operational development and systems testing — begins . with the next phase scheduled to begin as early as 2015 , if the needed activities are not completed on time , the bureau is at risk of not starting downstream operations on schedule .