is this correct ? if the information above is not correct , please note the necessary corrections in the space below . states , local governments , accrediting bodies ( such as aaalac and the joint commission ) , military organizations ( such as the medical command and army material command ) , and other federal entities such as nih , osha , epa , and doe might also inspect sa registered labs . if your lab was inspected in the past 2 years by any other entities ( for sa compliance or other reasons ) , please provide the name of the inspecting entity and inspection date . other inspecting entity and date of inspection: 2b . other inspecting entity and date of inspection: 2c . other inspecting entity and date of inspection: 2d . other inspecting entity and date of inspection: 2e . important ! javascript must be enabled on your browser in order to use this web questionnaire . this survey has 7 main sections covering the following key issues: 1 . inspecting agencies 2 . inspection activities: a . preparation b . execution c. close - out / response 3 . quantifiable costs of inspections 4 . non - quantifiable costs of inspections 5 effects of multiple inspections 6 . solutions 7 . joint inspections click on "menu" to the left of this screen to display a navigation panel that can be used to move from section to section . click on the "summary" to the left of this screen to print a copy of the survey . aaalac association for assessment and accreditation of laboratory animal care aphis department of agriculture's animal and plant health inspection service bsc biosafety cabinet bso biosafety officer cdc department health and human services' centers for disease control and prevention daig department of the army's inspector general dhs department of homeland security doe department of energy dot department of transportation epa environmental protection agency nih national institutes of health osha occupational safety and health administration pi principle investigator ro responsible official ( cdc designated ) sa select agent un certified packaging designed / tested in accordance with specifications of the united nations committee of experts on the transport of dangerous goods unless otherwise specified , the questions in this survey apply only to inspections for biosafety and biosecurity as required under select agent regulations or by those agencies that own or fund your entities' select agent research . please check the following information for accuracy . if you need to make changes , please do so in the appropriate editable field ( s ) below . respondent telephone 1 . gao received inspection data from cdc , aphis , dhs , dot , and daig , and identified your entity ( lab ) as one that has been inspected by more than one of these agencies within the past 2 years . specifically , these data indicate your lab was inspected by the following agencies in the past 2 years: ______ in ______ and ______ in ______ . if you would like to describe any areas of overlap between these "other" inspections and the inspections your lab has received from cdc , aphis , daig , dhs or dot , please do so in the space below .