( see fig . the hicn is constructed using the 9-digit ssn of the primary wage earner whose work history qualifies an individual for medicare , followed by a 1- or 2-character code , referred to as the beneficiary identification code , that specifies the relationship of the card holder to the individual who makes the beneficiary eligible for benefits . to obtain this information , providers would be expected to electronically request it from cms using the new identifier . in most cases , the ssn on the card is the card holder's own ; however , approximately 14 percent of medicare beneficiaries have cards that contain the ssn of the family member whose work history makes the beneficiary eligible for medicare benefits . a unique identifier is an essential component for administering health insurance . since that time , va officials report that the department has issued approximately 7.7 million vics . va officials also stated that , in the first quarter of fiscal year 2013 , va will start issuing new vics that will display a new unique identifier for the veteran and embed the new identifier in the card's magnetic stripe and bar code , replacing the ssn . va also removed ssns from display on the cards issued to beneficiaries in va dependent - care programs without replacing it with a new identifier , and beneficiaries in these programs now provide their ssn verbally at the time of service . representatives from a national organization representing private health insurers told us that , to their knowledge , all private health insurers have removed the ssn from display on insurance cards and replaced it with a unique identifier not based on the ssn . private insurers use these new identifiers for all beneficiary and provider interactions , including determining eligibility and processing claims . according to these officials , private health insurers took those steps to comply with state laws and protect beneficiaries from identity theft . consistent with this , representatives from the private health insurers we interviewed reported removing ssns from their cards' display and issuing beneficiaries new identifiers not based on the ssn , which are now used in all beneficiary and provider interactions . officials we interviewed from dod , va , and private health insurers all reported that the process to remove the ssn from cards and replace the ssn with a different unique identifier is taking or took several years to implement and required considerable planning . during their transition periods , dod , va , and private health insurers reported that they made modifications to it systems ; collaborated with providers and contractors ; and educated providers and beneficiaries about the change . one private health insurer we interviewed reported that it allowed for a transition period during which providers could verify eligibility or submit claims using either the ssn or the new unique identifier . this health insurer noted that this allowance , along with the education and outreach it provided to both beneficiaries and providers , resulted in a successful transition . another health insurer reported that it is providing it support for both the ssn and the new unique identifier indefinitely in case providers mistakenly use the ssn when submitting claims .