gao - 13-109 . washington , d.c.: december 14 , 2012 . washington , d.c.: july 20 , 1984 . access to the ndnh is limited by statute . although rrb does not have specific legal authority to access it , rrb has considered obtaining access to the ndnh for the purpose of fraud prevention in its unemployment and sickness benefit programs , but abandoned the effort , citing cost as a key reason for not pursuing it further . in may 2011 , the agency revisited the issue in the wake of the lirr fraud incident . specifically , in may 2011 , rrb studied the feasibility of using the ndnh to monitor the earnings level of individuals who are already receiving disability benefits . rrb concluded that it would not provide significant benefits due to costs associated with accessing the database and redesigning its processes ; the need for legislation to grant rrb access ; and potentially higher workloads , but did not quantify the potential financial benefits . furthermore , the study did not address whether it would be cost - effective to use the ndnh to obtain more current information about the earnings of people who apply for benefits . ssa , which has legal authority to access the ndnh , currently uses the ndnh to periodically monitor the earnings of those receiving supplemental security income benefits , and to investigate the current , or recent alleged work activity that is not yet posted to the mef for di applicants and beneficiaries . other tools for verifying claimants' earnings may be available from the public sector , such as the work number — a commercial , publicly - available data source . rrb procedures provide claims staff flexibility to decide when to verify medical evidence . field office claims representatives are responsible for assembling claim files and ensuring they are complete before forwarding them to headquarters for evaluation ; however , rrb does not require them to verify that medical evidence is obtained from a reliable source . specifically , rrb's field operations manual advises claims representatives to “make no judgment as to the acceptability of a medical source” and that , in the unlikely situation that the only medical - related evidence is from a source considered unacceptable , a headquarters claims examiner is to direct any further development of medical evidence . notes that most claimants have impairments that are either continuing or worsening , and directs them to avoid unnecessary claims development . rrb field operations manual , 1305.35.2. application to headquarters with an annotation asking that medical examinations be ordered by the appropriate claims examiner . although claims representatives are a potentially valuable source of first - hand information about individuals filing t&p claims , and often represent the agency's sole direct contact with claimants , our interviews and review of claims files showed that claims representatives' observations are used infrequently . when compiling case files , claims representatives can include comments in designated parts of the application form , the customer contact log , or in the form used to transmit the file to headquarters .