gao - 02-352 . washington , d.c.: may 31 , 2002 . ( see fig . over the last several years , states estimated submitting over 84 million requests to ssa using the batch method . similarly , states submitted a total of 13 million requests using the on - line method . two - thirds of these on - line requests were submitted in the last 2 fiscal years . ssa officials told us that the batch method offers advantages in circumstances where a real - time verification response is unnecessary . for example , some states have used the batch method to “clean - up” ssns in their existing records and address any discrepancies prior to the license coming due for renewal at a later date . a number of states that have used the batch method in this manner subsequently used the on - line method exclusively . for example , one state that used the batch method in 2001 to verify over 8.3 million existing records has since used the on - line method exclusively . ssa officials noted that only one state currently uses the batch method on a continuous basis to verify ssns for all of its customers . for states that issue permanent licenses on the spot , the on - line service also offers an advantage , namely , the ability to instantly verify the ssn and other key information submitted by individuals seeking initial licenses , as well as those converting out - of - state licenses . between fiscal years 1998 and 2002 , the number of states participating in ssa's on - line service grew by about 3 states each year . as shown in figure 2 , the volume of on - line verification requests processed by ssa has also increased significantly from 300,000 in fiscal year 1998 to 5.5 million in fiscal year 2002 . although the volume of on - line requests grew between 1998 and 2002 , usage varied significantly among states and within individual states from year to year . as shown in figure 3 , 5 states accounted for over 70 percent of the total transactions over a 5-year period , and a single state was responsible for submitting about one - third of the total transactions . in addition , in some states , the use of the on - line service varied from year to year . for example , one state sent in about 250,000 requests in 1 year and about half that number the following year . various factors — such as costs , performance problems , and state priorities — may affect states' decisions about whether or not to use ssa's verification service . the nonverifying states we contacted frequently cited cost as a reason why they did not use ssa's verification service . in addition to the per - transaction fees that ssa charges , states may incur additional costs to set up and use ssa's service , including the cost for computer programming , equipment , staffing , training , and so forth . state estimates associated with establishing an on - line ssn verification process with ssa varied considerably based on factors such as the system modifications they planned to make .