jpos at iaea . isn funds the jpo program at iaea . the program is implemented by the argonne and brookhaven national laboratories . in 2009 , 11 out of a total of 16 jpos at iaea were american . iaea officials noted that the organization intends for jpos to eventually return to iaea after gaining additional work experience . apos at fao . see app . iii for u.s. representation , by grade , at the five un organizations from 2006 to 2009. ) additionally , we found that the relative increase in nongeographic positions translates into a substantial increase in the total number of policymaking and senior - level positions at the secretariat , who , and fao , along with an increase in the number of americans holding these positions . for example , the total number of policymaking and senior - level positions at the secretariat in 2009 increased from 354 positions ( see table 4 ) to 722 ( see table 5 ) when the nongeographic positions are included as well . however , comparing the percentage of these positions held by americans in 2009 from both tables shows that , at the secretariat and iaea , the percentage of policymaking and senior - level positions held by americans , when these nongeographic positions are included , is lower compared with these geographic positions held by americans ; whereas at who and fao , u.s. representation in nongeographic policymaking and senior - level positions is somewhat higher when compared with the geographic positions held by americans . table 5 shows the total number of all policymaking and senior - level positions — geographic and nongeographic — for each un organization and the percentage of these positions held by americans . when nongeographic policymaking and senior - level positions are included with the geographic positions , u.s. representation declines in two organizations and increases in two organizations . for example , in 2009 , u.s. representation in geographic policymaking and senior - level positions at the secretariat was 14.4 percent , but it falls to 13.2 when nongeographic policymaking and senior - level positions are included . however , at who , u.s. representation in geographic policymaking and senior - level positions in 2009 was 5.0 percent , but increases to 7.6 percent when nongeographic policymaking and senior - level positions are included . all five of the un organizations we reviewed face challenges to recruiting , hiring , and retaining professional staff , including americans , most of which are outside direct u.s. government control . the un organizations have taken steps to mitigate the effects of some of these challenges , including a variety of human resource reform initiatives , and the u.s. government has also made some efforts to lessen the effect of these challenges on americans . based on our interviews with 63 americans employed at the un organizations , un human resources officials , and u.s. officials , we identified eight issues that present challenges to recruiting , hiring , and retaining american professional staff at the five un organizations we reviewed .