ii ) . we selected these five states because they are geographically diverse and because they have differing practices with regard to mva - collected ssns and use of driver's license suspension . specifically , we wanted a mix of states with respect to whether mvas were collecting ssns from all licensed drivers and whether driver's license suspension was a judicial process or an administrative process . of the five states , three were collecting ssns from all drivers and two were not and two used administrative procedures to suspend driver's licenses , two used judicial procedures , and one used both . we analyzed data from cse programs in four states to determine how often these programs used the driver's license suspension process in calendar year 2000 and the extent to which this process resulted in collecting payments . the states were colorado , maryland , pennsylvania , and washington , and we chose them because they had the type of automated data that we required for this analysis and were willing to provide it to us . cse program personnel extracted the data we requested from their files . we did not verify the accuracy of the data ; however , we did review the data for reasonableness , consistency , and suitability for our analysis . the objective of our data analysis was to identify child support payments that could reasonably be attributed to driver's license suspension . for 56 percent of the cases in which we attributed payments to suspension , this identification was straightforward . that is , the data were sufficient to indicate that these payments were the result of either the threat of driver's license suspension or an actual suspension . key contributors are listed in appendix iv . the objectives of our review were to ( 1 ) determine the extent to which states have implemented the federal requirement that mvas collect ssns from all licensed drivers and what ocse has done to promote compliance in states not adhering to this requirement , ( 2 ) identify privacy concerns associated with mva efforts to collect and safeguard ssns that are used for child support enforcement purposes , and ( 3 ) determine the extent to which state cse programs use driver's license suspension to collect past - due child support and whether this tool has resulted in collections . we conducted our review from november 2000 through december 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to accomplish the above objectives , we mailed a survey to 54 mvas , conducted telephone interviews with 54 cse programs , conducted site visits in five states , analyzed data on driver's license suspension from cse programs in four states , and interviewed officials from hhs's ocse and regional offices . we mailed a survey to 54 mvas — one in each of the 50 states , the district of columbia , and three of the u.s. territories — and received 53 completed surveys from the mvas . the intent of the survey was to obtain information about ( 1 ) the extent to which mvas collect ssns from licensed drivers and ( 2 ) their policies and procedures regarding the collection , sharing , and safeguarding of ssns .