technology maturity . a program office official stated that in developing the cost estimate they did not consider that technologies would not be mature , but rather assumed that most technologies needed to deliver each block 4 capability would be mature before the program begins development for that capability . the official stated that the complexity of design , development , and testing based on the baseline program experience was reflected in the estimate , but the cost estimate did not identify if there were specific costs associated with maturing these technologies . the official further noted that block 4 costs would increase if a capability takes longer than planned to design , integrate , and test due to its immaturity . in 2019 , we recommended that the secretary of defense ensure that the f - 35 program office completes an independent technology readiness assessment , as part of its business case for the initial block 4 capabilities , before initiating additional development work . dod did not concur with our recommendation . according to a program official , as of december 2019 , the program office had not completed any technology readiness assessments even though the contractor has started development of over half of the capabilities within block 4 . going forward , the program is considering holding incremental technology readiness assessments as it plans for and develops a new set of capabilities , in accordance with the c2d2 schedule . program officials told us that , going forward , as they update the block 4 cost estimate , they will consider the results of future technology readiness assessments . until the program office does so , management cannot determine a reasonable level of additional resources that might be necessary to cover increased costs resulting from unexpected design complexity , incomplete requirements , technology uncertainty , and other uncertainties . independent cost estimate . in 2019 , we also recommended the f - 35 program office include an independent cost estimate as part of its business case for block 4 . as noted in table 2 , the block 4 effort still lacks an independent cost estimate . the program is planning for the office of the secretary of defense , cost assessment and program evaluation to have a draft independent cost estimate for an interim program review scheduled for march 2020 and to have a complete independent cost estimate in june 2020 . this estimate will evaluate the entire f - 35 program , including block 4 . with these pieces currently missing , the block 4 development cost estimate does not present a full picture of block 4's cost . ultimately , without a complete understanding of block 4 costs , the program could face additional cost growth , which will be hard to track without a complete cost baseline . the lack of a complete cost baseline hinders insight and oversight into the program's costs , plans , and progress to date and going forward . moreover , if a cost estimate does not fully or substantially meet all four characteristics of cost estimating leading practices , it cannot be considered reliable . dod plans for the f - 35 to be central to the warfighter prevailing in future conflicts .