training . in extraordinary circumstances , state may grant a waiver of the fact training requirement to individuals on a case - by - case basis . using data from multiple sources related to state and usaid assigned personnel , we determined that 675 of 708 state personnel and all of the 143 usaid personnel on assignments to the designated high - threat countries on march 31 , 2013 , were in compliance with the fact training requirement . we found 33 state assigned personnel who were not in compliance with the mandatory training requirement . we were unable to assess compliance among short - term tdy personnel because of gaps in state's data . first , state has not established a mechanism to identify the universe of short - term tdy personnel who are required to take fact training . second , state's ecountry clearance ( ecc ) system — the most comprehensive data source for identifying short - term tdy personnel granted country clearance to high - threat posts — has limitations . according to gao's standards for internal control in the federal government , program managers need operating information to determine whether they are meeting compliance requirements . ambassador . in the same month , a car bomb hit u.s. government vehicles in pakistan , injuring two americans , and protesters in egypt and yemen overran the u.s. embassies' security defenses and broke into the embassy compounds . the president has instructed u.s. chiefs of mission that they are responsible for providing for the security of all u.s. government personnel on official duty abroad and their accompanying dependents , unless an interagency agreement provides otherwise . prepare personnel serving in high - threat countries , the department of state ( state ) established a mandatory requirement that specified u.s. personnel under chief - of - mission authority in designated high - threat countries receive foreign affairs counter threat ( fact ) training before deploying . fact training , conducted by state's bureau of diplomatic security , provides instruction in personal security skills necessary for recognizing , avoiding , and responding to potential terrorist and other threat situations . chiefs of mission are the principal officers in charge of u.s. diplomatic missions and certain u.s. offices abroad that the secretary of state designates as diplomatic in nature . usually , the u.s. ambassador to a foreign country is the chief of mission in that country . according to the law , the chief of mission's authority encompasses all employees of u.s. executive branch agencies , excluding personnel under the command of a u.s. area military commander and voice of america correspondents on official assignment ( 22 u.s.c . according to the president's letter of instruction to chiefs of mission , members of the staff of an international organization are also excluded from chief - of - mission authority . the president's letter of instruction further states that the chief of mission's security responsibility extends to all government personnel on official duty abroad other than those under the protection of a u.s. area military commander or on the staff of an international organization .