pub . 91-190 , 83 stat . 852 ( 1970 ) , codified as amended at 42 u.s.c . intent in the federal register . the notice of intent acts as the formal announcement of the project to the public and interested federal , state , tribal , and local agencies . the lead agency is then required to determine the scope of the project . during this scoping process , the lead agency consults with resource agencies — such as the corps or the department of the interior's fish and wildlife service ( fws ) — to identify issues and alternatives to be analyzed in the eis and allocate assignments for assistance in preparing the eis . the lead agency will also identify other environmental review and consultation requirements under state , tribal , or local laws . next , the lead agency prepares a draft eis and solicits comments from the public ; incorporates these comments into a final eis ; and issues a record of decision . among other things , the record of decision — which is the final step for agencies in the eis process — identifies ( 1 ) the decision made ; ( 2 ) the alternatives considered during the development of the eis , including the environmentally preferred alternative ; and ( 3 ) plans to mitigate environmental impacts . environmental assessment ( ea ) . the lead agency prepares an ea when it is not clear whether a proposed project will have significant environmental impacts . an ea is intended to be a concise analysis that , among other things , briefly provides sufficient evidence and analysis for determining whether to prepare an eis . if during the development of an ea , the lead agency determines that the proposed project will cause significant environmental impacts , the lead agency will stop producing the ea and , instead , produce an eis . however , an ea typically results in a finding of no significant impact , and this finding is reported in a document that presents the reasons for the agency's conclusion that no significant environmental impacts will occur when the proposed project is implemented . this finding is typically based on the use of mitigation measures . categorical exclusion . the proposed pipeline project is classified as a categorical exclusion if a federal agency determines that the project falls within a category of activities that has already been determined to have no significant environmental impact . under a categorical exclusion , the agency generally does not need to prepare an eis or ea . nepa regulations require federal agencies to make diligent efforts to involve the public in the preparation and implementation of nepa documents . under these regulations , agencies must provide a public comment period for a draft eis ; there is no corresponding requirement for an ea , but agencies may provide a public comment period . clean water act.requirements of the clean water act , one goal of which is to eliminate the addition of pollutants to waters of the united states .