capital losses . limitations on capital losses were implemented to reduce the reward for timing loss and gain transactions to avoid paying taxes . taxpayers can control when they realize a gain or a loss , thereby minimizing tax liabilities . limitations on interest . another example is limiting the deduction of investment interest to the amount of investment income to prevent “taxpayers from sheltering or reducing tax on other , non - investment income by means of the unrelated interest deduction.” personal interest was disallowed as a deduction because it enabled taxpayers to avoid taxes by purchasing consumables rather than purchasing assets that produce taxable income . the limitations on deducting capital losses are different for corporate and noncorporate taxpayers . for noncorporate taxpayers , capital losses can be carried forward indefinitely , but corporate taxpayers are limited to a 3-year carryback and 5-year carryforward , with some exceptions . for corporations , capital losses can only be allowed up to the amount of capital gains , and individuals are allowed an additional $3,000 loss above the amount of capital gains . in some cases , taxpayers have losses that exceed their gross income , resulting in a negative income flow or a net operating loss . when this occurs , taxpayers do not owe income tax for that year and can deduct the net operating loss against taxable income by carrying the losses back or forward to profitable years in which they paid taxes or would owe taxes . elective document review or examination . a rule limiting sole proprietor loss deductions could include an option for sole proprietors to request an irs review of documents provided by the taxpayer , either pre - or postfiling . for example , new sole proprietors could include their business plans and other evidence of their intent to make a profit . the irs staff could review these documents in the relatively lower - cost compliance center environment . irs does something similar in its innocent spouse program , which makes a complex determination regarding liability for a tax debt based on a document review , in most cases , in the compliance center environment . if irs judges it to be helpful ( for example , to ensure that documents are valid and supportable ) , this option could require the sole proprietor extend the statute of limitations for the returns filed with a sole proprietorship loss so that irs would have more time to examine the taxpayer . elective reviews would create administrative costs for irs and some compliance burden for taxpayers , but targeting might reduce the number of reviews significantly . assuming that only sole proprietors with compliant losses of $100 or more would apply for review and assuming that the compliance rate in 2006 is the same as in 2001 , we estimated that there were 3 million sole proprietor returns with compliant losses of at least $100 in 2006 . targeting the rule to those with losses above about $7,000 ( the top 25 percent of loss filers by the size of filed loss in 2001 ) could reduce the number of affected returns for which taxpayers might apply for review to about 870,000 .