the cards incur no charges until issued and activated . the navy activities are responsible for issuing the cards to individuals and the individuals activate the cards . once issued , the activities are responsible for reviewing and certifying the calling card charges , just as they are for all other types of telecommunication service charges . dod and its components have long acquired telecommunication systems to meet their individual mission needs , resulting in a fragmented and redundant telecommunication environment . to eliminate costly duplication and improve the effectiveness and efficiency of its communication services , in 1991 dod began to plan and implement the defense information systems network ( disn ) as the common - user , long­ haul telecommunication network for all dod components . under the disn program , dod's service components and defense agencies are still responsible for acquiring local base telecommunication services for their local bases and installations ; however , disa is to be the sole provider of long - haul telecommunication services for all dod components . to improve the interoperability of dod's long - haul telecommunication networks and service as well as to reduce costs , the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications , and intelligence ( asd / c3i ) established policies and procedures that ( 1 ) directed dod components to develop comprehensive inventories of their own long - haul telecommunication networks and directed disa to develop a defense - wide inventory of long - haul networks ; ( 2 ) directed disa to report annually on telecommunication services , acquisitions , trends , and associated costs ; ( 3 ) mandated components to use common - user networks such as disn or fts 2000 for long - haul communications ; ( 4 ) directed disa to establish a waiver process to let components procure independent networks when their telecommunication needs could not be met by common - user networks ; and ( 5 ) directed dod components to periodically review and revalidate their long - haul telecommunication requirements . in a previous review of the disn program,and during our work on this audit , we found that dod had not effectively implemented any of these directives . in response , dod agreed to address our concerns and to implement these policies and procedures . however , as discussed in this report , the navy has not yet established an accurate and complete telecommunication inventory or created a database of information on acquisition , trends , and associated costs , which are necessary to plan for future growth and cost effectively purchase new telecommunication equipment and services . the navy did not know exactly how much it was spending on telecommunication services nor did it know much about its telecommunication service vendors . the navy's lack of detailed cost data prevented us from analyzing its telecommunication expenditures on an aggregate level . for this reason , we were unable to comprehensively sample and test the adequacy of the navy's controls or perform effective data mining of its telecommunication expenditures . more importantly , this lack of adequate information also prevented the navy from obtaining the knowledge needed to take steps to leverage its buying power , even though it is a large customer for telecommunication services .