however , the program lacks other key internal controls . internal control standards state that government programs should ensure that significant events are authorized and executed only by persons acting within the scope of their authority . defining and consistently communicating how this authority is to be used would help ice ensure that immigration enforcement activities undertaken by participating agencies are in accordance with ice policies and program objectives . supervision of participating agencies: although the law requires that state and local officials use 287 ( g ) authority under the supervision of ice officials , ice has not described in internal or external guidance the nature and extent of supervision it is to exercise over participating agencies' implementation of the program . this has led to wide variation in the perception of the nature and extent of supervisory responsibility among ice field officials and officials from 23 of the 29 participating agencies that had implemented the program and provided information to us on ice supervision . for example , one ice official said ice provides no direct supervision over the local law enforcement officers in the 287 ( g ) program in their area of responsibility . conversely , another ice official characterized ice supervisors as providing frontline support for the 287 ( g ) program . ice officials at two additional offices described their supervisory activities as overseeing training and ensuring that computer systems are working properly . ice officials at another field office described their supervisory activities as reviewing files for completeness and accuracy . officials from 14 of the 23 agencies that had implemented the program were pleased with ice's supervision of the 287 ( g ) trained officers . some crimes are serious and pose a threat to the security and safety of communities . ice does not have the agents or the detention space that would be required to address all criminal activity committed by unauthorized aliens . thus , state and local law enforcement officers play a critical role in protecting our homeland because , during the course of their daily duties , they may encounter foreign - national criminals and immigration violators who pose a threat to national security or public safety . on september 30 , 1996 , the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act was enacted and added section 287 ( g ) to the immigration and nationality act . this section authorizes the federal government to enter into agreements with state and local law enforcement agencies , and to train selected state and local officers to perform certain functions of an immigration officer — under the supervision of ice officers — including searching selected federal databases and conducting interviews to assist in the identification of those individuals in the country illegally . the first such agreement under the statute was signed in 2002 , and as of february 2009 , 67 state and local agencies were participating in this program . my statement today is based on our january 30 , 2009 , report regarding the program including selected updates made in february 2009 .