the program has four proposed phases . the first two phases are focused on department - sponsored schools that have previously received grant funding from the state department , and the third and fourth phases focus on the nondepartment - sponsored schools with american students . in phase one , department - sponsored schools were offered funding for basic security hardware such as shatter - resistant window film , two - way radios for communication between the school and the embassy , and public address systems . as of november 19 , 2004 , 189 department - sponsored schools had received $10.5 million in funding for security equipment in phase one of the program . the second phase provided additional security enhancements , such as perimeter fencing , walls , lighting , gates , and guard booths . as of november 2004 , state has obligated over $15 million for phase two security upgrades . for phases three and four , state plans to provide similar types of security upgrades to eligible nondepartment - sponsored schools . the program also funds security enhancements for off - compound embassy employee association facilities , such as recreation centers . security upgrades include funding for perimeter walls and shatter - resistant window film . however , we found that state's primary program in place to protect u.s. officials and their families at residences , the residential security program , is principally designed to deter crime , not terrorism . ds officials agreed that this critical component should be added to their training curriculum . in response to several congressional committee reports , state began developing a “soft targets” program in 2003 to help protect overseas schools against terrorism . in fiscal year 2004 , almost $1 million was obligated for these enhancements . regional security officers ( rso ) said that identifying and funding for security enhancements at department - sponsored schools were straightforward because of the department's pre - existing relationship with these schools . they also noted that changes like this take time to be implemented globally . furthermore , state's original plan , to use the checklist as an accountability mechanism , was dropped before it was implemented . in its june 2003 report to congress on implementation of the 2003 arb recommendations , state stipulated that staff would be required to use the checklist periodically and that managers would review the checklists to ensure compliance . however , state never implemented this accountability mechanism out of concern it would consume too much staff time . we also found that key officials receive no training on how to promote personal security outside the embassy . according to a number of state officials , improvements in this area must start with the ambassador and the deputy chief of mission . yet no ambassadors , deputy chiefs of mission , or regional security officers receive any training in how to maximize soft target protection at embassies . however , they said it has been difficult to identify eligible nondepartment - sponsored schools for phase three because of the vast number of schools that might qualify , the lack of any pre - existing relationship , and limited guidance on eligibility criteria .