anticipated . both the contractor and niosh officials involved in the review reported that reviews of site profiles and dose reconstructions have proven considerably more complex than originally anticipated ; thus the original cost estimates for the project ( based on very limited information and experience ) were not realistic . contractor encountered initial delays in obtaining information . the contractor's progress was initially hindered by substantial delays it encountered in obtaining necessary security clearances and access from niosh to various technical documents . as part of the six - step resolution process , the contractor and niosh develop matrices that specify niosh's response and any planned actions for each of the contractor's findings and recommendations . in some matrices , space is provided for the board to recommend that niosh take certain actions to resolve issues . however , there is no system in place to track niosh's implementation of these actions or advisory board recommendations . procedures for prompt resolution and implementation of audit findings and other reviews should be part of all federal agencies' internal controls . exposure cohort petitions . a recent task order expands the contractor's role for this facet of the board's work . a potentially large increase in the board's petition review workload did not occur because many petitions did not meet initial qualification requirements . the advisory board has acknowledged the need to review the petitions in a timely manner . for six of these petitions , the contractor reviewed the site profiles ( though not the actual petitions associated with the named facilities ) . for the other two petitions , the advisory board did not request the contractor's assistance . evaluations of these petitions to recommend to the advisory board whether the petitioning group should be added to the special exposure cohort . as of october 2005 , niosh had determined that 18 of the submitted petitions did not meet the qualification requirements . filed as of october 2005: one petition is ready for the advisory board to review . niosh is completing its evaluation of four more petitions that will be sent to the board for review . niosh is assessing three other petitions to determine if they meet the qualification requirements . for evaluation is unknown . while niosh is generally required by law to complete its review of a petition within 180 days of the petition's being qualified , there is no specified time frame for the advisory board's review of petitions . nonetheless , the advisory board has discussed the fact that special exposure cohort petition reviews have required more time and effort to reach a recommended decision than originally estimated and that the advisory board needs to manage its workload in order to reach timely decisions . performing key roles , actions were taken to replace these officials . credibility is essential to the work of the advisory board and the contractor . thus , it is important to continue to be diligent in avoiding actual or perceived conflicts of roles as new candidates are considered for certain positions over the life of the advisory board . management and oversight of the review of site profiles and dose the advisory board's review has presented a steep learning curve for the various parties involved .