gao - 03-938t . what happens when the lease expires ? at the end of each 6-year lease , the aircraft are supposed to be returned to the owner , the special purpose entity , or be purchased by the air force for their residual value , estimated at about $44 million each in then - year dollars . if the aircraft were returned , the air force tanker fleet would be reduced , and the air force would have to find some way to replace the lost capability even though lease payments would have paid almost the full cost of the aircraft . in addition , the air force would have to pay an additional estimated $778 million if the entire 100 aircraft were returned ; this provision is intended to cover the cost of removing military - specific items . for these reasons , returning the aircraft would probably make little sense , and the congress would almost certainly be asked to fund the purchase of the aircraft at their residual value when the leases expire . how is termination liability being handled ? if the lease is terminated prematurely , the air force must pay boeing 1 year's lease payment . ordinarily , under budget scoring rules , the cost of the termination liability would have to be obligated when the lease is signed . because this could amount to $1 billion to $2 billion for which the air force would have to have budget authority , this requirement was essentially waived by section 8117 of the fiscal year 2003 department of defense appropriation act . this means that if the lease were terminated , the air force would have to find the money in its budget to pay the termination amount or come to congress for the appropriation . if the purpose of the lease is to “kick - start” replacement of the kc - 135 fleet — as the air force has stated — why are 100 aircraft necessary , as stipulated under this lease arrangement ? the main advantage of the lease , as pointed out by the air force , is that it would provide aircraft earlier than purchasing the aircraft and without disrupting other budget priorities . it is not clear , however , why 100 aircraft is the right number to do this . section 8159 authorized up to 100 aircraft to be leased for up to 10 years . the air force has negotiated a shorter lease period , but stayed with the full 100 aircraft to be acquired from fiscal years 2006 to 2011 . the “kick - start” occurs in the early years , and by fiscal year 2008 the air force would have 40 new aircraft delivered . we do not know to what extent the air force ( 1 ) considered using the lease for some smaller number of aircraft and then ( 2 ) planned to use the intervening time to adjust its procurement budget to begin purchasing rather than leasing . such an approach would provide a few years to conduct the tanker requirements study and the analysis of alternatives that the air force has said it will begin soon . military aircraft: information on air force aerial refueling tankers .