weight reduction . this initiative intends to decrease excess weight on an aircraft without adversely affecting mission capability . three categories that are being considered are taking unused items off the aircraft , taking fewer of the items that are needed , and looking at mission - critical items that could be designed differently , for example , with lighter materials . according to air force officials , every 100 pounds of weight equate to 1.6 million pounds of fuel , or $686,000 per year across its fleet of mobility aircraft . air refueling optimization . with this initiative , the air force intends to change the flight planning process to limit air refueling to only when it is mission essential . efficient ground operations . this initiative intends to reduce fuel burn during ground operations . some actions include reducing warm - up time and taxiing on fewer engines . in addition to these demand - reduction initiatives , the air force is pursuing efforts to increase supply through the research and testing of new technologies , as well as renewable and sustainable resources . through the air force's synthetic fuel initiative , jet fuels made from alternative energy sources , such as coal , natural gas , and biomass , are being evaluated for use in military aircraft with the goal of reducing future fuel costs and ensuring fuel availability . the air force completed initial testing of a synthetic blend of fuel in the b - 52h bomber and certified the use of this fuel blend for this aircraft in august 2007 . the service has begun testing on the c - 17 cargo aircraft , the b - 1 bomber , and the f - 22 fighter , with certification expected in 2008 . air force officials said that they expect the entire fleet to be certified to fly on the synthetic blend of fuel by 2011 . however , our prior work has highlighted challenges associated with the development and adoption of alternative energy sources . finally , the air force aims to create a culture that emphasizes energy considerations in all of its operations . air force officials told us that this component of their strategy has multiple elements , including focused leadership , training , educational curricula , and communication . the marine corps has taken steps to reduce its fuel usage by initiating research and development efforts to develop alternative power sources and improve fuel management . for example , it is testing the use of additional alternators in certain vehicles to provide onboard power capabilities , which could reduce the use of petroleum - based fuel and the number of generators needed on the battlefield . another initiative involves providing hybrid power — by combining solar panel , generator , and battery energy sources — at remote sites to lessen fuel transportation demands to forward - deployed locations . the marine corps expects to begin testing this initiative in october 2008 . in addition , the office of naval research is leading efforts for the marine corps to develop decision support tools that process and analyze data and improve fuel management in combat .