results . prority . decision makers . build a foundation of control and accountability . develop a finance team with the right mix of skills and competencies 2 . provide clear strong executive leadership . assess the finance organization's current role in meeting mission objectives . develop systems that support the partnership between finance and operations . use training to change the culture and engage line managers . maximize the efficiency of day - to - day accounting activities . reengineer processes in conjunction with new technology . build a finance organization that attracts and retains talent . organize finance to add value . translate financial data into meaning - ful information . we compared best practices that would be most applicable to gpo's financial management operations and transformation efforts to many of the activities and goals planned by gpo . overall , gpo and its cfo have taken many actions and have plans for efforts that are consistent with many best practices in financial management ; however , additional emphasis is needed for other best practices that enhance gpo's transformation and to ensure that planned efforts are fully supported . in addition , gpo's strategic planning for transformation should include the actions , plans , and goals to be initiated by its cfo and its financial management team to ensure that gpo's weakening financial position does not undermine its transformation goals . our prior report observes that the chief executive should recognize the important role the finance organization plays in improving overall business performance and involve key business managers in financial management improvement initiatives . this is especially important in a transformation environment . in order to make financial management an entitywide priority , the organization should ( 1 ) build a foundation of control and accountability , ( 2 ) provide clear strong executive leadership , and ( 3 ) use training to change the culture and engage line managers . gpo has shown that financial reporting and the audit process are important management and oversight tools for building a foundation of control and accountability by routinely receiving “unqualified” audit opinions on its annual financial statements . in addition , gpo receives an opinion on its management assertion on internal controls from its external auditor . additional accountability is provided through oversight from the gpo office of inspector general established by title 44 , u.s. code , section 3901 . also , gpo has expanded reported financial information beyond audited financial statements to include performance information on revolving fund operations such as printing and binding operations , purchased printing , and procured printing . our executive guide on best practices in financial management also recognizes that the chief executive officers of leading organizations understand the important role that the cfo and the finance organization play in improving overall business performance of the organization . consequently , the cfo is a central figure on the top management team and heavily involved in strategic planning and decision making . in this regard , the public printer established the cfo position shortly after arriving at gpo and has included the cfo as a member of the management council . the key to successfully managing change and changing organizational culture is gaining the support of line management .