( app . ii , fig . 1 has an overview of data matching under the srfmi program. ) the result of matching federal and state tax data is a file with data on potential federal nonfilers and underreporters . irs then filters the matched data to determine which matching results represent potential noncompliance or “leads” for compliance activities in several different organization units . these include: automated substitute for return ( asfr ) — creates a substitute federal tax return where none exists and makes an assessment . irs has no criteria or standards for determining where the pilot program performs adequately to be incorporated into normal irs compliance processes . irs officials said the agency plans to use research results to help formulate standards but did not provide a target date when this will occur . irs officials provided several projects conducted by sb / se research using phase i srfmi data that will serve as the basis for developing standards . for example , they gave us tabulations of results for data matches using federal and arkansas , iowa , and massachusetts state data and a preliminary analysis of the usefulness of colorado and new jersey tax amnesty data . such standards are needed for irs to determine whether the srfmi pilot program is effective . irs has not completely articulated its methodology to evaluate the pilot program . srfmi methodology should include developing plans for sound sampling methods , determining appropriate sample sizes , and comparing the pilot results with irs's similar ongoing compliance efforts to determine whether srfmi can identify cases with higher noncompliance potential than similar ongoing cases . irs officials provided action plans and testing sample plans for individual units when asked about their methodology . the action plans primarily contained project - management - type information such as actions or tasks to be taken by individuals , start date , completion date , and problem areas rather than a comprehensive description of the methodological approach for the overall pilot project . the testing sample plans were questionnaires soliciting information about compliance measures for the individual unit and the resources available for testing srfmi data . none of the plans they presented outline the methods , timing , or frequency of data collection . specifying these elements in the plan would help ensure that adequate , accurate , and timely data will be available to complete the evaluation . while irs officials have begun developing a sampling approach and determining appropriate sample sizes , irs officials encountered challenges that have delayed progress . first , irs officials told us that information technology support for identifying cases with higher noncompliance potential than similar ongoing cases did not occur as planned and , as a result , two compliance activities — asfr and field examination — performed manual workload selection on srfmi cases . second , irs is barred by the 3-year statute of limitations from assessing tax liabilities identified by state tax data received in the earlier phases of the pilot program . irs submitted a legislative proposal that would extend the 3-year limitation for assessments based on information obtained from state and local tax data .