( recommendation 3 ) . to examine actions agencies are taking to reduce demand for illegal wildlife products in the united states and asia , we interviewed relevant officials and reviewed information , including agency and implementing partner documentation of cwt - related projects , programs , and grants . we also analyzed how agencies combating wildlife trafficking in southeast asia are applying selected practices that can enhance and sustain collaborative efforts . as we have previously reported , such practices include establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies , defining and articulating a common outcome , and agreeing on roles and responsibilities . in addition , we conducted fieldwork at the port of miami and interviewed u.s. government officials at this location to obtain insights on u.s. government activities . we selected the port of miami because it has been the site of large - scale cwt operations , and agency officials identified miami as a hub for wildlife trade and an illustrative example of u.s. government cwt operations . we also conducted fieldwork in china and vietnam , where we visited rescue centers and interviewed host government officials and ngo representatives . to examine the extent to which fws , state , and usaid are assessing the effectiveness of their cwt activities , we selected programs to analyze , spoke with agency officials , and reviewed documentation from the programs selected . we included programs that had started , finished , or been ongoing from the beginning of fiscal year 2015 to the end of fiscal year 2016 and that are or were solely dedicated to cwt . specifically for state , programs must have been identified by its bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs as a discrete activity that contributed to cwt and must have been at least 3 months into implementation . specifically for usaid , programs must have ( or have had ) funding greater than $1 million . to assess agency monitoring practices , we analyzed agency guidance on monitoring and examined selected programs as illustrative examples of how agencies applied their own guidance . to assess evaluation practices , we assessed a usaid midterm evaluation against key elements to determine quality . two social science analysts independently assessed this evaluation using the same criteria , methods , and procedures that we developed for gao - 17-316 . the analysts met and reconciled any initial differences in their assessments . from launch through the middle of the second quarter of fiscal year 2017 , fws reported the following: billboards: monthly , about 5 million travelers are estimated to pass by the airport billboards at the international airports of atlanta , georgia ; chicago , illinois ; los angeles , california ; and miami , florida . to date , an estimated total of about 45 million travelers have passed through these airports and may have seen the messages . social media: on september 7 , 2016 , fws and its implementing partner , wildaid , launched the campaign with joint press conferences held at the atlanta international airport and at the los angeles international airport . this resulted in more than 1 million impressions on twitter , engagement of more than 236,000 friends on facebook , and 5,000 new followers on instagram .