all 52 of these ddss responded to our survey . to assess the opportunities for ssa to improve cdr cost - effectiveness and to examine ssa's rationale for delaying return - to - work services to some beneficiaries under the ticket to work program , we interviewed ssa officials from the office of disability and income security programs and the office of the chief actuary at ssa headquarters in baltimore . we also reviewed legislation , regulations , and ssa policy guidance related to the cdr and the ticket programs . in addition , we examined various studies and reports on the cdr and ticket to work programs , including reports from ssa's office of the inspector general and a wide range of contractor - produced reports analyzing the cost - effectiveness of the cdr process . finally , we analyzed data from ssa on the number of adult di and ssi beneficiaries , aged 19-64 , assigned to various cdr diary and profiling categories and the cdr outcomes — cessation or continuance — for these beneficiaries . these data were derived from ssa administrative data sets used by the agency to select cases for review and to track the results of cdrs . we did not independently verify these data , but based on comparison to ssa's previously published data , and discussion of minor discrepancies with ssa officials , we determined that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards between august 2002 and may 2003 . the following individuals also made important contributions to this report: mark trapani , melinda l. cordero , and corinna a. nicolaou . to the extent that funding , staffing , and other issues limit ssa's ability to process its cdr workload , the full realization of cdr cost savings could be in jeopardy . ssa maintains that the return on investment from cdr activities is high . in addition , we surveyed disability determination services ( dds ) directors to assess the potential effect of the expiration of special cdr funding on dds operations . to develop the survey , we identified information that would help us address the research questions . we generated specific survey items by reviewing ssa cdr reports submitted annually to the congress and drawing upon interviews we conducted early in the assignment with ssa officials and the national association of disability examiners . we validated our survey instrument by obtaining feedback from ssa officials and pretesting it with several current dds directors . in consultation with ssa , we excluded 2 of the 54 ddss from our survey as well as the federal dds . the two ddss excluded were guam and south carolina's dds serving persons who are blind – both relatively small ddss that are run by one person . we excluded the federal dds because responses from this site might skew results as the site ( 1 ) is a federal entity and as such it is “different” than other ddss , ( 2 ) is used to process the overflow of cdrs , and ( 3 ) serves as ssa's test unit .