they subsequently contacted the prescribing physician . since this incident , the pharmacy informed us that it has not filled another prescription for the deceased beneficiary . case 3: a mother with a criminal history and ritalin addiction used her child as a means to doctor shop for ritalin and other similar controlled stimulants used to treat attention - deficit / hyperactivity disorder ( adhd ) . although the child received overlapping prescriptions of methylphenidate and amphetamine medications during a 2-year period and was banned ( along with his mother ) from at least three medical practices , the illinois medicaid program never placed the beneficiary on a restricted recipient program . the physician was sentenced to life imprisonment . in 2006 , a florida physician was sentenced to life in prison following his conviction on multiple charges , including wire fraud , illegal distribution of controlled substances , and medicaid fraud . the physician , a general practitioner , wrote excessive prescriptions to patients for controlled substances without giving them physical examinations or additional follow - up treatments . the physician directed patients to have their prescriptions filled at specific pharmacies and warned them against filling their prescriptions at pharmacies that would ask too many questions about the quantity and combination of controlled substances prescribed . in fact , the physician was found to have known some of his patients were addicts feeding their drug habits . five of his patients died from taking drugs he prescribed . during 2004 to 2005 , a pharmacist created false telephone prescriptions for vicodin , an addictive narcotic pain reliever that combines hydrocodone and acetaminophen , and provided thousands of the pills to at least two purported customers . the pharmacist also submitted false claims for the drugs to medicaid and other insurance companies stating that they were prescribed for legitimate patients . the customers were actually friends of the pharmacist who sold the drugs and split the profits with him . in 2009 , the pharmacist was convicted of health care fraud , medicaid fraud , and distribution of dangerous controlled substances . my statement summarizes our report issued today to your subcommittee . this testimony discusses ( 1 ) continuing indications of fraud and abuse related to controlled substances paid for by medicaid ; ( 2 ) specific case study examples of fraudulent , improper , or abusive controlled substance activity ; and ( 3 ) the effectiveness of internal controls that the federal government and selected states have in place to prevent and detect fraud and abuse related to controlled substances . to identify whether there are continuing indications of fraud and abuse related to controlled substances paid for by medicaid , we obtained and analyzed medicaid claims paid in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 from five states: california , illinois , new york , north carolina , and texas . to identify indications of fraud and abuse related to controlled substances paid for by medicaid , we obtained and analyzed medicaid prescription claims data for these five states from the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) .