we did not attempt to independently validate the system . we performed our work from february 2004 through january 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested written comments on this report from the director of the fbi or his designee . a joint letter with comments from doj and fbi was received and is reprinted in appendix ii . in addition to those named above , sharon o. byrd , richard t. cambosos , tyshawn a. davis , lori b. ryza , and ruth s. walk made key contributions to this report . the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) . each weekday , gao posts newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence on its web site . to have gao e - mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to updates. our scope and methodology are discussed in greater detail in appendix i . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the director of fbi or his designee . the joint letter with comments from doj and fbi is reprinted in appendix ii . the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 amended the social security act ( the act ) to , among other things , ( 1 ) establish a health care fraud and abuse control program and ( 2 ) establish an expenditure account , designated as the health care fraud and abuse control account ( account ) within the federal hospital insurance trust fund ( trust fund ) . the account is administered by department of health and human services' ( hhs ) office of inspector general and doj . the amendment also makes appropriations for the account from the general fund of the u.s. treasury . the appropriations are in specified amounts for each fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 1997 for transfer to fbi to carry out its health care fraud investigations . in 1997 hhs and fbi entered into an interagency agreement to facilitate the required annual transfer of funds from the account to fbi solely for its health care fraud investigations . nfc officials also stated that they met informally with fbi personnel and explained how the accounting codes could be used to support fbi's needs . an fbi official told us that because of security concerns , fbi would have to give consideration to using such codes . during the course of our work , fbi modified its original schedule of cost estimates twice because of slight changes to the cost - estimation methodology .