we were later notified that we had been approved . on the basis of our records , no one called the fake number we provided before we were approved for coverage . the fictitious applicant obtained subsidized health coverage and has continued to maintain subsidized coverage to date . as mentioned , there is no specific legal requirement that federal or state - based marketplaces authenticate the documents submitted to support an sep event to determine whether those documents are fictitious . however , according to federal and state officials , all applicants that apply for enrollment during an sep must attest under penalty of perjury that they meet the conditions of eligibility for the sep . we provided a draft of this report to hhs , covered california , and the district of columbia ( dc ) health benefit exchange authority . written comments from hhs , covered california , and the dc health benefit exchange authority are summarized below and reprinted in appendixes ii – iv , respectively . in their written comments , in terms of overall context , these agencies reiterated that they are not required to verify the events that trigger an sep and instead rely on self - attestation and the associated penalties , which we acknowledge and state in this report . however , prudent stewardship and good management practices suggest that fraud risks be understood and managed to protect public funds . in addition to their formal written comments , all three agencies provided us with technical comments , which we incorporated , as appropriate , in this report . in its written comments , hhs stated that seps are a critical way for qualified consumers to obtain health coverage and that it is important that seps are not misused or abused . hhs also described several actions it is taking to better understand seps , including its efforts as part of the agency's special enrollment confirmation process , which we also describe in this report . for example , according to hhs , beginning june 18 , 2016 , all consumers who complete a marketplace application for an sep included in the special enrollment confirmation process will read in their eligibility determination notice next steps that they must take to prove their sep eligibility along with a list of examples of documents they may submit . hhs noted that consumers who do not respond to requests for documentation or do not provide sufficient documentation could be found ineligible for their sep and may lose coverage . in addition , hhs stated that it is implementing steps to improve program integrity , such as by conducting a fraud risk assessment of the marketplace consistent with gao's fraud risk framework . as mentioned , we believe that performing a fraud - risk assessment consistent with our prior recommendations to hhs in this area could help address the control vulnerabilities we identified during our sep tests . in its written comments , covered california also stated that it is important to ensure that consumers who enroll in health coverage during an sep have , in fact , experienced a qualifying life event . covered california explained that its controls are in compliance with federal standards .