as a result , under h.r . proposed bill h.r . 560 would amend the cnra to establish a cnmi resident status for certain individuals . in my statement today , i will draw on data and preliminary results from our ongoing work to discuss dhs's implementation of ( 1 ) cnra provisions regarding foreign workers and investors in the cnmi and ( 2 ) dhs's discretionary parole authority under the ina as it has been applied in the cnmi . our ongoing work updates information from two prior products related to implementation of u.s. immigration law in the cnmi , published in may 2017 and february 2018 . for the ongoing work on which this statement is based , we reviewed relevant provisions in the u.s. – cnmi covenant , the joint resolution approving the covenant , the cnra , the ina , an executive order , and proposed legislation on cnmi immigration . we also reviewed dhs rules and regulations , policies , and other documents used to implement federal immigration laws in the cnmi . we obtained data from dhs's u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , which administers the cnmi - only transitional worker program and other federal immigration programs in the cnmi . we used these data to conduct preliminary analysis of the numbers of cw - 1 permits that uscis approved for foreign workers in the cnmi for fiscal years 2012 through 2018 . we also obtained information about other foreign workers , investors , and individuals to whom uscis had granted parole . to determine the reliability of the uscis data , we interviewed cognizant uscis officials in washington , d.c. , and at the uscis california service center , which adjudicates petitions for cw - 1 permits and petitions for other types of status . we also discussed our methodologies and assumptions for analyzing cw - 1 data and the results of our preliminary analysis with uscis officials . we conducted electronic testing of the data to identify and resolve inconsistencies in personally identifiable information for cw - 1 permit holders and to ensure accuracy in tracking these individuals over time . we determined that the uscis data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the united states took control of the northern mariana islands from japan during the latter part of world war ii . after the war , the u.s. congress approved a trusteeship agreement making the united states responsible to the united nations for the administration of the islands . in 1976 , the district of the mariana islands entered into a covenant with the united states establishing the island territory's status as a self - governing commonwealth in political union with the united states .