cbp headquarters allocates staff to ports . a director of field operations ( dfo ) is responsible for port activities within a geographic area and serves as a liaison between port management and headquarters . within ports with multiple port facilities ( that may be spread across a wide area ) , port directors decide whether officers are assigned to airport , sea port or land port facilities and individual facility managers are responsible for overseeing day - to - day operations . port directors are also responsible for ensuring that officers are appropriately cross - trained to support the agency's mission and to allow for flexibility in assigning officers to various inspections functions and locations within a port . 2 ) what steps have airports and airlines taken to minimize passenger wait times ? 3 ) how has cbp managed staffing to minimize wait times across airports ? to determine wait times for international air passengers , we analyzed cbp data on the wait times at the 20 u.s. airports that receive most of the international traffic . because the reliability of cbp wait time data is significant to the findings of this review , we evaluated the agency's internal controls and determined that the required data elements are sufficiently reliable for the purpose of this review . to determine the factors affecting wait times , we analyzed and observed the inspections process and interviewed cbp officials responsible for port management and certain airport and airline officials involved with international passenger processing . to determine the steps airports and airlines have taken to speed passenger processing , we judgmentally selected and visited five international airports based on their unique characteristics and geographic dispersion . we interviewed airport and airline officials who were involved in international - passenger processing and observed the inspection facilities at the five airports we visited to compare capacities and constraints to passenger processing . to assess how cbp has managed staffing to minimize wait times across airports , we interviewed cbp officials at headquarters and from the five selected airports we visited . we also reviewed documentation on cbp's activities for allocating staff to ports and spoke with agency officials responsible for planning and implementing a staffing model to be used to help manage staff . we reviewed our prior work and that of the department of justice inspector general on previous models used by customs and ins . in each case , the airports or airlines conducted studies estimating future passenger volume to justify the cost of constructing these facilities . for example , the total cost of the new facility in houston was approximately $440 million , according to airport officials . airport and airline officials said that these projects were planned , funded , and completed with the expectation that cbp would increase staff for the new facilities as passenger volume increased . however , cbp officials stated that the agency is not legally or contractually required to allocate new staff when inspection facilities are constructed or expanded and the agency is to make no commitment implicitly or explicitly regarding future staffing levels in approving new inspection facility design proposals . airports and airlines also have taken other steps to minimize passenger wait times .