cmas . starting in april 2012 , public - alerting authorities can use ipaws to transmit alerts via the cmas interface to disseminate mobile alerts , which are geo - targeted , text - like messages to mobile phones . these alerts are limited to 90 characters and emit a unique ring tone and vibration cadence , which is intended to , among other things , improve capabilities for notifying individuals with disabilities during an emergency . this new capability is designed to relay presidential ( or national - level ) , amber , and imminent threat alerts to mobile phones using cell technology that is not subject to the congestion typically experienced on wireless networks during times of emergency . most imminent threat alerts are issued by the national weather service , which began sending severe weather - related alerts to all regions of the country in june 2012 . according to fema , as of january 2013 , the national weather service had sent 2,667 weather alerts via cmas . an additional 3 imminent threat alerts had been sent from one state related to hurricane sandy and 17 amber alerts had been sent from the national center for missing and exploited children . while cmas became operational in april 2012 , participation by wireless carriers is optional under the warn act . nevertheless , according to ctia — the wireless association , all of the major wireless carriers have agreed to participate . some carriers may still be rolling out cmas capabilities and not all cell phones are yet capable of receiving alerts , according to ctia . some state and local alerting authorities we contacted raised concerns about the degree of granularity for geo - targeting these alerts , which we discuss later in this report . concerning future tests , fcc rules require a nationwide eas test to be conducted periodically , but it is uncertain when the next test will occur . fema officials told us that they are continuing to work with fcc in determining corrective actions from the test results and will not hold another test until corrective actions are complete . as we have previously reported , regular nationwide eas testing is essential to ensure that the system will work as intended during an emergency . fcc recognizes that outdated state eas plans contributed to some of the reception and retransmission problems during the eas test , and is being more proactive in requesting states to submit updated plans . fcc officials stated that updating state eas plans would be valuable to ensure that the monitoring assignments for the broadcast stations remain accurate when a national - level alert is activated . however , as of october 2012 , fcc has received 7 of 50 updated state eas plans . officials stated that they would continue to ask state emergency communications committees to submit updated eas plans to review , but that fcc has no authority to require the filing of eas plans . as a result , fcc is unable to fully verify that states are keeping eas monitoring assignments up to date . in addition , some eas participants we spoke with are waiting for more guidance from fcc , including anticipated changes in rules governing eas .