however , the program has yet to do so . ( see app . ii for a summary of nasa's reports to date on the lessons learned that are applicable to the retirement of the space shuttle. ) program officials said that this preliminary effort is the first step in an approach they expect to take to plan for retiring the space shuttle . according to these officials , they plan to use the information collected from this preliminary effort to guide in the development of a management plan for retiring the space shuttle . this management plan is expected to include such things as the overall plan , processes , schedule , and roles and responsibilities related to retiring the space shuttle . to inform this management plan , the program expects sometime around mid - 2005 to assess its hardware and facility needs through retirement to determine whether to maintain , closeout , or transition assets to other nasa programs — such as space exploration activities . once these hardware and facility assessments have been completed , the program plans to conduct an assessment of its workforce needs . officials said that they must understand the program's hardware and facility needs before they can conduct an assessment of its workforce needs through retirement . however , our prior work on strategic workforce planning has shown that there are steps that successful organizations take to better position themselves to address future workforce needs , even when faced with uncertainties . since the space shuttle columbia accident , the program has focused on its near - term goal of returning the space shuttle to flight . while this focus is understandable given the importance of the space shuttle's role in completing assembly of the iss , it has led to the program delaying efforts to determine future workforce needs . for example , in developing the management plan for retiring the space shuttle , program officials said that the majority of the assessments the program is to complete to support decisions regarding whether to maintain , closeout , or transition the program's assets will not be undertaken until after the space shuttle has returned to flight . according to these officials , one reason for this delay is that personnel needed to conduct the assessments are currently focused on supporting return to flight activities . because the workforce assessment will not be conducted until after the program determines its hardware and facility requirements , its future workforce needs will likely remain unidentified until well after the space shuttle has returned to flight . while the vision has provided the space shuttle program with the goal of retiring the space shuttle by 2010 upon completion of the iss , the program lacks well - defined objectives or goals on which to base its workforce planning efforts . for example , nasa has not yet determined the final configuration of the iss or the type of vehicle that will replace the space shuttle and be used for space exploration . these decisions are important because they affect the time frames for retiring the space shuttle .