the iss program will fund the remaining service flights . nasa expects this capability to be available in fiscal year 2018 ; however , it is unclear whether those vehicles currently in development under the commercial crew program will be ready in time . once this capability has been established , nasa plans to increase the number of astronauts in the u.s. operating segment of the iss from three to four . nasa makes a significant investment in the iss program each year . based on our analysis of nasa's fiscal year 2016 budget estimate , the agency anticipates that the costs to operate , sustain , perform research , and provide crew and cargo transportation to the iss are projected to increase by almost $1 billion — or almost 53 percent — from fiscal year 2015 to fiscal year 2020 when the projected costs are expected to exceed $4 billion . see figure 1 for iss funding from fiscal year 2010 through fiscal year 2020 . the majority of the total projected cost increase for iss is due to the iss program's need to pay for commercial crew and cargo transportation . the budget for iss cargo and crew transportation is currently planned to increase by over $700 million from fiscal year 2016 to fiscal year 2020 , at which point it will comprise over 55 percent of the total iss budget . iss program officials told us that in fiscal year 2017 , the program will begin to fund commercial crew missions that are expected to take place in fiscal nasa has also initiated steps to purchase six soyuz seats year 2019.from russia for flights to the iss in 2018 , the cost of which iss program officials said was accounted for in the projected transportation costs . if nasa determines that domestic commercial entities are able to fulfill crew transportation requirements in 2018 , those vehicles will become nasa's primary transportation source to the iss and the soyuz seats purchased may then be utilized as backup transportation or to augment future iss needs . based on our analysis of nasa's fiscal year 2016 budget estimate , the cost to operate the iss is expected to be relatively stable with only slight increases through fiscal year 2020 . the iss operations costs decreased $500 million — or 30 percent — from a peak in fiscal year 2011 through fiscal year 2015 . operations costs are expected , however , to increase by approximately $130 million from fiscal year 2017 through fiscal year 2020 , which nasa officials attribute in part to inflation and the addition of the fourth crew member . our past work on department of defense ( dod ) aircraft systems similarly found that operations costs can increase over time . there may be other factors that could increase operations costs for the iss over time such as the need for additional spare parts and mitigations needed for structural issues . the iss program has implemented a number of initiatives that have yielded cost savings or containment . for example , nasa reduced operations costs by scaling back iss program and contractor workforce levels and by combining several contracts . our april 2015 report provides a synopsis of these legislative actions .