dot did not comment on our other four recommendations . dot also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate throughout the report . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of transportation , and the administrator of nhtsa . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or siggerudk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ) added section 412 to title 23 u.s.c. , which among other things included a requirement that gao analyze the effectiveness of the national highway traffic safety administration's ( nhtsa ) oversight of traffic safety grants and usefulness of the nhtsa's advice to states on the management of safety programs . in addition , as the federal government prepares to reauthorize highway safety programs , the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation and the house committee on transportation and infrastructure asked us to provide information on how states have used section 402 safety grants and how nhtsa oversees state progress under these grants . to address these issues , we examined ( 1 ) how states have used section 402 funding to achieve national safety goals , ( 2 ) the progress nhtsa has made toward addressing consistency in the management review process , ( 3 ) how useful nhtsa's management reviews and recommendations are in improving management of state safety programs , and ( 4 ) the approaches currently available to improve safety outcomes . see appendix i for more details on our scope and methodology . the section 402 program provides over $1 billion for fiscal years 2005 through 2009 in federal funding to states for highway safety programs aimed at reducing traffic crashes and related deaths , injuries , and property damage . each year , after states submit a highway safety plan to nhtsa that describes how they plan to use section 402 funding , this funding is distributed to all states according to a formula that accounts for state road miles and population but not differences in safety statistics such as fatality rates among states . these grants are administered by state highway safety officials who identify traffic safety priorities of greatest importance to their state and select and fund subgrantees to carry out safety programs ( see fig . some states have hundreds of subgrantees , and state subgrantees typically include a variety of different organizations , such as state and local law enforcement agencies , fire departments , nonprofit organizations , and advertising agencies . in fiscal year 2007 , states spent over $203 million in section 402 funding on traffic safety programs .