no state has used the fund since 1997 . equally important as the requirement that states raise their own financial commitment in order to gain access to additional federal funds is a requirement that states share in all additional program costs — even beyond the moe requirements . requiring a match encourages states to be more cost - conscious than if the costs of an expanding caseload were covered only with federal dollars . second , the federal government would incur interest costs while states could realize interest earnings . the cash management improvement act of 1990 ( cmia ) helps ensure that neither the states nor the federal government incur unnecessary interest costs or forgo interest income in the course of federal grant disbursement by prohibiting states from drawing down funds until they are needed . if congress permitted , notwithstanding cmia , states to draw down their tanf balances to establish reserves , it could also require states to reimburse the u.s. treasury for any interest they earn on the drawdowns . this would maintain the spirit of the cmia by preserving fiscal neutrality for the federal government and the states , since the states could use interest earnings they gain on investing the drawdowns to reimburse the treasury . essentially , states would have to justify why tanf deserves an exemption from a governmentwide grant policy that settled years of intergovernmental conflicts between federal and state administrators . the permanent nature of the appropriation to each state as well as the significant devolution of responsibilities to states for addressing the program's fiscal risks may argue for such a change , but other federal interests would have to be weighed as well . for example , some may argue that cmia promotes transparency by ensuring that states' unspent balances remain in the federal treasury rather than in state treasuries . this concern could be addressed through federal reporting on states' expenditures and reserves . in conclusion , the tanf program has established a new fiscal partnership that has supported the transition to work - based welfare reforms . because the partnership has yet to be tested in times of fiscal stress , now is the time for both federal and state governments to consider actions to prepare for more uncertain times and the possibility of higher program costs . although tanf currently contains certain mechanisms to provide a fiscal cushion , the options we have presented provide an opportunity to promote greater assurance that all states will be poised to respond to future fiscal contingencies affecting their tanf programs . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . but it is unclear how much of what is currently obligated is committed for future needs . for example , both california and colorado have county - administered welfare systems . these states pass most of their annual block grant directly to the counties . as caseloads have continued to decline in both states , the budgets over - estimated expenditures leaving considerable balances unspent . greater emphases on work implies a tighter link to work and hence the economy .