no facilities assistance provisions . state has established a “charter school facilities account” funded by bond proceeds ( k - 12 ) . additionally , the state has set up a charter school facility grant program for charter schools located in low - income areas which awards up to $750 per student to provide assistance for up to 75 percent of the charter school's annual facilities rent and lease costs . each school district must make any vacant school facilities available to charter schools at minimum charge . charter schools must be able to use district facilities “deemed available” by the school district at no cost , except for operations and maintenance expenses . the state must distribute a portion of its education funds to charter schools to help cover capital construction costs . a charter school may ask its local school board to issue bonds to fund capital construction expenses . state has established a grant program that provides charter schools with up to $500,000 for assistance with capital expenses ; to be eligible , the charter school must have been operating during the prior fiscal year . school districts must make unused buildings or space available for charter schools , and must “bargain in good faith” over the cost of rent , services , and maintenance . the delaware department of education must publish an annual list of facilities available for charter school use . district of columbia district of columbia offers charter schools a limited preference to lease or purchase surplus public school buildings provided that doing so will not result in a significant loss of revenue that might be obtained from other dispositions or uses of the facility or property . an “enhanced credit fund” has also been established to help charter schools finance the purchase , construction , and / or renovation of facilities . district charter schools also receive an annual per - pupil facilities allowance . state agencies may issue revenue bonds to provide for charter school facilities assistance . charter schools are also eligible for facilities assistance from a state capital outlay fund . charter schools are offered a preference to use surplus school buildings . georgia state board of education may require a local referendum to decide whether a local board of education must provide funds from school tax levies or incur bonded indebtedness or both , to support a charter school . state oversees annual maintenance and repairs for charter school facilities and establishes a priority - of - need list for charter school facilities requiring assistance . a charter school's board of directors may borrow money to finance the purchase of facilities for charter schools . a charter school may negotiate and contract with a school district , a state college or university , or any other public , nonprofit , or for - profit entity for a school charter site . if a charter school uses an existing school building , the school is only required to pay the building operation and maintenance costs — no rent is required . no facilities assistance provisions . no facilities assistance provisions . no facilities assistance provisions . local school boards must make any vacant facility available to charter schools at fair market value .