i and ii ) . research is currently being done to enable the rapid identification of biological agents in a variety of settings ; develop new or improved vaccines , antibiotics , and antivirals to improve treatment and vaccination for infectious diseases caused by biological agents ; and develop and test emergency response equipment such as respiratory and other personal protective equipment . appendix i provides information on the total reported funding for all the departments and agencies carrying out research , along with examples of this research . the department of agriculture ( usda ) , department of defense ( dod ) , department of energy , department of health and human services ( hhs ) , department of justice ( doj ) , department of the treasury , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) have all sponsored or conducted projects to improve the detection and characterization of biological agents in a variety of different settings , from water to clinical samples ( such as blood ) . ( the complete name of this group is the interagency board for equipment standardization and interoperability. ) force packages response team . this cooperative group is developing a system to improve on - site rapid detection of biological agents in animals , plants , and food . bioterrorism: federal research and preparedness activities ( gao - 01-915 , sept. 28 , 2001 ) . combating terrorism: selected challenges and related recommendations ( gao - 01-822 , sept. 20 , 2001 ) . combating terrorism: comments on h.r . 525 to create a president's council on domestic terrorism preparedness ( gao - 01-555t , may 9 , 2001 ) . combating terrorism: accountability over medical supplies needs further improvement ( gao - 01-666t , may 1 , 2001 ) . combating terrorism: observations on options to improve the federal response ( gao - 01-660t , apr . combating terrorism: accountability over medical supplies needs further improvement ( gao - 01-463 , mar . combating terrorism: comments on counterterrorism leadership and national strategy ( gao - 01-556t , mar . combating terrorism: fema continues to make progress in coordinating preparedness and response ( gao - 01-15 , mar . combating terrorism: federal response teams provide varied capabilities ; opportunities remain to improve coordination ( gao - 01-14 , nov. 30 , 2000 ) . west nile virus outbreak: lessons for public health preparedness ( gao / hehs - 00-180 , sept. 11 , 2000 ) . combating terrorism: linking threats to strategies and resources ( gao / t - nsiad - 00-218 , july 26 , 2000 ) . chemical and biological defense: observations on nonmedical chemical and biological r&d programs ( gao / t - nsiad - 00-130 , mar . national response teams . the teams constitute a national planning , policy , and coordinating body to provide guidance before and assistance during an incident . interagency group for equipment standards . this group develops and maintains a standardized equipment list of essential items for responding to a terrorist wmd attack . this is a grouping of military units that are designated to respond to an incident . cooperative work on rapid detection of biological agents in animals , plants , and food .