v ) . all three agencies agreed that it was important to finalize key acquisition documents in a timely manner , and dod proposed extending the due dates for the documents to july 2 , 2007 . because the npoess program office intends to complete contract negotiations by july 4 , 2007 , we remain concerned that any further delays in approving the documents could delay contract negotiations and thus increase the risk to the program . in addition , the department of commerce agreed with our recommendation to develop and implement a written process for identifying and addressing human capital needs and to streamline how the program handles the three different agencies' administrative procedures . the department also agreed with our recommendation to plan to immediately fill open positions at the npoess program office . commerce noted that noaa identified the skill sets needed for the program and has implemented an accelerated hiring model and schedule to fill all noaa positions in the npoess program . the department also stated that the program director will begin presenting the detailed staffing information at monthly program management reviews , including identifying any barriers and recommended corrective actions . commerce also noted that noaa has made npoess hiring a high priority and has documented a strategy — including milestones — to ensure that all 20 needed positions are filled by june 2007 . dod did not concur with our recommendation to delay reassigning the program executive officer , noting that the npoess system program director responsible for executing the acquisition program would remain in place for 4 years . the department of commerce also noted that the program executive officer position is planned to rotate between the air force and noaa . commerce also stated that a selection would be made prior to the departure of the current program executive officer to provide an overlap period to allow for knowledge transfer and ensure continuity . however , over the last few years , we and others ( including an independent review team and the commerce inspector general ) have reported that ineffective executive - level oversight helped foster the npoess program's cost and schedule overruns . we remain concerned that reassigning the program executive at a time when npoess is still facing critical cost , schedule , and technical challenges will place the program at further risk . this shift affected the npoess deployment schedule . to plan for this shift , the program office developed a new program cost and schedule baseline . cost - estimating organizations throughout the federal government and industry use certain key practices — related to planning , conducting , and reporting the estimate — to ensure a sound estimate . table 6 lists the elements of a sound cost estimating methodology . in addition , to ensure the validity of the data assumptions that go into the estimate , leading organizations use actual historical costs and seek an independent validation of critical cost drivers . dod's cost analysis group used an acceptable methodology in developing the npoess cost estimate in that they planned , conducted , and reported the estimate consistent with leading practices .