open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in connection with treasury's current compilation process and the development of treasury's new compilation system and process , to develop and fully document policies and procedures for the cfs preparation process so that they are proper , complete , and consistently applied by staff members . open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in connection with treasury's current compilation process and the development of treasury's new compilation system and process , to require and document reviews by management of all procedures that result in data changes to the cfs . closed . management reviews were implemented in fiscal year 2003 under the current compilation environment . gao will review management reviews in the new compilation environment . as treasury is designing its new financial statement compilation process to begin with the fiscal year 2004 cfs , the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , to develop reconciliation procedures that will aid in understanding and controlling the net position balance as well as eliminate the plugs previously associated with compiling the cfs . open . as treasury is designing its new financial statement compilation process to begin with the fiscal year 2004 cfs , the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to use balanced accounting entries to account for the change in net position rather than simple subtraction of liabilities from assets . open . as omb continues to make strides to address issues related to intragovernmental transactions , the director of omb should direct the controller of omb to develop policies and procedures that document how omb will enforce the business rules provided in omb memorandum m - 03-01 , business rules for intragovernmental transactions . open . as omb continues to make strides to address issues related to intragovernmental transactions , the director of omb should direct the controller of omb to require that significant differences noted between business partners be resolved and the resolution be documented . open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to implement the plan to require federal agencies to report in treasury's new closing package , beginning with fiscal year 2004 , intragovernmental activity and balances by trading partner and to indicate amounts that have not been reconciled with trading partners and amounts , if any , that are in dispute . open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to design procedures that will account for the difference in intragovernmental assets and liabilities throughout the compilation process by means of formal consolidating and elimination accounting entries . open .