3 and app . iii for more detail on reasons states chose options. ) in addition , two important reasons state officials gave for choosing options were to decrease the burden on participants and decrease the workload for caseworkers , as shown in figure 3 . for example , several state officials told us they thought options such as simplified homeless shelter costs and simplified standard utility allowance that allow states to use a standard allowance rather than actual costs in determining eligibility would provide relief for participants and caseworkers . when standard allowances are used , participants do not have to furnish proof of all actual costs and , correspondingly , caseworkers have less information to verify . in addition , some state officials told us that they thought an option , such as transitional benefits , that decreases the frequency with which participants must report changes would reduce workload . under the transitional benefits option , households leaving tanf are automatically allowed up to 5 months of food stamp benefits and are not required to report changes in household circumstances during the transitional period . to view the results from the local food stamp office surveys , go to www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 04-1059sp . to augment information from our state and local surveys , we conducted three comprehensive site visits ( arizona , maryland , and michigan ) and two structured telephone interviews ( colorado and south carolina ) . we chose states for our site visits and telephone interviews to capture the variation in the following criteria: ( 1 ) number of and type of selected options , ( 2 ) numbers of food stamp participants and program participation rate , ( 3 ) program error rates , and ( 4 ) entity ( state or county ) administering the food stamp program . during each visit we met with state officials administering and developing policy for the food stamp program , local officials in the office where services are provided , and officials responsible for other key assistance programs , such as tanf and medicaid . we also reviewed farm bill legislation and related committee reports , and we reviewed fns reports and other program analysis . we held discussions with program stakeholders , including officials at fns headquarters and regional offices , officials at hhs , representatives of advocacy organizations , and other program experts . we performed our work from august 2003 to june 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the federal food stamp program is intended to help low - income individuals and families obtain a better diet by supplementing their income with benefits to purchase food . fns pays the full cost of food stamp benefits and shares the states' administrative cost — with fns paying about 50 percent of the administrative cost . in addition , state officials reported that they thought the child support expense income exclusion option would help more households to receive food stamps by making it easier for them to meet eligibility requirements . this option allows states to exclude legally obligated child support payments from the gross income of the noncustodial parent who is paying the child support when determining food stamp eligibility .