noncurrent cre loans have increased . from the first quarter of 2008 through the fourth quarter of 2010 , the percent of cre loans at community banks that were noncurrent increased from 2.2 to 5.3 percent , well above the average rate of 0.9 percent from 2000 through 2007 . the average from 2000 through 2010 is 1.94 percent . however , the data show that the volume of noncurrent cre loans has begun to level off ( see fig . cre loan charge - offs increased . from the end of 2007 through the end of 2010 , the percent of cre loans that had to be charged off at community banks rose from 0.19 to 1.34 percent . from 2000 through 2007 , the average charge off rate of cre loans at community banks was 0.09 percent , and from 2000 through 2010 it was 0.39 percent ( see fig . charge - offs and expected losses that may arise from increases in noncurrent cre loans have put stress on banks' capital and alll . increased bank failures linked to high cre and adc concentrations . many bank failures are associated with high cre and adc concentrations . in 2009 and 2010 , 102 of 106 of the mlrs issued by the igs of the banking regulators cited high cre concentrations , and 92 of 106 specifically cited adc loans in particular as a contributing factor in bank failures . in the 106 mlrs , 76 of the banks reviewed were community banks . for example , the mlr for one failed bank — which contains findings similar to many other mlrs we reviewed — states that the rapid growth of its cre portfolio “increased the institution's exposure to a sustained downturn in the real estate market and reduced its ability to absorb losses due to unforeseen events. cre market value declines could reduce overall small business lending by community banks . the recent financial crisis underscored how important it is for regulators to evenly apply guidance during strong economic periods , although this was not always the case , as previously noted . consistent application of guidance is important to avoid unduly hampering credit provision throughout the economy . cre still is working through a downturn sparked by the broader financial crisis , presenting an ongoing challenge to community banks and regulators . while community banks have been working through the challenges associated with many years of past growth in cre concentrations , cre portfolios continue to have a significant effect on community bank balance sheets as loan delinquencies and charge - offs remain historically high . community banks continue to seek ways to work with their borrowers and shore up capital to remain solvent , but the current economic environment and the expectation that refinancing of cre loans will bring a new round of market stress suggest many community banks may face these challenges for some time . and , because community banks tend to provide a greater proportion of their loans to small businesses , the availability of credit to small businesses could be constrained while community banks work through these difficulties .