we have incorporated this additional information into the report . in response to our draft recommendation that omb revise the it dashboard and its guidance so that only major changes to investments are considered to be rebaselines , omb provided us with its new guidance on managing it baselines , which was issued on june 28 , 2010 . it is intended to be the central financial system for usda and is to consolidate the current financial management system environment from 19 legacy systems into one web - based system . usda's risk management agency - 13 program is intended to support the reengineering of all business systems associated with the crop insurance program and provide a central financial system that will provide web - based tools and applications for accessing risk management agency data . dod's joint precision approach and landing system investment is intended to provide a precision approach and landing capability for all dod ground and airborne systems . it is intended to enable u.s. forces to safely land aircraft on any suitable surface worldwide ( land and sea ) , with ceiling and / or visibility the limiting factor . regarding our recommendation that omb consider weighing recently completed and ongoing milestones more heavily than historical milestones in the cost and schedule ratings , the federal cio stated that omb has a new version of the dashboard that implements updated cost and schedule calculations . this system is to be used throughout the army to provide a common view of critical information . doe's integrated management navigation system consists of 5 major projects and is intended to standardize and integrate accounting , data warehouse , human resource , procurement , and budget processes throughout doe . the integrated management navigation system incorporates enterprisewide projects from doe's office of the chief financial officer , office of human capital management , and office of management . doe's sequoia platform is a supercomputer being developed for use by three weapons laboratories — los alamos , lawrence livermore , and sandia national laboratories — to contribute dramatically to the national security enterprise . this supercomputer will also be used in maintaining the nuclear deterrence and areas of nonproliferation , nuclear counterterrorism , and support to the intelligence community . hhs's biosense program is intended to improve the nation's capabilities for disease detection , monitoring , and near real - time health situational awareness by creating a system that uses data from existing health - related databases to identify patterns of disease symptoms prior to specific diagnoses . hhs's electronic research administration program is the national institutes of health's system for conducting interactive electronic transactions for the receipt , review , monitoring , and administration of grant awards to biomedical investigators worldwide . it is also intended to provide the technology capabilities for the agency to efficiently and effectively perform grants administration functions . doj's law enforcement wireless communication system , also known as the integrated wireless network , is to support the replacement and modernization of failing radio systems and achieve communication standards at doj's law enforcement agencies .