automating hiring processes . our may 2003 report also emphasized that manual processes for rating and ranking job candidates are time consuming and can delay the hiring process . as we mentioned in our previous report , the use of automation for agency hiring processes has various potential benefits , including eliminating the need for volumes of paper records , allowing fewer individuals to review and process job applications , and reducing the overall time - to - hire . in addition , automated systems typically create records of actions taken so that managers and human capital staff can easily document their decisions related to hiring . to help in these efforts , opm provides to agencies on a contract or fee - for - service basis an automated hiring system , called usa staffing , which is a web - enabled software program that automates the steps of the hiring process . these automated steps would include efforts to recruit candidates , use of automated tools to assess candidates , automatic referral of high - quality candidates to selecting officials , and electronic notification of applicants on their status in the hiring process . according to opm , over 40 federal organizations have contracted with opm to use usa staffing . opm told us that it has developed and will soon implement a new web - based version of usa staffing that could further link and automate agency hiring processes . as we mention in the report we are issuing today , 21 of the 22 chco council members responding to our recent survey reported that their agencies had made efforts to automate significant parts of their hiring processes . improving candidate assessment tools . we concluded in our may 2003 report that key candidate assessment tools used in the federal hiring process can be ineffective . our previous report noted that using the right assessment tool , or combination of tools , can assist the agency in predicting the relative success of each applicant on the job and selecting the relatively best person for the job . these candidate assessment tools can include written and performance tests , manual and automated techniques to review each applicant's training and experience , as well as interviewing approaches and reference checks . madam chairwoman and mr. davis , this completes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you might have . for further information on this testimony , please contact j. christopher mihm , managing director , strategic issues , ( 202 ) 512-6806 or at mihmj@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include k. scott derrick , karin fangman , stephanie m. herrold , trina lewis , john ripper , edward stephenson , and monica l. wolford . reforming the classification system . in our may 2003 report on hiring , we noted that many regard the standards and process for defining a job and determining pay in the federal government as a key hiring problem because they are inflexible , outdated , and not applicable to the jobs of today .