gao - 05-859 . t ifii september 13 , 2005 . border security: actons needed to strengthen management of department of homeland securiy's visa security program . gao - 05-801 . t july 29 , 2005 . state argued that it already had such a plan . based on our analysis , we continue to believe it is incumbent on the department to conduct a worldwide analysis to identify high - priority posts and positions , such as supervisory consular positions in posts with high - risk applicant pools or those with high workloads and long wait times for applicant interviews . as we note in our report , at the time of our work , the midlevel visa chief positions in riyadh and jeddah , saudi arabia , and cairo , egypt , were not filled with permanent midlevel officers . this was a serious deficiency given that the visa sections were staffed with officers on their first tour . although state noted that it anticipated addressing this shortage of midlevel consular officers before 2013 , it did not indicate when that gap would be filled . moreover , state's bidding and assignment process does not guarantee that the positions of highest priority will always be filled with qualified officers . therefore , a further assessment is needed to ensure that state has the right people in the right posts with the necessary skill levels . in september 2003 , dhs assigned visa security officers ( vso ) to consular posts in saudi arabia and plans to assign staff to other posts to strengthen the visa process at these locations . as we addressed in our july 2005 report , according to state department consular officers , the deputy chief of mission , and dhs officials , vsos in saudi arabia enhance the security of the visa adjudication process at these consular posts , though several issues raise concerns about the vsos' role and impact . vsos in saudi arabia provide an additional law enforcement capability to the visa adjudication process and have access to and experience using important law enforcement information not readily available to consular officers . moreover , vsos' border security and immigration experience can assist consular officers during the visa process . the consular sections in riyadh and jeddah have incorporated the vsos' review of all visa applications into the adjudication process in saudi arabia . in addition to reviewing applications , the vsos may conduct secondary interviews with some visa applicants based either on findings from their application reviews or a consular officer's request . despite the vsos' positive effect on visa operations , however , several concerns exist about their role and overall impact . the requirement that vsos review all visa applications in saudi arabia limits the amount of time they can spend on training and other valuable services . we observed that vsos in riyadh and jeddah must spend a significant amount of time reviewing all visa applications , including those of low - risk applicants or individuals who do not pose a threat to national security , as well as those that have preliminarily been refused by consular officers .