see text box below . working capital fund ( wcf ) business process analysis help desk calls: the wcf division found that an unnecessarily high number of customer calls to help desks for password resets were contributing to higher costs to the department . for example , more than 20 percent of customer calls to treasury arc's financial management help desk were from customers requesting password resets , which can be manually resolved without calling the help desk and incurring a transaction fee . in fiscal year 2019 , the cost to hud per financial management help desk call was about $128 . according to the wcf division director , the wcf division presented its findings to ocfo leadership and the wcf committee , including five recommendations targeted at reducing system password reset call volume and future costs to the department . commercial purchase order transactions: commercial purchase order accruals are more costly because they are manually processed . among other findings , the wcf division's analysis determined that changing ocfo's current business process for obligations below a certain threshold could reduce the volume of transactions processed . the ocfo official told us that ocfo plans to implement one of the recommendations with a new process for recording those accruals in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020 to reduce the volume of transactions . according to the wcf division's analyses , the implementation of this recommendation could achieve potential annual costs savings of nearly $600,000 . however , ocfo has not taken actions to address seven remaining recommendations , which the wcf division found could produce additional benefits , including potential cost savings of more than $400,000 annually . the ocfo official told us that ocfo plans to examine hud's fiscal year 2019 service usage to determine the effectiveness of the actions it has already taken to reduce the help desk call and commercial purchase order transaction volume . the estimated help desk call volume and associated cost to hud for a given year , as agreed upon in hud's agreement with treasury arc , is generally based on the average of the previous 2 years' call volume . as such , changes in usage in 1 year will not necessarily result in lower service costs in the next year , but hud may realize cost savings over time if usage is consistently lower . while they have a process for identifying opportunities for efficiencies through the business process analyses , wcf division officials acknowledged that they have not defined and documented the wcf division's own roles and responsibilities with regard to the analyses . wcf division officials told us they are focused on other priorities , such as new business line proposals . however , they told us that they are open to defining these roles in the future . there are additional reasons why the wcf division has not defined and documented roles and responsibilities for these activities . for example , division officials told us that the division faces organizational challenges which may limit its own ability to monitor and implement actions . first , as previously discussed , the business line offices are responsible for managing and overseeing the service lines .