irs agreed with the recommendation . electronic filing: the percentage of tax returns filed electronically has increased from 52 percent in 2005 to 71 percent in 2010 . however , in 2010 , irs still processed 40 million tax returns filed on paper . electronic filing benefits taxpayers by reducing processing errors and expediting their refunds . increasing electronic filing would also reduce irs's return processing costs and increase revenue by facilitating enforcement . as noted in a december 2010 gao report , irs estimated savings of $3.10 per return for returns filed electronically versus paper in fiscal year 2009 . our prior work has shown that irs has three opportunities to increase electronic filing of individual income tax returns: ( 1 ) requiring tax software identification numbers would help inform research into how the pricing and attributes of different software products affect taxpayers' willingness to use software and file electronically , allowing irs to better promote electronic filing ; ( 2 ) working with taxpayers and their representatives to reduce the number of rejected electronic returns could reduce the number of frustrated taxpayers who opt to print and mail in their rejected electronic returns , leaving irs to identify and correct any errors and process the paper returns , thereby losing the benefits of electronic filing ; and ( 3 ) requiring software vendors to encode relevant information in a bar code that would be embedded on all paper returns printed from tax software and mailed would enable irs to obtain electronic information , such as a taxpayer's social security number and address , from the return . while not as beneficial as electronic filing , bar coding would still provide efficiencies over data transcription and enable more information to be available electronically . having more or all tax return information available electronically could help irs target audits on noncompliant taxpayers , avoid burdening compliant taxpayers with unnecessary audits , make more productive use of irs's audit resources , and — according to irs officials — increase annual tax revenue by $175 million . adjusting civil tax penalties: the internal revenue code has over 150 civil penalties that potentially deter taxpayer noncompliance . a number of civil tax penalties have fixed dollar amounts — either a specific dollar amount , or a minimum or maximum amount — that are not indexed for inflation . over time , the lack of indexing can decrease the real value of irs assessments and collections significantly . we found in august 2007 that adjusting civil tax penalty fixed - dollar amounts for inflation from 2000 to 2005 would have increased irs collections by an estimated $38 million to $61 million per year based on a limited number of penalties we reviewed . we reported that congress may want to consider requiring irs to periodically adjust for inflation , and round appropriately , the fixed - dollar amounts of the civil penalties to account for the decrease in real value over time and so that penalties for the same infraction are consistent over time . although congress has increased the amount of some fixed penalties since our report , only two penalties are to be adjusted for inflation on a periodic basis .