according to fema , partnering has other benefits as well . fema's approach is based on four objectives . two objectives fema hopes to achieve through map modernization — building and maintaining a premier data collection and delivery system and expanding outreach and better informing the user community — have the potential to improve the use of flood maps for improved flood mitigation and increased nfip participation , as well as multi - hazard risk management . the other two objectives — building and maintaining mutually beneficial partnerships and achieving effective program management — are intended to facilitate the achievement of the first two objectives and their intended benefits efficiently and effectively . the goal of fema's objective to develop a new data system using the latest technology is more efficient production , delivery and , thereby , the use of flood maps . as discussed previously , fema hopes to accomplish this by using geographic information systems technology that provides the foundation for the production and delivery of more accurate digital flood maps and multi - hazard data that is more accessible over the internet . in developing the new data system to update flood maps across the nation , fema's intent is to develop and incorporate flood risk data that are of a level of specificity and accuracy commensurate with communities' relative flood risks . according to fema , there is a direct relationship between the types , quantity , and detail of the data and analysis used for map development and the costs associated with obtaining and analyzing those data . fema believes it needs to strike a balance between the relative flood risk faced by individual communities and the level of analysis and effort needed to develop reliable flood hazard data if it is to update the nation's maps efficiently and effectively . fema ranked all 3,146 counties from highest to lowest based on a number of factors , including , among other things , population , growth trends , housing units , flood insurance policies and claims , repetitive loss properties , and flood disasters . this would then result in floodplain boundaries being shown in the wrong place . by their nature , paper flood maps have limited accessibility as compared with a digital map that can be made available on the internet . the expansion of internet connectivity in recent years has substantially enhanced the potential value of digital maps created with gis because now it is possible to locate and connect data from many distinct gis databases to develop analytical information on almost any topic that is associated with physical locations . digital flood maps created according to fema's standards are intended to provide users not only with the ability to determine the flood zone and base flood elevations for a particular location , but also with the ability to access other information like road , stream , and public land survey data . communities could use this information for a variety of purposes , including decisions on future development and evacuation routes . as part of map modernization , fema has promoted the use of a variety of advanced technologies to improve the accuracy of flood maps .