iii. ) certain financial institutions are also required to file currency transaction reports with fincen for transactions that involve $10,000 or more in currency . like sars , these reports are supposed to be analyzed to look for suspicious activity . financial regulators said they oversee financial institutions' programs for complying with these legal requirements because it is their statutory responsibility , not because it is included in the nmls . they said they would do so with or without the strategy . most officials said that september 11 greatly affected how the administration and congress thought about money laundering because some of the techniques used to launder money , illicitly moving funds to avoid detection , are similar to those used to finance terrorist activity . some officials said the new administration was more concerned with the burden anti - money laundering compliance placed on financial institutions prior to september 11 , but that the events of september 11 changed this , resulting in more attention being paid to the importance of anti - money laundering compliance . congress passed the usa patriot act , which , for example , increased the due diligence , reporting , and record keeping requirements for some financial institutions to guard against their being used by their customers to launder money or finance terrorist activity . some officials noted that usa patriot act requirements reflected topics being discussed in the nmls and other working group meetings that might still have been in the discussion phase had not september 11 motivated their inclusion in the usa patriot act , thus requiring treasury and other agencies to issue regulations . reflecting this change of emphasis , the 2002 nmls discussed the need to adapt traditional methods of combating money laundering to unconventional tools used by terrorist organizations to finance their operations . according to the 2002 nmls , the primary responsibility of the financial regulators was to participate in the drafting and issuance of usa patriot act regulations and to provide technical expertise on the operations of depository institutions and other financial institutions to treasury . the regulators also worked to educate financial institutions and their own staff on the new requirements . the federal financial regulators have participated in the implementation of the nmls from 1999 to 2002 in a variety of ways , including participation in working groups established by the nmls and , in 2002 , worked with treasury to implement provisions of the usa patriot act . the federal financial regulators were expected to participate in nmls initiatives , but treasury , rather than the financial regulators , was usually designated as the lead agency responsible for implementation . most federal financial regulators are independent federal agencies . therefore , while the financial regulators have committed to work with treasury and justice on nmls initiatives , they are not required to do so because , with the exception of occ and ots , they are not part of the executive branch .