implemented . a section was assessed as implemented if the responsible agency had completed responsive actions to address each of the section's requirements that we reviewed . in progress . we assessed status as “in progress” if responsive action was under way to address each of the section's requirements , even if statutory deadlines had not been fully met . not fully addressed . we assessed a section's status as not fully addressed when an agency had taken actions that did not meet the requirements specified in the act or had not taken action on requirements with imminent or expired deadlines . our work was conducted from april 2004 to september 2004 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for more than 20 years before the enactment of the e - government act , the management of federal information and information technology ( it ) was governed by a number of issue - specific laws and one law that coordinates across those issue areas . examples of the issue - specific laws are the privacy act , which governs the protection of personal privacy in government records ; the freedom of information act , which provides for public access to government information ; and the clinger - cohen act , which applies investment control concepts to it management . the coordinating law is the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) . like the e - government act , the paperwork reduction act gives management responsibilities to agencies and oversight responsibilities to the office of management and budget ( omb ) . the pra , as first enacted in 1980 and as significantly revised in 1995 , established the concept of “information resources management” ( irm ) to coordinate information and it management functions throughout the information life cycle , from collection through disposition . the pra established the omb office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) for governmentwide oversight and stated that the administrator of oira should “serve as principal adviser to the director on federal information resources management policy.” under the pra irm umbrella , oira is responsible for overseeing information collection and the control of paperwork , including review of agency information collection proposals ; statistical policy and coordination ; records management , including oversight of compliance with the privacy , including oversight of compliance with the privacy act ; information security , including oversight of compliance with the federal information security management act ; information disclosure , including oversight of compliance with the freedom of information act ; and information technology , including oversight of the clinger - cohen act and promoting the use of information technology “to improve the productivity , efficiency , and effectiveness of federal programs , including through dissemination of public information and the reduction of information collection burdens on the public.” the e - government act of 2002 added to omb's statutory pra duties with requirements to promote “electronic government,” defined as government use of web - based internet applications and other information technologies to enhance access to and delivery of government information and services and to improve government operations . to oversee these electronic government activities , the e - government act created the omb office of electronic government , to be headed by an administrator .