( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . dod concurred with our recommendation to develop a mechanism to better communicate to all stakeholders the implementation status of acquisition - related ndaa provisions . the department said it will develop a matrix reflecting the implementation status of acquisition - related ndaa provisions and post the matrix on the defense pricing and contracting public website . dod's written comments on the report are reprinted in appendix ii . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the acting secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment ; the secretaries of the air force , army , and navy ; the director , defense acquisition regulations system ; appropriate congressional committees ; and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by e - mail at woodsw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff that made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . a house armed services committee report related to the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2019 included a provision for us to review the department of defense's ( dod ) process for revising the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) , among other things . this report ( 1 ) determines how dod implements acquisition - related ndaa provisions and communicates implementation status , and ( 2 ) identifies the status of dod's efforts to implement acquisition - related ndaa provisions from fiscal years 2010- 2018 . to determine how dod implements acquisition - related ndaa provisions , we reviewed dod documents and supplemented our work with interviews with relevant dod officials . specifically , we reviewed the dfars operating guide , january 2015 ; presentation on the defense acquisition regulations system rulemaking process , dfars open and closed cases reports , federal acquisition regulation open and closed cases reports ; decision matrices from the defense acquisition regulations system ( dars ) , which document decisions on implementing ndaa provisions from fiscal years 2010-2018 ; and other applicable reports and information on provisions and cases from the dars staff and the defense acquisition regulations council . we also referenced our past reports on dfars rulemaking ; u.s. code on publication of proposed regulations ; the federal acquisition regulation operating guide , july 2015 ; federal register notices related to dod rulemaking ; and the news listing on the dars website . we adopted the dars use of the term “implementation,” which includes both regulatory action as well as other actions , such as public meetings or a report . we interviewed dod officials that are involved in the dfars rulemaking process .