selecting returns for audit ) . other irs policies — including the retention standard — reference the fair and equitable treatment of taxpayers in general , but do not consistently reference audit selection in particular . individual income tax return . all w&i's audits are correspondence audits — a type of audit conducted through the mail . audits have two compliance effects . first , they directly detect and correct noncompliance by the audited taxpayers . second , audits indirectly encourage nonaudited taxpayers to comply voluntarily . w&i's audit responsibilities generally concern refundable credits claimed on individual income tax returns . a refundable credit can give taxpayers a refund even if they owe no tax and are not otherwise required to file a tax return . nonrefundable credits also can reduce taxpayers' tax , but any excess is not refunded . the most common refundable credit that w&i audits is the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , which is a benefit for working people with low to moderate income . eitc will cost an estimated $58 billion in federal outlays in fiscal year 2016 , according to the office of management and budget ( omb ) . irs measures noncompliance in claiming eitc and also uses those measures to estimate its portion of federal improper payments . we believe irs should develop at least one objective and measure that reflects its definition of fairness . doing so would better enable irs to clarify how it operationalizes fairness in the selection process and assess whether its actions are meeting that objective . in regard to our recommendation on developing and implementing procedures to ensure that all criteria or methods used in programs to select returns for audit are consistently documented and approved , irs stated that it has procedures in place to document criteria and methods used in return selection . however , we found instances , discussed in our report , in which irs's documentation was not specific to return selection as well as instances in which procedures were not fully documented . incomplete documentation makes it difficult for irs to clearly communicate how audit selection works and defend against accusations that it is not appropriately following its processes and procedures . irs also stated that it would review existing procedures to ensure consistent documentation and approval . our report shows evidence of this need , such as being able to show how the selection criteria and methods were used consistently . for our recommendation on having additional procedures for monitoring audit selection controls and corrective actions , irs stated that it will review the processes in place for documentation and timely implementation of selection controls and corrective actions to further ensure the controls and actions are implemented in a timely manner . however , our report indicated a need to do more than a review by developing additional monitoring procedures . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to secretary of the treasury , secretary of labor , irs and sec .