( see app . i for a list of the sentinel indicators. ) in addition , we obtained and reviewed 20 states' emergency preparedness planning documents relating to medical surge and interviewed officials from these states responsible for planning for medical surge . we selected the 20 states by identifying 2 states from each of the 10 hhs geographic regions — one with the most aspr hospital preparedness program funding and one with the least funding . these selection criteria allowed us to take into account population ( program funding was awarded using a formula including , in part , population ) , geographic dispersion , and different geographic risk factors , such as the potential for hurricanes , tornadoes , or earthquakes . we obtained and reviewed dod and va policies and interviewed officials regarding their participation with state and local entities in emergency preparedness planning and response . ( 2 ) what have states done to prepare for medical surge in a mass casualty event ? ( 3 ) what concerns have states identified as they prepare for medical surge in a mass casualty event ? to determine what assistance the federal government provided to states to help them prepare their regional and local health care systems for medical surge in a mass casualty event , particularly related to four key components of medical surge , we reviewed and analyzed national strategic planning documents . we also analyzed reports related to medical surge capacity issued by various entities , including the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) , centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , office of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) , and the joint commission . in addition , we obtained and reviewed documents from aspr to determine the amount of funds awarded to states through its hospital preparedness program's cooperative agreements . we conducted our work from may 2007 through may 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . federal responsibilities for assisting states in preparing for emergencies include developing national strategies , policies , and guidelines and providing funding to assist states in developing their emergency preparedness plans and programs . number of participating hospitals statewide that have access to pharmaceutical caches sufficient to cover hospital personnel ( medical and ancillary ) , hospital - based emergency first responders and family members associated with their facilities for a 72-hour period . number of participating hospitals statewide that have the capacity to maintain at least one suspected highly infectious disease 7 . number of awardees' defined regions that have regional facilities to support the initial evaluation and treatment of at least 10 adult and pediatric patients at a time in negative pressure isolation within 3 hours post - event . number of ambulatory and nonambulatory persons that can be decontaminated within a 3-hour period , statewide . number of health care personnel , statewide , trained through competency - based programs . number of hospital lab personnel , statewide , trained in the protocols for referral of clinical samples and associated information . we also interviewed officials from aspr , cdc , and dhs to identify and document criteria and guidance given to states to plan for medical surge .