gao - 11-53 . washington , d.c.: october 7 , 2010 . dod has made some progress in marking legacy items . this cost is not included in the task force's estimate . as previously discussed , an iuid label on an item may contain human - readable information , such as the item's national stock number . in addition , the label has a data matrix that contains information about the labeled item . dod also provided technical comments , which we considered and incorporated where appropriate . dod concurred with our recommendation to develop quantitatively - defined goals for the number of legacy items that may allow dod to achieve the task force's estimate of iuid's potential benefits . dod stated that an iuid working group will identify the target population of items that qualify for iuid marking in a list of the items' national stock numbers and dod will track progress in its marking of individual items on this list according to component iuid implementation plans that are due to be submitted to the assistant secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness by september 2012 . dod concurred with our recommendation to establish quantifiable interim milestones for marking legacy items that allow dod to track progress toward its goals . dod stated that its iuid working group will establish interim milestones to track the progress of marking legacy assets as part of the development of component iuid implementation plans to be submitted to the assistant secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness by september 2012 . dod concurred with our recommendation to track progress using a consistent set of criteria . dod stated that progress will be tracked using a consistent set of criteria , once developed by the iuid working group . dod concurred with our recommendation to develop policies and procedures that provide for systematic assessment of the sufficiency of contractor - marked items' data matrices . dod stated that the defense contract management agency has risk - based assessment policies and procedures in place . according to dod , these include a review of contracts to determine whether they contain an iuid requirement ; surveillance of a contractor's iuid marking ; and an iuid checklist that requires agency personnel to examine an item's data matrix . dod explained that agency personnel assess the sufficiency of a data matrix by electronically reading it with a scanner supplied by a contractor or through a statement of quality from contractors that the agency has determined have adequate quality control . we believe that dod's concurrence with our recommendation may lead to the components improving their capability to systematically assess these matrices , and that the agency's policies and procedures may assist its inspectors in doing the same . however , our review of the policies and procedures provided by the agency indicate that it does not require inspectors to assess the sufficiency of data matrices in all cases .