iraq rejected the terms of this resolution . second attempt to create an oil for food program . iraq rejected the terms of this resolution . authorized transferring money produced by any iraqi oil transaction on or after august 6 , 1990 , which had been deposited into the escrow account , to the states or accounts concerned as long as the oil exports took place or until sanctions were lifted . allowed iraq to sell $1 billion worth of oil every 90 days . extended the oil for food program another 180 days ( phase iii ) . raised iraq's export ceiling of oil to about $5.3 billion per 6-month phase ( phase iv ) . it is unclear what actions oip took . as part of its strategy to repair iraq's oil infrastructure , the cpa had planned to install reliable metering at mina al - basra and other terminals , but no contracts have been let . oip also was responsible for monitoring iraq's purchase of commodities and the delivery of goods . security council resolution 986 , paragraph 8a ( ii ) required iraq to submit a plan , approved by the secretary general , to ensure equitable distribution of iraq's commodity purchases . the initial distribution plans focused on food and medicines while subsequent plans were expansive and covered 24 economic sectors , including electricity , oil , and telecommunications . the sanctions committee's procedures for implementing security council resolution 986 stated that experts in the secretariat were to examine each proposed iraqi commodity contract , in particular the details of price and value , and to determine whether the contract items were on the distribution plan . oip officials told the defense contract audit agency they performed very limited , if any , pricing review . they stated that no u.n. resolution tasked them with assessing the price reasonableness of the contracts and no contracts were rejected solely on the basis of price . however , oip officials stated that , in a number of instances , they reported to the sanctions committee that commodity prices appeared high , but the committee did not cite pricing as a reason to place holds on the contracts . for example , in october 2001 , oip experts reported to the sanctions committee that the prices in a proposed contract between iraq and the al - wasel and babel trading company appeared high . however , the sanctions committee reviewed the data and approved the contract . in april 2004 , the treasury department identified this company as a front company for the former regime . the united nations also required all countries to freeze the assets of this company and transfer them to the development fund for iraq in accordance with security council resolution 1483 . the sanctions committee's procedures for implementing resolution 986 stated that independent inspection agents will confirm the arrival of supplies in iraq . oip deployed about 78 u.n. contract monitors to verify shipments and authenticate the supplies for payment . oip employees were able to visually inspect 7 to 10 percent of the approved deliveries .