we disagree . because of the inherent conflict of interest that exists when wyo insurers are the property - casualty insurers for wind claims and are also responsible for servicing the flood claims on the same properties , fema must ensure that its internal controls are sufficient to minimize the potential adverse impacts of this conflict on the accuracy of damage determinations and flood claims payments . accurately determining claims payments is particularly important , given the likely eventuality that fema would need to draw on the u.s. treasury to pay flood losses that exceed the funds available from premiums . we do not suggest that fema collect and analyze wind claims data for each claim or even each flood event . rather , we recommend that fema have the ability to access wind damage claims information when it is available from the wyo insurer — that is , in circumstances when the wyo insurer is responsible for servicing both the wind and flood policies on the same property and when uncertainties exist , such as when the physical evidence has been compromised or limited physical evidence remains . obtaining wind damage claims information that is already available from wyo insurers establishes proper transparency over the adjustment process when both wind and flooding contribute to damages without an unreasonable or costly burden . as long as a conflict of interest exists with a wyo insurer that services its own policy for wind - related risks along with the nfip flood policy on the same property , additional controls are warranted . when properties are subjected to both wind and flood perils , particularly in cases where uncertainties exist due to limited or compromised evidence at the damage scene , collecting enough information to understand whether or not the wyo insurer is also the wind insurer for the same property and , if so , the extent of damage it determined to be caused by wind versus flooding , is key to maintaining transparency over the adjustment process . furthermore , when the same insurance company has already determined the amount of damage caused by wind and flooding for a given property , obtaining and assessing this available information should not be cost prohibitive for fema or wyo insurers . the authority to access policies , procedures , and guidance used for determining wind versus flood damage would enable fema to have a more complete understanding about how concurrent damages are handled by the wyo insurers . such information would strengthen fema's oversight and ability to identify abuses and better ensure the accuracy of flood payments made . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the administrator of fema ; the chief executive officer of naic ; the chairman of the house committee on financial services ; the chairman and ranking member of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; the chairman and ranking member of the house committee on homeland security ; the chairman and ranking member of the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ; and other interested committees and parties .