we disagree with this view . we conducted a detailed analysis of the major funding trends for park operations . for example , we reported the overall funding trends for operations , including appropriations from the onps account , in relation to the park service's total budget authority . as the report indicates , this trend showed that appropriations to the onps account increased overall during our study time frame at a higher rate than the park service's total budget authority . we also analyzed the trends in both allocations for daily operations and projects for the park service as a whole and for each of the 12 high - visitation park units we visited . moreover , the report showed that the fiscal year 2005 appropriation for the onps account included an additional $37.5 million over the amounts proposed by the house and senate for the operation of the national park system account , to be used for daily operations . furthermore , the report discusses the impacts that these trends have had on operations at the 12 parks we visited . in response to the department's comments , we have included more examples in the report showing where project funds have been used by park units . the department also commented that within a constrained fiscal environment , park operations have been a high priority for both the administration and the congress . such an analysis would require a much broader review comparing the park service's budget with budgets of other federal agencies , which was beyond the scope of our review . the department commented that the report draws a “false dichotomy” between operations and project funding . specifically , it said that the visitor experience at national parks is shaped not only by direct visitor services activities such as ranger interpretive programs , but also by the condition of park facilities and the natural resources . we agree that daily operations allocations — which funds activities such as ranger interpretive programs — and project allocations — which funds facility improvements — are both important to park operations and visitor experiences . furthermore , we believe there is an important distinction between how park units can use daily operations allocations as opposed to allocations for projects . in fact , the park service itself allocates onps appropriations in these distinct categories . daily operations allocations are used to pay for operating expenses such as permanent and temporary employees to perform day to day activities such as interpretive programs and cleaning restrooms . in contrast , park service procedures require that project - related allocations are to be used only for projects and not for day to day activities . the report recognizes this distinction by presenting these trends separately and by providing examples of how park units are using these two sources of allocations to conduct operations . the department also stated that the report's use of several park anecdotes concerning reduced allocations for daily operations is misleading .