this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . ยง 720 requires the head of a federal agency to submit a written statement of the actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and to the house committee on oversight and government reform not later than 60 days from the date of the report and to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this report . because agency personnel serve as the primary source of information on the status of recommendations , we request that the agency also provide us with a copy of the agency's statement of action to serve as preliminary information on the status of open recommendations . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , and the treasury inspector general for tax administration . the report also is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact nancy r. kingsbury at ( 202 ) 512-2700 or gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 . we can also be reached by e - mail at kingsburyn@gao.gov and wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . the objective of our review was to determine whether controls over key financial and tax - processing systems were effective in protecting the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of financial and sensitive taxpayer information at the internal revenue service ( irs ) . to do this , we examined irs information security policies , plans , and procedures ; tested controls over key financial applications ; and interviewed key agency officials in order to ( 1 ) assess the effectiveness of corrective actions taken by irs to address weaknesses we previously reported , ( 2 ) determine the extent to which compensating and mitigating controls presented by irs address previously noted areas of concern , and ( 3 ) determine whether any additional weaknesses existed . this work was performed in connection with our audit of irs's fiscal years 2011 and 2010 financial statements for the purpose of supporting our opinion on internal control over the preparation of those statements . to determine whether controls over key financial and tax - processing systems were effective , we considered the results of our evaluation of irs's actions to mitigate previously reported weaknesses , and evaluated a selection of controls that irs asserted compensate for and mitigate known deficiencies . other monitoring activities were also not always operating effectively . although irs had enabled audit logging for certain systems , it had not for others . for example , the agency had enabled and configured audit logging for unix operating systems on 31 servers reviewed . however , it had not enabled and configured monitoring activity for its authorization system . irs officials recognized this shortcoming and indicated that they are working with cybersecurity staff to resolve this deficiency .