you asked us to examine these issues . our review focused on the following questions: what circumstances contributed to the delay , and what effects did the delay have on the prices paid for vaccine ? how effectively do current distribution channels ensure that high - risk populations receive vaccine on a priority basis ? what is the federal government doing to better prepare for possible disruptions of influenza vaccine supply ? because physicians are the main source of flu shots for the elderly ( who comprise about half of the high - risk population ) , we surveyed 58 physician group practices to determine how readily they were able to obtain vaccine and the prices they paid for the 2000-01 season . the groups we selected included a diverse array of primary care groups nationwide , but they were not a statistically representative sample that can be generalized to all physician groups . we also interviewed officials of health departments in all 50 states about their vaccine purchase and distribution activities . we conducted this work from november 2000 through april 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . vaccination is the primary method for preventing influenza and its more severe complications . flu vaccine is produced and administered annually to provide protection against particular influenza strains expected to be prevalent that year . when the match between the vaccine and the circulating viruses is close , vaccination may prevent illness in about 70-90 percent of healthy people aged 64 or younger . it is somewhat less effective for the elderly and those with certain chronic diseases but , according to cdc , it can still prevent secondary complications and reduce the risk for influenza - related hospitalization and death . cdc estimates that during the average flu season , for every 1 million elderly persons that are vaccinated approximately 1,300 hospitalizations and 900 deaths are prevented . information on which groups are at highest risk for medical complications associated with influenza and recommendations on who should receive a flu shot are issued by cdc's advisory committee on immunization practices ( acip ) . because the flu season generally peaks between december and early march , and because immunity takes about 2 weeks to establish , most medical providers administer vaccinations between october and mid - november . cdc's acip recommended this period as the best time to receive a flu shot . however , if flu activity peaks in february or march , as it has in 10 of the past 19 years , vaccination in january or later can still be beneficial . producing the vaccine is a complex process that involves growing viruses in millions of fertilized chicken eggs . this process , which requires several steps , generally takes at least 6 to 8 months between january and august each year . each year's vaccine is made up of three different strains of influenza viruses , and typically each year , one or two of the strains is changed to better protect against the strains that are likely to be circulating during the next flu season . fda decides which strains to include and also licenses and regulates the manufacturers that produce the vaccine .