thank you . for further information on this testimony , please contact thomas j. mccool at ( 202 ) 512-2642 or mccoolt@gao.gov . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . these meetings help to ensure that we are collaborating as appropriate and not duplicating efforts . my statement today is based primarily on our march 31 , 2009 report that we are issuing today — the third under the act's mandate , which covers the actions taken as part of tarp through march 27 , 2009 , and follows up on the recommendations we made in our previous reports . the statement also provides information on our ongoing review of the auto industry financing program , which we plan to report on separately . specifically , like the march 2009 report , this statement focuses on ( 1 ) the nature and purpose of the activities that had been initiated under tarp through march 27 , 2009 , unless otherwise noted ; ( 2 ) treasury's office of financial stability's ( ofs ) hiring efforts , use of contractors , and progress in developing a system of internal control ; and ( 3 ) indicators of tarp's performance . to do this work , we reviewed documents related to tarp , including contracts , agreements , guidance and rules . we also met with officials from ofs , contractors , and federal agencies . we plan to continue to monitor the issues highlighted in our prior reports , as well as future and ongoing capital purchases , other more recent transactions undertaken as part of tarp , and the status of other aspects of tarp . we conducted this performance audit between february 2009 and march 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . as of march 27 , 2009 , treasury had disbursed $303.4 billion of the $700 billion in tarp funds ( see table ) . most of the funds ( about $199 billion ) went to purchase preferred shares of 532 financial institutions under the capital purchase program ( cpp ) — treasury's primary vehicle under tarp for stabilizing financial markets . treasury has continued to improve the integrity , accountability and transparency of tarp . for example , it recently expanded monthly surveys of the largest institutions' lending activity to cover all cpp participants , as gao recommended . these surveys should provide additional important information about how the capital investments are impacting participants' lending activities and capital levels .