gao - 03-1103 . washington , d.c.: august 18 , 2003 . department of veterans affairs: key management challenges in health and disability programs . gao - 03-756t . washington , d.c.: may 8 , 2003 . we also held discussions with va officials . to evaluate effects of the cares proposal to shift inpatient workload from va's murfreesboro hospital to nashville and non - va hospitals in chattanooga , we analyzed mid south network data for chattanooga - area veterans' inpatient workload at those locations during fiscal year 2002 and estimated the workload that would be served at those locations if the cares proposal were implemented . in addition , we used the department of energy driving time model to analyze the extent to which access would change if va opened the additional primary care clinics proposed in the national draft cares plan . also , we analyzed the reliability of key databases to ensure that there were no material errors or inconsistencies . figure 2 highlights the 18-county chattanooga area . as figure 3 shows , va estimates that the veteran population in the chattanooga area will decline by about 25,600 veterans from fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2022 — a decrease of almost 27 percent . during that same period , however , va projects that chattanooga - area veterans enrolled in va's health care system will rise by about 5,000 — an increase of more than 30 percent . moreover , within the central market , va expects the enrolled veterans' workload for inpatient hospital and outpatient primary and specialty care to double through fiscal year 2022 , in large part , as a result of the projected growth in the chattanooga - area enrolled population as well as the aging of that population . for example , 43 percent of the 16,379 enrolled veterans were 65 years of age or older as of september 2001 . almost all chattanooga - area veterans faced travel times that exceeded va's travel time guidelines for accessing inpatient hospital care . also , about half faced travel times that exceeded va's guideline for outpatient primary care . in addition , appointment waiting times for initial outpatient primary care and specialty care consultations exceeded va's guidelines , although va officials recently have taken several steps to shorten appointment waiting times . almost all ( 99 percent ) of the 16,379 chattanooga - area enrolled veterans , as of september 2001 , faced travel times that exceeded va guidelines for travel to the nearest va hospitals in murfreesboro and nashville . almost two - thirds of chattanooga - area veterans whose travel times exceeded va guidelines lived in five urban counties to which the 60-minute guideline applies — hamilton and bradley counties in tennessee and catoosa , walker , and whitfield counties in georgia . the rest ( 36 percent ) lived in rural counties to which the 90-minute guideline applies . as figure 4 shows , chattanooga is about 120 minutes by car from murfreesboro , the nearest va hospital .