we have included this list in appendix i . to address these objectives , we reviewed documents on activities conducted at the site during world war i , the progress of cleanup activities at the site , health risks , and estimated costs , and interviewed federal and district of columbia government officials and other stakeholders . we also reviewed the statutes authorizing various cleanup activities . in addition , we visited the site to observe the activities first - hand and attended meetings of resident and other stakeholder groups formed to advise the cleanup process . we obtained and reviewed records from defense , the environmental protection agency , and the district of columbia's department of health to develop a list of sites in the district of columbia where hazards resulting from federal activities have been found . in 1917 , the bureau of mines initiated the chemical warfare research program at american university , and in 1918 , the research effort was transferred to the chemical warfare service in the war department . the chemical warfare service used a portion of american university and other areas that became part of the spring valley neighborhood to operate a large research facility to develop and test chemical agents , equipment , and munitions . the u.s. army used the remaining part of the area as a camp to house and train engineer troops . these two areas were known as the american university experiment station and camp leach ( which includes fort gaines ) , respectively . historical and archival information indicates that onsite development and testing of ordnance and chemical warfare materials occurred at the american university experiment station between 1917 and 1919 , as shown in figure 1 . the majority of the property was returned to private ownership by october 1920 . during the 1950s and 1980s , american university and others raised concerns about buried munitions in the spring valley neighborhood . following an accidental discovery of buried ordnance in spring valley in 1993 , the corps designated the site as a fuds . the spring valley fuds includes , in addition to american university , about 1,200 private residences , sibley hospital , 27 embassy properties , and several commercial properties . according to the u.s. army , spring valley is the only known fuds where chemical agents were tested in what became a well - established residential neighborhood at the heart of a large metropolitan area . figure 2 shows the location of the spring valley neighborhood in washington , d.c. to fund the environmental restoration program , the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 ( sara ) established the defense environmental restoration account . total spending for the fuds cleanup program since fiscal year 1984 is $2.6 billion . during the 5 most recent fiscal years ( 1997-2001 ) , annual program funding for fuds cleanup has decreased from about $255.9 million to about $231 million , with program funding estimated to decrease further to about $212.1 million by fiscal year 2003 . by the end of fiscal year 2001 , the corps had identified 4,649 potential cleanup projects on 2,825 properties requiring environmental response actions .