circular no . a - 127 refers to the series of publications entitled federal financial management systems requirements , initially issued by the joint financial management improvement program's ( jfmip ) program management office ( pmo ) as the primary source of governmentwide requirements for financial management systems . appendix ii lists the federal financial management systems requirements published to date . figure 4 is the current model that illustrates how these systems interrelate in an agency's overall systems architecture . omb circular no . a - 127 also requires agencies to purchase commercial off - the - shelf ( cots ) software that has been tested and certified through the pmo software certification process when acquiring core financial systems . the pmo's certification process , however , does not eliminate or significantly reduce the need for agencies to develop and conduct comprehensive testing efforts to ensure that the cots software meets their requirements . moreover , according to the pmo , core financial systems certification does not mean that agencies that install these packages will have financial management systems that are compliant with ffmia . many other factors can affect the capability of the systems to comply with ffmia , including modifications made to the pmo - certified core financial management systems software and the validity and completeness of data from feeder systems . the federal accounting standards advisory board ( fasab ) promulgates federal accounting standards that agency chief financial officers use in developing financial management systems and preparing financial statements . fasab develops the appropriate accounting standards after considering the financial and budgetary information needs of congress , executive agencies , and other users of federal financial information and comments from the public . fasab forwards the standards to the three sponsors — the comptroller general , the secretary of the treasury , and the director of omb — for a 90-day review . if there are no objections during the review period , the standards are considered final , and fasab publishes them on its web site and in print . the american institute of certified public accountants has recognized the federal accounting standards promulgated by fasab as being generally accepted accounting principles for the federal government . this recognition enhances the acceptability of the standards , which form the foundation for preparing consistent and meaningful financial statements both for individual agencies and the government as a whole . currently , there are 29 statements of federal financial accounting standards ( sffas ) and 4 statements of federal financial accounting concepts ( sffac ) . the concepts and standards are the basis for omb's guidance to agencies on the form and content of their financial statements and for the government's consolidated financial statements . appendix iii lists the concepts , standards , interpretations , and technical bulletins , along with their respective effective dates . fasab's accounting and auditing policy committee ( aapc ) assists in resolving issues related to the implementation of accounting standards . aapc's efforts result in guidance for preparers and auditors of federal financial statements in connection with implementation of accounting standards and the reporting and auditing requirements contained in omb's bulletin no . 01-09 , form and content of agency's financial statements ( sept. 25 , 2001 ) , and bulletin no .