most of the identified weaknesses pertain to access controls . a primary reason for these weaknesses is that fdic has not yet fully implemented its information security program . as a result , weaknesses in controls over its financial and sensitive data increase the risk of unauthorized disclosure , modification , or loss of data . because of these heightened risks , we concluded that the weaknesses we identified constituted a reportable condition with respect to fdic's information systems security for 2005 . protecting the resources that support critical operations from unauthorized access is a basic management objective for any organization . organizations accomplish this objective by designing and implementing controls that are intended to prevent , limit , and detect unauthorized access to computing resources , programs , and information . access controls include ( 1 ) user accounts and passwords , ( 2 ) access rights and permissions , ( 3 ) network services , ( 4 ) configuration assurance , ( 5 ) audit and monitoring of security - related events , and ( 6 ) physical security . inadequate access controls diminish the reliability of computerized information , and they increase the risk of unauthorized disclosure , modification , and loss of sensitive information and of disruption of service . a computer system must be able to identify and differentiate among users so that activities on the system can be linked to specific individuals . its local and wide area networks interconnect these systems . to support its financial management functions , the corporation relies on several financial systems to process and track financial transactions that include premiums paid by its member institutions and disbursements made to support operations . in addition , fdic uses other systems that maintain personnel information for its employees , examination data for financial institutions , and legal information on closed institutions . at the time of our review , there were about 6,100 users on its systems . in our report on the results of our audit of the fdic funds' financial statements for 2003 and 2004 , we noted that fdic's implementation of a new financial system would significantly change its information systems environment and the related information systems controls necessary for their effective operation and that , consequently , continued commitment to an effective information security program would be essential to ensure that the corporation's financial and sensitive information would be adequately protected in the new environment . to support the corporation's financial management functions in 2005 , fdic implemented its new financial system in may 2005 . the new financial system is composed of 26 separate applications that either replaced or modified previous applications to support the new financial environment ( nfe ) . in addition to changing financial systems , fdic has undergone organizational changes in the last year that include the reorganization of the division of information technology . this division oversees the development and operation of the corporation's computer systems and software . it maintains the corporation's communications network and provides the expertise necessary for developing new information management systems needed by the fdic's bank examiners , researchers , legal case managers , and finance officers .