we requested comments on a draft of this report from naic . on march 28 , 2002 , naic's senior counsel for financial services provided us with the following oral comments on the draft . state insurance authorities obtained their authority from their state laws . naic staff told us that the model standards were designed to establish a flexible standard that all insurance entities can meet . they believe this flexibility is important because state insurance departments regulate many different types and sizes of organizations , all of which will be required to comply with this rule . naic staff pointed out the challenge of developing a regulation to cover a wide range of types and sizes of organizations was similar to that faced by ftc . new york has carried out the subtitle a mandate to establish standards for safeguarding insurance customer records and information . the new york department of insurance adopted regulation 173 , “standards for safeguarding customer information,” on february 27 , 2002 . california issued a proposed regulation that contains safeguarding standards for public comment on december 4 , 2001 . both new york's regulation 173 and california's proposed regulations are generally consistent with the current draft of naic model safeguarding regulation . it also must inform the consumer of how to exercise the nondisclosure option . a consumer's failure to opt out within a reasonable time after having the opportunity to do so means that the financial institution may disclose the consumer's nonpublic information to nonaffiliated third parties . the privacy notice and opt - out requirements are subject to certain exceptions . one exception , known as the joint marketing exception , releases a financial institution from the opt - out requirement when it discloses protected information to nonaffiliated third parties who are service providers or joint marketers . the exception specifically permits disclosures for the purpose of marketing the financial institution's products or services as well as financial products or services offered pursuant to a joint marketing agreement between the disclosing institution and other financial institutions , subject to restrictions on further disclosure of the information . subtitle a also contains two sets of exceptions from both the requirement to furnish an initial privacy notice to consumers ( i.e. the other set of exceptions includes disclosures authorized by the consumer , disclosures to the consumer's authorized representative , disclosures in connection with protecting the confidentiality of institution records concerning the consumer , disclosures required for institutional risk control and other institutional purposes , and disclosures specifically permitted by laws or to comply with legal requirements . all of the states and the district of columbia have by statute , regulation , or insurance bulletin advised the insurance institutions they regulate that the institutions must comply with subtitle a's disclosure - related provisions .