i for further examples. ) as shown in the figure , the public dose limit for nuclear power plants is one - third the u.s. average natural background radiation level . doe did not concur with our recommendation that it lead the development of a mechanism for interagency collaboration on research on the health effects of low - dose radiation . in particular , doe stated that epa and nrc also have legal mandates to research low - dose radiation exposure and that these agencies establish their research priorities in accordance with their respective budget authorities and recommendations from independent advisory bodies . doe stated that as a result , it would not be appropriate for doe to lead the development of a mechanism for interagency collaboration . instead , according to doe , from its experience , the leadership of an organization with government - wide responsibilities would result in the most effective interagency collaboration . we believe that doe's concerns stem from a misinterpretation of our recommendation , and we made several changes to our report and our recommendation to clarify doe's role . in particular , we did not recommend that a mechanism for interagency collaboration serve as a replacement for agencies' legal mandates , budget authorities , and recommendations from independent advisory bodies . instead , this mechanism would help agencies address shared research priorities , such as research needs that the national academies , in advising the u.s. government , identified regarding health effects of low - dose radiation . according to officials we spoke with from doe's office of environment , health , safety and security , more collaboration among agencies on low - dose radiation research would be very helpful . in making our recommendation , we did not specify the coordinating mechanism that agencies should use and instead left it to doe to lead the development of an appropriate mechanism . if the leadership of an organization with government - wide responsibilities would result in more effective interagency collaboration , as doe suggested in its written comments , then doe could implement our recommendation by working with such an organization to obtain its involvement in a coordination mechanism . nrc officials we interviewed said that nrc does not generally fund research on radiation's health effects but agreed to provide funding to the million person study with the understanding that nrc would be a minority funding partner in the program . however , after doe stopped funding the study , nrc became the largest contributor , providing a total of $2.1 million in fiscal years 2012 to 2016 . nrc also funded an epidemiological study analyzing cancer risks in populations living near u.s. nuclear facilities , but it did not continue the study because of the study's limited usefulness for drawing conclusions about risk and its long duration and high cost , according to nrc officials . nasa officials told us that the agency mostly conducts research on space - based radiation , which differs from ground - based radiation in terms of its physical characteristics and its effects on health .