gao - 09-620t . washington , d.c.: april 22 , 2009 . coast guard: change in course improves deepwater management and oversight , but outcome still uncertain . gao - 08-745 . washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2008 . other assets have baselines either with dhs for approval or are in development . since many deepwater assets are intended to replace older coast guard assets , delays in their introduction and final deliveries could have an effect beyond the deepwater program . for example , the nsc — together with the opc — is intended to replace older high endurance and medium endurance cutters , some of which have been in service for over 40 years . according to coast guard officials , the longer these older cutters remain in service — due to a delay in the introduction of the nsc or the opc to the fleet or delays in delivering all of the assets — the more funding will be required for maintenance of assets that are being replaced . according to a senior official in the coast guard's acquisition directorate , additional , unplanned funding will be required for a sustainment project to keep the high endurance cutters in service longer than anticipated . an acquisition strategy to achieve this project is currently in development . the coast guard's reevaluation of baselines has also changed its understanding of the capabilities of deepwater assets . to assess the coast guard's implementation of a disciplined , project management process for deepwater acquisitions , we reviewed the most recent update to coast guard's msam and the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) november 2008 interim acquisition directive 102-01 as well as how individual assets were complying with both sets of guidance . we compared these policies with best practices reflected in previous gao work on major acquisitions . we also interviewed acquisition directorate officials and program and project managers to discuss ongoing efforts to transition the acquisition of deepwater assets to the msam process and spoke with dhs officials about the department's major acquisition review process and reporting requirements . we also interviewed coast guard officials and analyzed documentation for the fleet - mix analysis currently being conducted by the capabilities directorate . we conducted case studies of selected assets , representing some that are in production as well as some with recent contract awards . this analysis included reviews of acquisition program baselines , operational requirements documents , test plans , and other key acquisition documentation and interviews with program and project managers and independent test authority officials . in addition , we met with contractor and coast guard officials at lockheed martin's facilities in moorestown , new jersey and icgs's offices in arlington , virginia to discuss the transition of systems integrator functions and current work on c4isr capabilities . we also met with coast guard officials at the aviation logistics center in elizabeth city , north carolina to discuss their role in upgrading and maintaining deepwater assets , and the u.s. navy's commander operational test and evaluation force in norfolk , virginia to discuss their role in conducting operational testing . finally we met with coast guard officials and toured facilities and ships , including the national security cutter bertholf in alameda , california .