as discussed , this should be minimized . however , when absolutely necessary , the risk that such data could be exposed to unauthorized individuals can be reduced by using technological controls such as encryption , which significantly limits the ability of such individuals gaining access to the data . while encrypting data adds to the operational burden on authorized individuals , who must enter pass codes or use other authentication means to decrypt the data , it can provide reasonable assurance that stolen or lost computer equipment will not result in personal data being compromised , as occurred in the recent incident at the department of veterans affairs . limit data retention . closely related to limiting data collection is limiting retention . retaining personal data longer than needed by an agency or statutorily required adds to the risk that the data will be compromised . in discussing data retention , california's office of privacy protection recently reported an example in which a university experienced a security breach that exposed 15-year - old data , including social security numbers . the university subsequently reviewed its policies and decided to shorten the retention period for certain types of information . federal agencies can make decisions up front about how long they plan to retain personal data as part of their pias , aiming to retain the data for as brief a period as necessary . limit access to personal information and train personnel accordingly . only individuals with a need to access agency databases of personal information should have such access , and controls should be in place to monitor that access . further , agencies can implement technological controls to prevent personal data from being readily transferred to unauthorized systems or media , such as laptop computers , discs , or other electronic storage devices . security training , which is required for all federal employees under fisma , can include training on the risks of exposing personal data to potential identity theft , thus helping to reduce the likelihood of data being exposed inadvertently . consider using technological controls such as encryption when data needs to be stored on mobile devices . in certain instances , agencies may find it necessary to enable employees to have access to personal data on mobile devices such as laptop computers . a decision about whether to use encryption would logically be made as an element of the pia process and an agency's broader information security program . while these suggestions do not amount to a complete prescription for protecting personal data , they are key elements of an agency's strategy for reducing the risks that could lead to identity theft . i just discussed some preventive measures agencies can take to avoid a data breach . however , in the event an incident does occur , agencies must respond quickly in order to minimize the potential harm associated with identity theft . applicable laws such as the privacy act currently do not require agencies to notify individuals of security breaches involving their personal information ; however , doing so allows those affected the opportunity to take steps to protect themselves against the dangers of identity theft .