reactive policing responds to crime after it has occurred . proactive policing attempts to prevent crime from occurring . $ from fiscal years 2008 through 2012 , the cops office managed 10 programs designed to advance community policing . as table 1 illustrates , these 10 programs provided funding to target crime issues , such as school violence , as well as to hire officers or develop crime - fighting technology , among other things . as table 1 indicates , chp accounted for 68 percent of the funds awarded through the cops office's various grant programs . ( 3 ) to what extent does the cops office's monitoring process assess whether grantees are using funds to advance community policing ? to address the first question , we reviewed the history of the cops office's programs and related award data from the most recent 5 fiscal years — 2008 through 2012 — and confirmed that chp received the largest share of funds as compared with other programs administered by the cops office during this period . ( 2 ) to what extent does the cops office's grant application collect information about how applicants plan to use chp - funded officers to advance community policing ? we also analyzed cops office documentation , such as the grant owner's manuals and cops office website materials , to learn about each program's origin and emphasis . to determine which areas of the united states have received chp funding , we analyzed the allocation of chp grant awards — and the numbers of officers funded — by state and mapped the chp grant award data . additionally , we analyzed chp award lists for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 to determine the average chp entry - level officer salary and benefits by state and territory , and assessed them for variation . to ensure the reliability of data used in our review , we interviewed cops office officials about the integrity of the data they provided to us and reviewed system tests that the cops office conducts periodically to ensure data reliability . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . we also interviewed cops office officials to determine what factors could account for variations in grant award amounts and to learn about other administrative aspects of the program . to address the second question , we examined the chp authorizing statute , the chp application , and the cops office's criteria for selecting awardees . we compared the chp application with the chp authorizing statute and best practices for grants management , including practices for designing applications , identified by the domestic working group . additionally , we selected a systematic random sample of 103 chp applications , out of 841 , that the cops office funded from the 3 most recent fiscal years — 2010 through 2012 — and reviewed them for their level of detail in describing applicants' planned use of funds . the results of this review are generalizable to all 841 funded applications . further , we conducted interviews with a nonprobability sample of 20 chp grantees in five metropolitan areas to understand how they were using their awards at the local level .