retained for parking . property was retained on the basis of guidance from the president . state has decided to sell the property . retained for recreational use . the state department plans to sell the property when the school relocates . in the interim , the department will charge the school rent . post has not acted to sell property . the buildings were acquired separately but are now connected . the state department has terminated these long - term leases effective april 23 , 2002 . obo officials predict that the state department will implement advisory board recommendations more quickly in the future . according to these officials , recent actions to expedite property sales , such as contracting for real estate appraisal and marketing services , will reduce delays in implementing the advisory board's recommendations by making approved property sales less susceptible to post appeals and inaction . moreover , obo believes that its enhanced standing within the department will reduce delays by giving obo a greater voice in intradepartmental discussions to counterbalance post appeals . in 2001 , obo was upgraded from an office reporting to the assistant secretary of state for administration to a bureau reporting to the under secretary of state for management . obo officials also said the advisory board's support for obo's position on most properties was a positive factor in helping to reduce post resistance to proposed sales . obo has implemented a number of initiatives to improve the identification of unneeded properties . accurate property inventory data would help obo and the posts to further identify such properties . however , inventory data are currently inaccurate and therefore unreliable , and post cooperation in correcting these errors and omissions has been inconsistent . while obo has taken action to expedite property sales , difficulties reaching consensus within the state department on sales of individual properties continue to cause delays . furthermore , the state department has not fully implemented most of the real property advisory board's recommendations , and properties valued at about $70 million have not been sold . additional property sales could be delayed unless the department takes action to ensure that approved sales recommendations are implemented as the congress intended — as soon as market conditions are appropriate and any issues with the host country are resolved . to improve the state department's ability to identify properties that may be available for sale , we recommend that the secretary of state take action to improve the accuracy of the real property inventory . ensuring that all posts install and use the new automated property inventory software would be a key step . in written comments on a draft of this report , the state department stated that it is in total agreement with our recommendation and is taking steps to implement it . the department added that it believes this report is a fair and accurate representation of its ongoing efforts to dispose of unneeded real property overseas , and that the report recognizes the progress and the many improvements that have been made and continue to be made . the department also stated that the cooperative effort between the legislative and executive branches on this review can serve as a model for future work .