iv. ) authorized signature ( sign at purchase ) “first day use.” not valid if altered . the kind of food tht ce prchased with vocher the mont of food prticipnt cn prchase with vocher ( prticipnt cn prchase only p to thi mont ) the ctual price of prchase with vocher ( cashier fill in t checkond ) unlike some other food assistance program models , wic vouchers do not provide an incentive for program participants to consider vendor prices for supplemental foods . for example , the food stamp and wic farmers' market nutrition programs generally provide electronic benefits or coupons that are used like cash at grocery stores or through farmers , and which encourage participants to make cost - conscious decisions regarding food choices . voucher 2 in figure 13 also demonstrates why it is necessary to know the price of individual items on the voucher . without this information , it is not possible to know whether the prices at one vendor are higher than prices at another vendor . in voucher 2 , the total value of the voucher is less than in voucher 1 , yet the price charged for a gallon of milk is significantly higher . use of the average value of the voucher of $14.00 clearly does not prove that prices at the second vendor are less than prices at the first vendor with the higher average value of $17.95 . in addition , it is important to collect the actual price of the sales transaction — collected at the point of sale — rather than a shelf price . using these data , we could determine the actual number of food vouchers redeemed at wic - only and regular wic vendors for each of the three states , as well as the average value of all food vouchers redeemed at wic - only and regular wic vendors in each state . for example , figure 12 depicts the information available on three representative food vouchers and how we combined the values for these individual vouchers ( eg , $17.95 , $13.07 , and $12.55 ) to determine the average value of all vouchers redeemed ( eg , $14.52 ) . we did this for all vouchers for wic - only and regular wic vendors in california , texas , and florida . to prevent potential duplication of data , we limited the study to the geographically contiguous states , omitting the 32 indian tribal organizations that authorize many of same vendors authorized by the geographic wic state agencies in which they reside . given the large size of the wic retail vendor population , we used existing data sources for our national - level analyses of wic - only vendors' growth and market share . because wic food instrument and redemption systems are unique to each state , we focused our analyses of wic - only vendors' contribution to program expenditures at the state level , concentrating on california , texas , and florida , the states that authorize 84 percent of wic - only vendors .