this represents over half of all government procurements . making services procurement more efficient is particularly relevant given the current fiscal environment , as any savings from this area can help agencies mitigate the adverse effects of potential budget reductions on their mission . moreover , our reports have shown that agencies have difficulty managing services acquisition and have purchased services inefficiently , which places them at risk of paying more than necessary . third , agencies have missed opportunities to increase competition for services due to overly restrictive and complex requirements ; a lack of access to proprietary , technical data ; and supplier preferences . we found that strategic sourcing efforts addressed products significantly more often than services and that agencies were particularly reluctant to apply strategic sourcing to the purchases of services . for example , of the top spending categories that dod components reported targeting through implemented strategic sourcing initiatives , only two are services . officials reported that they have been reluctant to strategically source services for a variety of reasons , such as difficulty in standardizing requirements or a decision to focus on less complex commodities that can demonstrate success . yet , like the commercial sector , federal agencies can be strategic about buying services . for example , dhs has implemented a strategic sourcing initiative for engineering and technical services , which is also in the top 10 spending categories for the army , air force , and navy . the reluctance of federal agencies to apply strategic sourcing to services stands in sharp contrast to leading companies . as described below , leading companies perceive services as prime candidates for strategic sourcing , though they tailor how they acquire these services based on complexity and availability . given the trend of increased federal government spending on services and today's constrained fiscal environment , this committee asked that we identify practices used by large commercial organizations in purchasing services . we reported on the results of this review in april 2013 . like the federal government , leading companies have experienced growth in spending on services , and over the last 5 to 7 years , have been examining ways to better manage them . officials from seven leading companies gao spoke with reported saving 4 to15 percent over prior year spending through strategically sourcing the full range of services they buy , including services very similar to what the federal government buys: facilities management , engineering , and information technology , for example . leading company practices suggest that it is critical to analyze all procurement spending with equal rigor and with no categories that are off limits . achieving savings can require a departure from the status quo . companies' keen analysis of spending , coupled with central management and knowledge sharing about the services they buy , is key to their savings . their analysis of spending patterns can be described as comprising two essential variables: the complexity of the service and the number of suppliers for that service . knowing these variables for any given service , companies tailor their tactics to fit the situation ; they do not treat all services the same .