( see fig . tmj implants may improve the function of the jaw joint , however , pain , which is a chief complaint of many who suffer from temporomandibular joint and muscle disorders , is not always relieved . medical devices , including tmj implants , are regulated by fda , through its center for devices and radiological health . tmj implants are classified as class iii devices . the total implant was approved with conditions to address the fda review team's concerns mentioned above . there was also conflict regarding the decision to approve the tmj implants , inc. , ( partial implant ) application . although the second level of management ultimately approved the device for marketing with conditions , both the fda review team and first level of management found that there was insufficient data to assure that the device was safe and effective . the review team recommended that the device be considered not approvable . the first level of management agreed with this recommendation for the following reasons: the data were limited due to lack of patient follow - up . for example , the group of patients with 2-year and 3-year follow - up data in the sponsor's clinical study was too small to draw significant conclusions about the device . of approximately 100 patients with implants , only 29 completed the 24-month follow - up . only 11 patients completed the intended 36-month follow - up . outstanding concerns existed related to ( 1 ) questionable conduct by the sponsor in classifying and reporting adverse events , ( 2 ) lack of engineering testing to determine the long - term effect of the partial tmj implant on the natural condyle , ( 3 ) unsupported indications for use of the device , and ( 4 ) lack of data on patients' clinical and treatment history . while the second level of management recognized and agreed with the scientific concerns that had been raised , the sponsor was sent an approvable letter requiring minor application changes , such as revised device labeling , and the device was eventually approved . an internal memo outlining the second level of management's approval decision stated that there was a compelling argument in favor of approving the device . it argued that there appeared to be a small group of patients , although poorly defined , for whom the device seemed to provide an option for relief of chronic pain . in addition , it noted that there did not appear to be a prohibitory risk associated with the device in patients who are appropriately educated about all treatment alternatives , their disorder , and the device , and this information is provided in the implant's labeling . however , the approval memo also stated that the decision to approve the partial implant did not imply that the previous concerns raised by the review team and first level of management related to the inadequacy of the data were reversed . of these concerns raised , those related to engineering testing on the device's effect on the natural condyle were addressed through conditions of approval ; the others remained unaddressed .