we used multiple methodologies to conduct the work for these reports . for example , we reviewed and analyzed ssi administrative data from fiscal years 2000 to 2011 ; reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance ; reviewed key agency documents , such as ssa's strategic plan , human capital plan , strategic leadership succession plan , and annual ssi stewardship reports ; and interviewed management and staff from ssa headquarters , selected regions , and field offices . we assessed the data we received and concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reports . ssa also has a stewardship responsibility to guard against improper payments . given the size of the ssi program , even small errors in benefit payments can result in a significant loss of taxpayer dollars . my testimony — based primarily on reports we issued from 2002 to 2015 — describes ssa's challenges with ( 1 ) ensuring ssi program integrity and ( 2 ) managing the program . more information on the scope and methodology of our work is contained within our published reports . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in april 2015 , ssa published vision 2025 , which incorporates input from employees , advocates , members of congress , and other stakeholders and articulates a vision of how ssa will serve its customers in the future . as a next step , ssa has indicated that it will create working groups representing a cross - section of ssa staff . under the leadership of ssa's chief strategic officer , they will be charged with developing a strategic roadmap for the next 10 years that will define actions ssa will need to take and resources required to achieve ssa's vision for 2025 . moving forward , ssa will need to implement the steps outlined in its long - term strategic plan — as well as those in its human capital plan — to ensure it has the capacity and resources needed to manage future workloads while making quality decisions . as stated in vision 2025 , ssa plans to realize its service delivery vision in part by simplifying and streamlining its policies and procedures , and in 2013 , ssa formed an ssi simplification workgroup that is tasked with identifying promising proposals that could simplify the ssi program and reduce improper payments . program complexity has been a long - standing challenge for ssi that contributes to administrative expenses and the potential for overpayments . in addition to collecting documentation of income and resources to determine ssi benefit amounts , ssa staff must also apply a complex set of policies to document an individual's living arrangements and financial support being received .