admin . code 7-21-8 ( a ) ( 3 ) . in addition , although the regulation does not require schools to obtain a physician's written orders , an indiana statute provides immunity from liability to school employees who administer prescription medication in compliance with the parent's or guardian's written permission and the practitioner's written orders . see ind . code 34-30-14-2 . the maine statute also requires the state commissioner of education to adopt rules for medication administration in schools , including training requirements for unlicensed personnel . the maine respondent told us that the rules have been proposed but not yet enacted . the pennsylvania respondent told us that currently there are no implementing guidelines in effect . the pharmacy - container requirement is specific to self - administered medications . code of rhode island rules 14-000-011 , sec . the south dakota respondent told us that the state board of education has not promulgated rules under the statute , but that the state department of health has issued discretionary guidelines addressing medication administration in schools . william bates , christine davis , jennifer joseph , stuart kaufman , monica kelly , lawrence kinch , lori levitt , mark ramage , anne rhodes - kline , and lisa wallace . the regulation requires either the physician's instructions or a pharmacy label . oregon admin . rules , 581-021-0037 ( 1 ) ( c ) . we did not verify the reliability or validity of the reports . we reviewed the anecdotal accounts of school - based diversion or abuse of attention disorder medications to provide an indication of the public perception of diversion and abuse of attention disorder medications at schools . we searched two major on - line databases for the period january 1996 to february 2001 for anecdotal accounts . the databases include articles from over 30,000 sources , including every major u.s. newspaper , magazines , and other published sources . because of the nature of news coverage , no conclusions can be drawn from these accounts . we did not verify the reliability or validity of the identified incidences . “administrators at xx middle school had heard about ritalin abuse for almost three years , principal x said . but they did not know of abuse within the school until a teacher spotted two students passing something in a restroom last month . since then , 15 students have been suspended.” cincinnati post ( cincinnati , oh ) may 8 , 2000 . “fifteen students at xx middle school are suspected of abusing the prescription drug ritalin . according to details of the investigation of this incident , students gave away the tablets or sold them for 50 cents to $1.” daily herald ( il ) may 8 , 2000 . “now comes word that the drug used to control the disorder – ritalin – is being used recreationally by people who certainly don't need it… . at xx middle school , 15 students were suspended recently for this.” the deseret news ( salt lake city , ut ) may 6 , 2000 .