implements the constellation program . to conduct our work , we reviewed nasa plans and processes related to to conduct our work , we reviewed nasa plans and processes related to transition and retirement . we reviewed project - specific documentation transition and retirement . we reviewed project - specific documentation related to transition and retirement within nasa as well as various nasa reports and studies on similar efforts elsewhere in the federal government . we reviewed budgetary information and guidance related to transition and retirement costs . we conducted interviews with nasa officials in the space operations mission directorate ( somd ) and the exploration systems mission directorate ( esmd ) who are responsible for transition and retirement efforts , including the transition managers . in addition , we interviewed nasa and prime contractor officials within the space shuttle and constellation program and project offices about the transition and retirement effort and met with nasa officials from the international space station program . therefore , the srb project office could have informed the prime contractor that it no longer needed the subcontractor's services as of january 2007 . however , because the subcontractor's refurbishment capability may be needed for the ares 1 crew launch vehicle ( clv ) , the srb project office sought and obtained $1.8 million in gap funding from the transition program requirements control board for work that would preserve the subcontractor's capability / skills for the clv through the end of fiscal year 2007 . otherwise , according to analysis completed by nasa , if the constellation program needed to restart the subcontractor's refurbishment capability in the future through a new subcontract with the clv's prime , it would cost $15 million . at the time of our review , the space shuttle program transition manager stated that the constellation program should decide by summer of 2007 whether it needs the subcontractor as its supplier . the lack of a “pull” from the constellation program — that would identify current shuttle suppliers that will be used in the new exploration program — may result in additional gap funding for some critical suppliers , costly production restarts in the event that some suppliers are let go but found to be needed later , or the capability could be lost altogether . the lack of requirements for the constellation program is not the only factor impacting nasa's transition plans and decision - making processes . nasa's plans and decision - making processes are relatively untested because only a small number of supplier decisions have been vetted through the decision - making process thus far . the strategic capability assessment database , as described earlier , was created to efficiently and effectively manage the transition and retirement of shuttle capabilities . the database divides each shuttle project element into a list of capabilities that comprise the entire project . each capability covers property , personnel , suppliers , and contracts data . a key decision date , last - need date , and estimated release date are determined for each capability . documenting decisions is an important part of the decision - making process .