see figure 1 . we further analyzed the 64 percent of appropriated funding that went toward the dna backlog reduction program and other dna backlog initiatives over the 5-year period . we found that , annually , nij generally has increased the percentage of funding provided to the dna backlog reduction program , while the overall amount of the dna and forensic program funds available through appropriations and prior year carryover decreased from a high of about $153 million in fiscal year 2010 to $118 million in fiscal year 2012 . for instance , in fiscal year 2008 , nij awarded about 36 percent of the total amount available to nij to obligate for the dna backlog reduction program . to what extent does nij have a process to determine its funding priorities for its dna and forensic program appropriation ? to what extent does nij verify data on grant results submitted by grantees and measure the outcomes of the dna backlog reduction program ? to determine how nij allocated dna and forensic program funds , we reviewed relevant appropriations from fiscal years 2008 through 2012 and compared related nij expenditures and award data for the same time period . nij officials stated that the increased funding for the dna backlog reduction program was primarily because the agency decided to prioritize the program more than its other initiatives . in addition , nij officials stated that funding also increased when the agency subsumed the convicted offender and / or arrestee dna backlog reduction program into the larger dna backlog reduction program starting in 2011 . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 , mackinm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . specifically , to determine the amount of the appropriation that went to dna backlog reduction purposes or other forensic science purposes , we reviewed nij awards and expenditure data using doj and ojp financial systems that track expenditures , ojp's electronic system for grant management , and hard copies of awards not contained in the electronic grant system . using the awards' purpose statements , we categorized the awards into those used for dna backlog reduction purposes , other dna - related efforts and those used for other forensic sciences purposes . we then solicited and incorporated input from nij officials to verify how we categorized each award . we assessed the reliability of these data by conducting electronic testing of the data and interviewing nij's managers responsible for the data . we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of determining how nij allocated dna and forensic program funds . to determine the extent to which nij has a process to determine funding priorities for its dna and forensic program appropriation , we reviewed nij documentation outlining nij's annual process for determining annual funding priorities . the available documentation consisted of briefing slides for fiscal years 2008 through 2011 and budget memos for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 . we also interviewed nij officials knowledgeable about the agency's annual funding priority process .