for example , the u.s . interagency coordination mechanisms . thirty - three percent ( 17 of 52 ) of the strategies we reviewed generally identified interagency coordination mechanisms . for example , usaid's multi - sector nutrition strategy identified joint planning , funding , and programming mechanisms for coordination among development and humanitarian assistance agencies at country and regional levels in usaid and the u.s. government as a whole . twenty - nine percent ( 15 of 52 ) of the strategies partially identified coordination mechanisms . for example , cdc's global health strategy and usaid's global health strategic framework both described the agencies' respective unique roles in global health but did not specifically discuss how the agencies would work together to achieve their goals . thirty - eight percent ( 20 of 52 ) of the strategies did not discuss interagency coordination mechanisms . as our prior work has shown , agencies that establish strategies that align with partner agencies' activities , processes , and resources are better positioned to accomplish common goals , objectives , and outcomes . our prior work has also determined that collaboration among federal agencies working toward similar results can help ensure consistent goals and mutually reinforcing program efforts that effectively manage fragmentation . these agencies can use higher - level strategic plans as a tool to drive interagency collaboration to ensure complementarities in goals and objectives . to improve alignment of related strategies , each strategy should address ( 1 ) integration with relevant sectoral strategies and ( 2 ) integration with relevant higher - or lower - level strategies . the six agencies implementing most of u.s. foreign assistance do not have consistent guidance for strategy development that could help ensure their strategies address the key elements we identified . for example , state and usaid guidance for strategy development includes many of these elements but does not cover all strategies that these agencies are involved in developing . additionally , guidance for state's and usaid's joint regional strategies , state's functional bureau strategies , and usaid's country development cooperation strategies does not apply to other state and usaid strategies , such as the joint state - usaid integrated country strategies . in this strategy , usaid committed to host donor coordination and other stakeholder forums to monitor progress and to establish a monitoring and evaluation “core team” to ensure that learning is incorporated in decision making . thirty - seven percent ( 19 of 52 ) of the strategies partially addressed monitoring and evaluation planning . some of these strategies emphasized the importance of monitoring and evaluation or made broad statements without outlining more specific plans . for example , the state - usaid joint strategy on countering violent extremism noted that state and usaid will develop a results framework for measuring progress that will be accompanied by clear , well - developed , and well - resourced monitoring and evaluation plans . the strategy also noted that state and usaid will , to the extent possible , develop a common set of indicators to measure outputs and outcomes . however , the strategy provided no additional details . twenty - one percent ( 11 of 52 ) of the strategies did not outline any monitoring and evaluation plans .