we provided a draft of this report to dol for its review . the courses tailored to the construction industry are the most popular . in fiscal year 2016 , about 75 percent of the outreach training participants took the construction courses , and 24 percent took the general industry courses ( see fig . osha's outreach training program reflects attributes of a well - designed training program . gao's training guide identifies attributes of a well - designed training program and suggests the kinds of documentation to look for that indicate that a training program has a particular attribute in place . osha is not required to follow gao's training guide , however , we found that the program's design reflected at least one indicator for six of the seven attributes of a well - designed training program described in the guide ( see table 1 ) . osha took steps to design the outreach training program so that workers receive consistent and quality training by using data to identify the content of the training , developing training materials , and issuing detailed requirements for training providers . according to osha officials , the content of the training was selected after the agency reviewed data on the leading causes of worker deaths and the most frequently cited osha standards . osha also developed training materials that training providers can use , including presentations , lesson plans , fact sheets , and tests . in addition , osha developed detailed requirements regarding the content and delivery of the training that apply to all outreach training providers to improve the quality of the courses and ensure the integrity of its authorized trainers . specifically , in 2011 , osha replaced its previous program guidelines with a revised policy document establishing requirements that apply to all outreach training providers , including in - person and online training providers . osha issued general outreach training program requirements and separate industry procedures for the construction , general industry , maritime , and disaster site courses . the requirements and industry - specific procedures identify the learning objectives for the courses , the topics that must be covered , and the amount of time training providers must spend on each topic , among other things . osha most recently revised the outreach training program requirements and industry - specific procedures in january of 2017 . osha used a combination of centralized and decentralized approaches to design the outreach training program . gao's training guide suggests agencies consider the advantages and disadvantages of using centralized and decentralized approaches to designing training programs . centralizing design can enhance consistency of training content whereas a decentralized approach to training design can enable agencies to tailor training programs to better meet the unique needs of the intended audience . osha used a combination of approaches by centrally setting the learning objectives and establishing detailed content requirements , while also allowing training providers to supplement the curriculum to meet the specific needs of their audience . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we conducted this performance audit from february 2016 to february 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .