or other procurement laws . the statute also gives the comptroller general authority to conduct audits of the graduate school's financial records relating to interagency agreements entered into under this provision . in 1996 , congress passed legislation that made it clear that as of april 4 , 1996 , the graduate school would continue to operate as a nafi ( 7 u.s.c . any fees collected by the graduate school are not considered federal funds and are not required to be deposited in the united states treasury . that statute also provides that the graduate school is exempt from various other federal provisions generally applicable to federal agencies , including the freedom of information act , the privacy act , and the federal tort claims act . consequently , the graduate school does not have to respond to freedom of information act requests , nor does it have any legal obligation to release any of its training materials , such as specific curriculum outlines , to the general public . the law authorizes the graduate school's use of the department of agriculture facilities and resources on a cost - reimbursable basis . according to financial reports for fiscal year 1999 , the graduate school reimbursed the department approximately $1.5 million for use of office space and other facilities . to get information regarding the extent to which agencies use the graduate school , we reviewed seven executive branch agencies . collectively , the seven federal agencies we surveyed used private companies more frequently in fiscal year 1999 than the graduate school.as table 1 indicates , these agencies had far more contracts with the private sector than interagency agreements with the graduate school ( 531 vs. 20 , respectively ) for training . in examining the funding received by the graduate school , we found a similar result: the agencies surveyed spent more on contracts with private companies — about $29 million — than on interagency agreements with the graduate school — about $5.7 million . the selected agencies accounted for approximately one - third of the total interagency agreement revenue earned by the graduate school in fiscal year 1999 . we also surveyed these agencies regarding their total level of training supported by the graduate school ( rather than training only acquired through interagency agreements ) . officials at the agencies reported that the graduate school's share of their overall training budgets was minimal , ranging from 0 percent to 11 percent of their total annual training budgets . agency officials we surveyed told us they followed specific internally established policies , practices , and procedures for making decisions on vendors and procurement methods . while only two of the seven agencies had documented these policies , officials from all seven told us their policies were consistently applied and required that at least two other vendors be considered for any procurement . for example , the u.s. customs service has written policies governing the acquisition of training that are published in a directive and a memorandum from the assistant commissioner . all customs external training purchases require the advance approval of the appropriate management officials with delegated authority to approve training . nasa officials said they follow the external training guidelines in the federal acquisition regulation .