locations . mobility support . we discuss each of the seven cost areas in more detail below . dod does not yet know the full facilities requirements for guam or potential environmental mitigations ; therefore , it does not have sufficient information to determine the full costs of building the facilities and training ranges needed to support the guam segment of the realignment . the cost estimate for the guam segment of the current realignment plan — including the cost of establishing training ranges in the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands and investing in local civilian infrastructure — is approximately $8.6 billion , of which a portion will be funded by the government of japan . however , this estimate does not fully capture the total costs of the guam segment of the realignment , because dod has not determined the physical layout of the marine corps presence on guam , or fully identified specific infrastructure requirements yet . to estimate the costs for the guam portion of the realignment , dod officials assumed that the main marine corps installation , or cantonment , would be constructed at finegayan ( an area in the northern part of guam just south of andersen air force base ) , and that the training range requirements would not have changed from those in prior plans . however , since the current plan calls for fewer marines to relocate to guam , and the composition of the marine units that will relocate has changed , different locations might be selected for the main marine corps cantonment and live - fire training ranges . those locations under consideration include military space at andersen air force base and naval base guam . as of january 2013 , dod is assessing alternatives and the possible effects that the current plan might have on guam's infrastructure and on the environment in order to develop the supplemental environmental impact statement . the results of dod's assessments could affect where dod builds , what the facilities requirements will be , and what environmental mitigations dod might take . dod officials told us that they will wait until this environmental impact statement is completed before proceeding with any further planning and assessments that may be needed to identify specific requirements . dod does not know the minimum level of government - provided housing needed to accommodate the relocated marines and to inform its housing investment strategies to ensure that the housing needs of servicemembers and their families are cost - effective on guam . of the $8.6 billion estimate for the guam segment of the current realignment plan , dod includes approximately $400 million to construct military housing for marines on guam ; however , dod has not performed the necessary housing analysis to validate this estimate yet , nor has it determined how navy housing policies and joint region marianas housing practices will affect marine corps housing requirements . according to joint region marianas officials , joint region marianas is responsible for maintaining and sustaining housing on guam . in 2010 , dod performed an analysis to determine the minimum level of government - provided military housing needed to serve both unaccompanied and accompanied servicemembers on guam .