ii ) . cras are required to provide a substantially similar version of the model summary of identity theft victim rights to any consumer who “contacts a consumer reporting agency and expresses a belief that the consumer is a victim of fraud or identity theft.” as previously mentioned , the act mandated that ftc launch a public campaign on how to prevent identity theft by december 2005 , but did not specifically require that section 609 ( e ) be included in the campaign . at the time of our review , some efforts to educate consumers , business entities , and local enforcement officials about their rights and obligations under section 609 ( e ) — notably efforts undertaken by the ftc , u.s . postal inspection service , international association of chiefs of police , and national credit union administration — were under way . we found that while most of the federal agencies and law enforcement agencies and other groups that we contacted were engaged in outreach related to identity theft issues , those efforts generally did not have a component specifically addressing section 609 ( e ) . in particular , ftc staff told us that outreach for section 609 ( e ) would be part of broader efforts to educate the public , business entities , and law enforcement officials about identity theft and fact act provisions and that outreach on 609 ( e ) would increase beginning in december 2005 as part of its public identity theft campaign . as of june 2005 , outreach efforts by a variety of interest groups , including businesses and their trade groups , federal law enforcement agencies , and banking regulators , were also just beginning . most of these groups saw ftc as having primary responsibility for outreach . ftc staff told us that they have undertaken a number of outreach efforts to educate the public , law enforcement , and others on the fact act , including section 609 ( e ) . however , ftc staff explained that section 609 ( e ) is only one tool in the resources available to victims for remedying the effects of identity theft and that ftc's first priority is to make those affected aware of all of the relevant provisions contained in the fact act . since 2004 , ftc in conjunction with federal law enforcement agencies has cosponsored six conferences and presentations geared directly to local law enforcement , which included a discussion on the fact act . in addition , since january 2004 ftc has participated in more than 50 conferences , seminars , and presentations on the fact act involving attorneys , bar associations , business trade groups , financial institutions and state regulators . ftc staff told us that these outreach efforts addressed increasing the awareness of section 609 ( e ) provisions , as appropriate to the particular audience .