ii. ) there does not appear to be a strong basis for concluding that the district's commercial property tax base is negatively affected by the federal presence . given that a large portion of the private sector activity in the district is linked to the presence of the federal government and other exempt entities , it is unclear whether commercial property would fill the void left if federally owned property were reduced to the hypothetical average level seen in other cities . in fact , a good deal of the commercial property tax base locates in the district due to the federal presence . for example , commercial office buildings in the district are occupied by contractors who provide services to the federal government , lawyers who need to interact with regulatory agencies , and public relations firms that interact with congressional offices , among others . the district of columbia tax revision commission presented a comparison suggesting that , even with the large concentration of exempt property , the per capita value of the district's taxable property base is large compared to that of other large cities and comparable to the per capita values in surrounding jurisdictions . it is difficult to estimate the net fiscal impact of the presence of the federal government or other tax - exempt entities because of the wide variety of indirect contributions that these entities make to district revenues and the lack of information on the services they use . tax - exempt entities do generate revenues for the district , even though they do not pay income or property taxes directly . for example , employees of the tax - exempt entities and employees of businesses that provide services to these entities pay sales taxes to the district . many of these capital projects affect the safety and health of citizens . deferred public safety projects include , for example , renovation of the third and sixth police district buildings and a disaster vehicle facility . district of columbia public schools' ( dcps ) fiscal year 2003 deferred projects included the replacement of electrical systems and heating and cooling plants and the upgrade of fire alarms , intercoms , and master clocks . public health deferred projects include asbestos abatement and lighting system retrofitting in local facilities . deferred transportation projects included rehabilitating bridges , paving alleys and sidewalks , and resurfacing streets . deferred maintenance project costs for three agencies total 79 percent of the total percentage of all deferred maintenance projects for fiscal year 2003 — dcps totals about 34 percent , department of transportation is about 30 percent , and the metropolitan police department is about 15 percent . table 7 lists the agencies and their deferred maintenance project costs for fiscal year 2003 and the 6-year period fiscal years 2003 through 2008 . see appendix iv for a detailed list of agency projects and funding requests that the district has deferred . the district's capital improvement plan ( cip ) funding for fiscal years 2003 through 2008 is currently budgeted at $3.3 billion for a total of 229 projects .