this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . § 720 requires the head of a federal agency to submit a written statement of the actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and to the house committee on oversight and government reform not later than 60 days from the date of the report and to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this report . because agency personnel serve as the primary source of information on the status of recommendations , we request that the agency also provide us with a copy of the agency's statement of action to serve as preliminary information on the status of open recommendations . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , and the treasury inspector general for tax administration . the report also is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact nancy r. kingsbury at ( 202 ) 512-2700 or gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 . we can also be reached by e - mail at kingsburyn@gao.gov and wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . the objective of our review was to determine whether controls over key financial and tax processing systems were effective in protecting the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of financial and sensitive taxpayer information at the internal revenue service ( irs ) . to do this , we examined irs information security policies , plans , and procedures ; tested controls over key financial applications ; and interviewed key agency officials in order to ( 1 ) assess the effectiveness of corrective actions taken by irs to address weaknesses we previously reported and ( 2 ) determine whether any additional weaknesses existed . these guards screen every visitor that enters these facilities . the agency had also corrected a previously identified weakness by consistently reviewing the images displayed on x - ray machines while screening employees , visitors , and contractors entering restricted areas . however , visitor physical access cards to restricted areas at one computing center provided unauthorized access to other restricted areas within the center — a weakness previously reported in 2010 . in addition , irs had not consistently applied its processes for reviewing access to restricted areas within its computing centers . for example , effective procedures were not in place at two of the three computing centers to ensure that individuals with an ongoing need to access restricted areas within the center were reviewed regularly in order to assess whether the access was warranted to perform their job . although one computing center regularly reviewed the visitor access list , it did not review the list of individuals who had ongoing access .