i , fig . stamping out and vaccination . killing infected animals and vaccinating uninfected animals — for example in buffer zones around infected premises — to limit the spread of the virus . compensating owners . paying owners fair market value for animals and equipment that the government determines must be destroyed to limit disease spread . to help prepare for a potential fmd outbreak , aphis and its partners conduct preparedness exercises in which officials practice responding to simulated fmd outbreaks . such exercises range from small - scale , narrowly scoped exercises to full - scale , broadly scoped exercises . for example , some exercises focus on specific response tasks such as electronic messaging between laboratories or shipping response supplies to the field , and involve relatively few people for less than a day . other exercises simulate a wide range of response activities that aphis and its partners would use in an fmd outbreak , involve dozens of people from different agencies and industry organizations in locations across the country , and last for multiple days . multiple units within aphis carry out these preparedness and response activities at the agency's headquarters in maryland ; field offices in 27 states and puerto rico ; and the national veterinary services laboratories in ames , iowa , and on plum island , new york . aphis's foreign animal disease diagnostic laboratory on plum island , new york , develops and performs diagnostic tests for foreign animal diseases , including fmd . aphis also works with federal agencies within and outside of usda , along with states , tribes , and academic and industry partners — all of which have roles related to fmd control , as discussed below . usda's food safety and inspection service is responsible for the safety of meat , poultry , and egg products . agency officials assigned to slaughter establishments examine animals before processing to look for visible symptoms of fmd , among other things . usda's agricultural research service conducts research on agricultural problems of high national priority , including the fmd virus and fmd vaccine . usda's national institute of food and agriculture invests in and conducts agricultural research , education , and extension to help solve national challenges in agriculture , food , the environment , and communities . the agency has funded modeling of fmd spread and research on potential economic impacts . dhs has funded research on fmd vaccine and development of response decisions tools , training , and equipment ; sponsored preparedness exercises ; and developed emergency plans , among other things . in an fmd outbreak , dhs may assume the lead for coordination of federal resources if the secretary of agriculture requests assistance from dhs . the secretary of homeland security , in coordination with the secretaries of agriculture , health and human services , the attorney general , and the administrator of the environmental protection agency , is to ensure that the combined federal , state , and local response capabilities are adequate to respond quickly and effectively to a major disease outbreak , among other things , affecting the national agriculture or food infrastructure .