as the use of the u.s . munitions list and the commerce control list expands to areas beyond export controls , taking steps to apply the concepts and terms used by the lists consistently would help eliminate confusion and facilitate collaboration . state's export compliance officials noted that the u.s . munitions list sets out a procedure for assessing items to determine whether they are subject to state's export control regulations , and that other potential users of this list need to understand how this procedure works in order to avoid confusion . some impediments to collaboration could be addressed when the implementation of certain initiatives is completed . for example , dod's use of better buying power 2.0's defense exportability features enables dod to more clearly inform acquisition programs about their responsibilities for critical technologies programs such as anti - tamper policy and foreign military sales at the design stage , rather than waiting until decisions are made about where to deploy or sell a system . dod plans to continue the defense exportability features initiative in better buying power 3.0 , which launched in september 2014 . in addition , the establishment of the e2c2 was a step toward addressing concerns about collaboration we had raised in prior reports , and the e2c2's deconfliction process provides significant opportunities for improved information sharing . however , the full benefit of export enforcement coordination is limited until all of the standard operating procedures are completed , including the one that allows for greater collaboration between the enforcement and intelligence communities . in a september 2014 meeting with senior representatives of the agencies involved in the protection of critical technologies , we discussed their efforts to address our designation of this area as high risk and also discussed the possibility of having one agency in charge of this area . these agencies expressed concern over their distinct roles and responsibilities and which agency would take the lead for coordinating efforts to protect critical technologies . in subsequent discussions with these agencies , the officials responsible for the operations of these programs generally agreed with the need for better collaboration among the programs , including actions not currently being taken . such actions could include holding an annual meeting of the programs designed to protect critical technologies to discuss the technologies they are protecting , their programs' intent , and any new developments or changes planned for their programs . for example , the director of dod's defense technology security administration stated that , even within dod , these programs expand beyond any one organization and initiatives are occurring within these programs . interagency collaboration mechanisms for various agencies involved in common goals , such as the protection of critical technologies , are essential to avoid the potential for a patchwork of activities that could waste scarce funds and limit the overall effectiveness of federal efforts . cross agency collaboration may strengthen the alliance of these programs and create common understanding of these technologies and better ensure that they are provided to foreign entities in a manner consistent with u.s. interests .