ponder . “gender , age , and race in subprime america.” housing policy debate , vol . zimmerman treichel , monica and jonathan a. scott . “women - owned businesses and access to bank credit: evidence from three surveys since 1987.” venture capital , vol . “do women pay more for mortgages ? ” the journal of real estate finance and economics , vol . cheng , ping , zhenguo lin , and yingchun liu . “racial discrepancy in mortgage interest rates.” the journal of real estate finance and economics , vol . cole , rebel , and tatyana sokolyk . “who needs credit and who gets credit ? evidence from the surveys of small business finances” . journal of financial stability , vol . coleman , susan . “access to debt capital for women - and minority - owned small firms: does educational attainment have an impact ? ” journal of developmental entrepreneurship , vol . duesterhas , megan , liz grauerholz , rebecca weichsel , and nicholas a. guittar . “the cost of doing femininity: gendered disparities in pricing of personal care products and services,” gender issues , vol . goodman , laurie , jun zhu , and bing bai . “women are better than men at paying their mortgages.” urban institute , research report ( 2016 ) . haughwout , andrew , et al . “do lenders discriminate against minority and woman entrepreneurs ? ” journal of urban economics 63 ( 2008 ) : 467 – 497 . blanchflower , david g. , phillip b. levine , and david j. zimmerman . “discrimination in the small - business credit market.” the review of economics and statistics , vol . busse , meghan r. , ayelet israeli , and florian zettelmeyer . “repairing the damage: the effect of price expectations on auto repair price quotes.” national bureau of economic research , working paper 19154 ( 2013 ) . cavalluzzo , ken s. , linda c. cavalluzzo , and john d. wolken . “competition , small business financing , and discrimination: evidence from a new survey.” the journal of business , vol . cheng , ping , zhenguo lin , and yingchun liu . “subprime mortgage pricing: the impact of race , ethnicity , and gender on the cost of borrowing.” brookings - wharton papers on urban affairs ( 2009 ) : 33-63 . mijid , naranchimeg . “gender differences in type 1 credit rationing of small businesses in the us.” cogent economics & finance , vol . mijid , naranchimeg . “why are female small business owners in the united states less likely to apply for bank loans than their male counterparts ? ” journal of small business & entrepreneurship , vol . mijid , naranchimeg and alexandra bernasek . “gender and the credit rationing of small businesses.” the social science journal , vol . morton , fiona scott , florian zettelmeyer , and jorge silva - risso . “consumer information and price discrimination: does the internet affect the pricing of new cars to women and minorities ? ” national bureau of economic research , working paper 8668 ( 2001 ) . o'connor , sally . “the impact of gender in the mortgage credit market.” university of wisconsin - milwaukee doctoral dissertation ( 1996 ) .