status coordination . however , irs officials said they share with external stakeholders the general timeframes for upcoming guidance . report: information reporting: irs could improve cost basis and transaction settlement reporting implementation , gao - 11-557 ( washington , d.c.: may 19 , 2011 ) . to gain efficiencies and improve taxpayer service , the commissioner of internal revenue should direct the appropriate officials to: ( 1 ) determine a customer service telephone standard , and the resources required to achieve this standard based on input from congress and other stakeholders . ( 2 ) assess business units' needs for holding contact analytics calls beyond 45 days and store calls for this period or document that the costs of doing so exceed the benefits . ( 1 ) as of august 2014 , irs's position remained that its measure of telephone service does not need to be revised and the current process for establishing irs telephone plans is sufficient . however , we continue to believe that a telephone standard would serve as a means of communicating to congress and others what irs believes would constitute good service . ( 3 ) establish a performance measure for taxpayer correspondence that includes providing timely service to taxpayers . report: 2010 tax filing season: irs's performance improved in some key areas , but efficiency gains are possible in others , gao - 11-111 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 16 , 2010 ) . ( 2 ) irs disagreed with this recommendation . as of august 2014 , irs officials continue to maintain that increasing the recorded call storage beyond 45 days would not be a low cost effort . however , we continue to believe that storing calls for extended periods would allow irs to better identify trends and taxpayer concerns , thus offsetting the costs . ( 3 ) irs agreed with this recommendation and started using more detailed performance measures that includes an overaged / timeliness measure for its correspondence beginning in fiscal year 2011 . however , in april 2014 , we reported that overaged correspondence increased from 25 to 47 percent ; thus , we continue to believe that elevating this measure to irs's suite of balanced measures would help provide more visibility and ultimately better service . open recommendations to gauge the extent of 1099-misc payer noncompliance and its contribution to the tax gap , we recommend that the commissioner of the internal revenue service , as part of future research studies: ( 1 ) develop an estimate of 1099-misc payer noncompliance . status ( 1 ) according to irs , developing such an estimate requires a multi - pronged approach and a large amount of coordinated effort . as of september 2014 , irs estimates results will be available in december 2015 . ( 2 ) determine the nature and characteristics of those payers that do not comply with 1099-misc reporting requirements so that this information can be factored into an irs - wide strategy for increasing 1099-misc payer compliance . ( 2 ) irs researchers are collecting data on 1099-misc reporting as part of its national research program study on employment taxes , a program that involves examinations of a sample of tax returns expected to culminate in 2015 .