preventing fraud . finally , two states reported that data analytics had the advantage of improving the return on investment of anti - fraud activities through the prevention of fraud before it occurs . for example , officials in wisconsin estimated that data analytics has helped them prevent a large proportion of fraud before it occurs , thereby improving the cost - benefit of their anti - fraud practices . financial savings . four states reported that data analytics had the advantage of financial savings through the collection of overpayments and the closure of cases . for example , officials in washington said that its data matching activities saved millions of dollars through the closure of cases . how has fns assisted states in implementing leading practices for data analytics ? prioritizing and enhancing investigations . four states reported that data analytics helped them prioritize and enhance fraud investigations . for example , officials in washington said that they had a system in place that used an algorithm to rank each fraud referral based on a number of factors and moved higher - risk referrals to the top of the list of investigations . officials in wisconsin said that they combined eligibility , transaction , and retailer data and analyzed it to produce a prioritized list of individuals who appeared most likely to have trafficked at a specific retailer , allowing them to focus their investigative resources on cases most likely to be fraud . officials in mississippi noted that data analytics can be an effective deterrent . officials we interviewed in all seven selected states reported a range of organizational and resource challenges that either prevented them from using more advanced data analytics techniques or made their current data analytics practices difficult to implement . quantifying benefits of data analytics . for all three objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , program guidance , and reports . for objective 1 , we analyzed all out - of - state snap transactions for fiscal year 2017 using data provided by fns . we selected the district of columbia and two states — north dakota and washington — with large amounts of non - border out - of - state transactions ( compared to all snap benefits issued in the state ) for further review . for these states , we reviewed fiscal year 2017 transaction data for households that spent all their benefits in a non - border state in that year . we also analyzed all transaction data for households in these states for indicators of potential trafficking . for objective 2 , we selected these three states as well as massachusetts , mississippi , new mexico , and wisconsin for our review . we selected these seven states to reflect a range of individual state experiences based on the percentage of non - border state transactions , receipt of related technical assistance , and fns's reports on their capacity to conduct data analysis . we interviewed knowledgeable officials from the seven state snap agencies about their efforts to use data analytics to detect potential recipient fraud and the advantages and challenges states face in doing so . we obtained related documentation when possible .