we did not independently assess the merits of detainee complaints . of the approximately 1,700 detainee complaints in the oig database that were filed in fiscal years 2003 through 2006 , oig investigated 173 and referred the others to other dhs components . our review of approximately 750 detainee complaints in the oig database from fiscal years 2005 through 2006 showed that about 11 percent involved issues relating to medical treatment , such as a detainees alleging that they were denied access to specialized medical care . opr stated that in fiscal years 2003 through 2006 , they had received 409 allegations concerning the treatment of detainees . seven of these allegations were found to be substantiated , 26 unfounded , and 65 unsubstantiated . four of the seven substantiated cases involved employee misconduct , resulting in four terminations . according to opr officials , three cases were still being adjudicated and the nature of the allegations was not provided . additionally , 200 of the allegations were classified by opr as either information only to facility management , requiring no further action , or were referred to facility management for action , requiring a response . crcl also receives complaints referred from the oig , nongovernmental organizations , and members of the public . officials stated that from the period march 2003 to august 2006 they received 46 complaints related to the treatment of detainees , although the nature of the complaints was not identified . we did not determine whether these deficiencies were subsequently addressed as required . our review of available grievance data obtained from facilities and discussions with facility management showed that the types of grievances at the facilities we visited typically included the lack of timely response to requests for medical treatment , missing property , high commissary prices , poor quality or insufficient quantity of food , high telephone costs , problems with telephones , and questions concerning detention case management issues . ice's detainee grievance standard states that facilities shall establish and implement procedures for informal and formal resolution of detainee grievances . four of the 23 facilities we visited did not comply with all aspects of ice's detainee grievance standards . specifically , casa de san juan family shelter in san diego did not provide a handbook to those aliens in its facility , the cowlitz county juvenile detention center in washington state did not include grievance procedures in its handbook , wakulla county sheriff's office in florida did not have a log , and the elizabeth detention center in new jersey did not record all grievances that we observed in their facility files . the primary mechanism for detainees to file external complaints is directly with the oig , either in writing or by phone using the dhs oig complaint hotline . detainees may also file complaints with the dhs office for civil rights and civil liberties ( crcl ) , which has statutory responsibility for investigating complaints alleging violations of civil rights and civil liberties .