we did not make any recommendations in that report . the senate armed services committee report accompanying a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 included a provision for us to review privatized military housing projects and the effect of recent changes in servicemembers' basic allowance for housing on the long - term sustainability of the projects . in this report , we examine the extent to which dod has ( 1 ) assessed and reported the financial condition of each privatized housing project ; ( 2 ) assessed the effects of recent reductions in the basic allowance for housing on privatized housing , and identified any other challenges and options to address those challenges ; and ( 3 ) defined notification requirements for project changes and risk tolerances relative to privatized housing goals . for objective one , we reviewed dod guidance on the oversight and management of privatized military housing and documentation used by each military department to oversee the financial condition of each of their privatized housing projects . this included documentation on each of their portfolios as a whole through portfolio - wide oversight reports , monthly and quarterly reports on each privatized housing project , and the projects' audited financial statements from fiscal years 2013 to 2016 . we also reviewed dod's annual report to congress on privatized housing , as well as data for privatized housing projects from fiscal years 2013 through 2016 . we met with officials involved in the oversight and management of privatized housing to discuss their oversight and management of the financial condition of privatized housing projects . additionally , we examined the differences among and within the military departments in determining the financial condition of their projects . we compared the extent of dod's actions to assess and report the financial condition of each privatized housing project with dod's housing policy and federal internal control standards related to quality information . for this and each of our objectives , we visited a non - generalizable sample of privatized housing projects . for objective two , we reviewed dod guidance on applying reductions in the basic allowance for housing to privatized military housing , as well as other documentation on dod's reductions in basic allowance for housing payments . specifically , we reviewed the military departments' reports on the projected effects of the reductions in basic allowance for housing on their portfolios and quarterly project oversight reports from fiscal years 2016 and 2017 to identify challenges and options to address challenges . we interviewed officials from each military department involved with privatized housing , officials at the installations in our non - generalizable sample involved in privatized housing , and officials of five leading privatized housing developers for their perspectives on challenges to their privatized housing and options to address them . we reported examples of challenges that were identified by at least two of the three military departments . additionally , we interviewed officials at the defense travel management office for information on the basic allowance for housing calculations and military department officials for their perspectives on the reductions in the basic allowance for housing .