as reported in app . 1 , of the tax systems changes , only tetr created new compliance concerns for irs and irs modified its plans to address those concerns during the filing season . the number of calls to irs's toll - free telephone lines has been less than last year and is significantly less for automated calls than in 2002 ( see table 3 ) . similar to last year , irs assistors answered over 40 percent of the total calls , while the rest of the calls were answered by an automated menu of recordings . by one measure of access , irs's performance is somewhat better and for another it is somewhat worse than this time last year . taxpayers' ability to access irs's toll - free telephone lines is somewhat better than last year , and irs is meeting its annual goals . according to irs officials , irs does not try to match previous years' performance , but sets and tries to achieve performance goals according to the budget received . as shown in table 4 , the percentage of taxpayers who attempted to reach an assistor and actually got through and received services — referred to as the level of service — was one percentage point higher than the same time period last year and greater than irs's goal of 82 percent for both fys 2006 and 2007 . average speed of answer , which is the length of time taxpayers wait to get their calls answered , is just under 4 minutes , almost 15 percent longer than last year , but better than irs's annual goal of 4.3 minutes . irs estimates that the accuracy of telephone assistors' responses to tax law and account questions to be comparable to the same time period last year by using a statistical sampling process . irs officials noted that there was unprecedented hiring for fy 2007 , and while every employee working tax law applications completes a requisite certification process , new employees will be less productive than experienced employees . irs has implemented several initiatives , such as targeted monitoring and training , to assist the new hires . irs officials reported that tax system changes have had minimal impact on telephone operations so far this filing season . tetr - related calls are a small fraction of the tetr calls that irs projected and all calls that irs received . between january 1 and april 14 , 2007 , irs expected 12.4 million tetr - related calls , but received about 540,000 . irs hired 650 ftes in fy 2007 , with the expectation that those hires would be used to cover anticipated attrition in 2008 . their first assignment was answering tetr telephone calls and they also were trained to handle other accounts calls allowing more experienced employees to address paper inventory . irs anticipated little impact on telephone service from the split refund option and tax provision extenders . for split refunds , irs anticipated it would receive about 70,000 calls to assistors compared to the 70 million total calls it receives each year . irs did not have projections for tax provision extensions .