these 5 packages were all approved by headquarters in 2011 . usss's asset forfeiture liaison said that with the assignment of a new asset forfeiture specialist in 2012 , usss changed its review process and no longer approves determinations before forfeiture . the 5 packages we reviewed that usss headquarters approved after 2011 complied with this requirement . to what extent do dhs components coordinate with treasury in overseeing the equitable sharing program ? to determine tff revenues from and obligations by dhs components from fiscal year 2003 — the year in which dhs began operations — through fiscal year 2013 , we analyzed treasury's reported data on revenues and obligations by fiscal year , using information contained in cbp's national finance center's financial accounting systems . we interviewed officials from the four dhs components that participate in the tff , dhs's office of the chief financial officer , and the treasury executive office for asset forfeiture ( teoaf ) to discuss trends and variations in the revenues and obligations over this 11-year period . regarding dhs controls over the equitable sharing program , we analyzed federal statutes and treasury guidance on making equitable sharing determinations and documentation of dhs component controls designed to help ensure compliance with guidance . we analyzed nongeneralizable samples of 40 equitable sharing determination packages for forfeited assets of less than $1 million and 5 packages for forfeited assets of $1 million or more to determine the extent to which the packages complied with treasury's guidance . we selected these packages from payments made and packages approved from october 2012 through june 2013 based on payment amounts and amounts forfeited , among other factors . we also interviewed officials from teoaf ; ice , usss , and cbp in headquarters ; and selected field offices of these components in california , new york , and texas to identify and assess controls designed to help ensure compliance with guidance . these three states received the highest amounts of equitable sharing payments on average from fiscal years 2010 through 2012 . what have been dhs components' revenues contributed to and obligations from the tff from fiscal years 2003 through 2013 ? to what extent have dhs components designed controls to help ensure compliance with treasury's guidance when implementing the equitable sharing program ? we selected field offices to include those that processed high amounts and large numbers of equitable sharing payments . we compared controls designed to help ensure compliance with treasury's guidance with the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control outlined in standards for internal control in the federal government . in addition , we interviewed officials from three state or local law enforcement agencies in each of these three states , which we selected based on such factors as the amount and number of payments they received in fiscal year 2012.of packages and interviews are not generalizable to the universe of packages and agencies , but they provided valuable information on the the results of our analysis equitable sharing determination process , designed controls , and extent to which the selected packages adhered to guidance .