solicitations . of the five agencies we reviewed , all but nih required in their solicitations for fiscal years 2008 through 2011 that applicants for phase i awards submit a commercialization strategy demonstrating that the applicants had taken steps such as identifying a market for their sbir technologies , planning to secure financing , and estimating expected future sales . for phase ii awards , all of the agencies we reviewed required that applicants submit a commercialization plan . in general , the solicitations we reviewed required that phase ii commercialization plans discuss the potential market and competitors ; the qualifications of key management and technical personnel ; as well as financing , marketing , and manufacturing plans , among other things . the agencies we reviewed differed in their stated processes for evaluating the commercial potential of applications . for example , dod guidance to applicants outlined a systematic process for how the agency would consider commercialization potential when evaluating applications submitted by small businesses that had received multiple prior awards . dod indicated that , under this process , it would assign a commercialization achievement score to applicants that had completed the work for four or more phase ii awards from any agency ; this score would reflect how the applicants' commercialization experience compared with historical averages . applicants whose scores fell within the lowest 20 percent would not be allowed to receive more than half the maximum number of points possible for commercialization potential , which was to be assessed on the basis of several factors , including the commercialization strategy or plan . dod guidance stated that businesses with fewer than four completed phase ii awards would not be affected by the absence of a commercialization achievement score . although the other four agencies we reviewed did not outline as systematic a process for evaluating past commercialization success as a gauge of commercialization potential , they still indicated that commercialization potential would be taken into account in reviewing applications . for example , doe's solicitation instructions encouraged phase i applicants to seek firm commitments for private - sector or non - sbir federal funding prior to applying for a phase ii award . the instructions further stated that phase ii applicants that obtained such commitments were more likely to receive full credit for commercialization planning during the evaluation of their applications . in the case of nsf , solicitation instructions stated that proposals are usually reviewed by 3 to 10 outside experts in fields related to the proposal ; according to nsf officials , these reviewers have business experience . nsf's solicitation instructions further stated that the agency would not review applications that lacked sufficient information on commercial potential . in 2010 , two agencies we reviewed also issued sbir solicitations under new programs that were explicitly oriented toward increasing commercialization . specifically , in july 2010 , doe launched a program under which it solicited applications for phase iii of sbir , the commercialization phase . for example , as part of its commercialization pilot program , the army assisted selected phase ii sbir award recipients in assessing commercialization potential , developing business plans , and matching their technologies with potential government and industry customers .