this was not our intent . in follow - up discussions with va officials , we explained that our recommendation was directed at taking action to establish va - wide naming conventions that would be used by all va facilities in recording property information in their local inventory systems . we clarified the wording in our recommendation accordingly . based on our follow - up meeting , va officials said they agreed with all five of our recommendations . they reiterated actions noted in va's comment letter on steps taken as well as planned actions to improve the accuracy and consistency of information in va's property inventory systems . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of veterans affairs ; the veterans affairs chief information officer ; the under secretary of health , veterans health administration ; and the director of the office of management and budget . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9095 or dalykl@gao.gov , if you of your staff have any questions concerning this report . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . major contributors to this report are acknowledged in appendix v . given the continuing nature of information technology ( it ) equipment inventory control problems and their significance , the chairman and ranking member of the house committee on veterans' affairs , subcommittee on oversight and investigations asked us to perform additional follow - up work to determine ( 1 ) whether the department of veterans affairs ( va ) has made progress in implementing our prior recommendations for improving internal control over it equipment and ( 2 ) the effectiveness of va's current internal controls to prevent theft , loss , or misappropriation of it equipment . we evaluated va's progress in implementing our previously reported recommendations by reviewing agency documentation and interviewing property management and office of information technology ( oit ) officials on actions taken in response to recommendations in our 2007 and 2004 reports . in concert with the subcommittee request that va perform a departmentwide physical inventory of it assets , we reviewed the results of va's 2007 physical inventory of it equipment items and va's process for completing reports of survey on lost and stolen items . we also evaluated policies that include guidance for improving accountability of it equipment and accuracy of inventory records , related memorandums , and other documentation , such as action summaries . in addition , we interviewed cognizant va officials about specific actions under way or completed , the component organizations responsible for those actions , and the status and targeted completion dates of those actions . our assessment of the effectiveness of current va it equipment inventory controls included statistical tests of key control attributes at four case study locations , including the health care systems ( hcs ) in north texas , boston , and puget sound , and va headquarters organizations .