( see fig . similarly , according to our survey results , fcc has not provided sufficient guidance to pilot projects on how to meet fcc's requirement that projects comply with hhs health it initiatives . however , key stakeholders and pilot participants are not involved in ensuring that quarterly reports are providing the most useful information possible . we excluded the puerto rico project because at the time of our survey , it was the only project that had been withdrawn from the program for an extended period of time ; thus , although we tried , locating a contact with knowledge of the program was not possible . our goal was to obtain responses from individuals with knowledge of and experience with the tasks related to the pilot program — such as preparing forms and responding to information requests — for each sampled entity . our data set included the name and contact information for each project's project coordinator and associate project coordinator . how have fcc's design and implementation of the pilot program affected participants ? what are fcc's performance goals and measures for the rural health care program , and how do these goals compare with the key characteristics of successful performance goals and measures ? for each of these questions , we reviewed fcc documents , including fcc orders and requests for comment on the rural health care program , as well as written comments submitted in response to these requests . we also interviewed fcc staff and staff of the universal service administrative company ( usac ) — the not - for - profit corporation that administers the rural health care program under a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) with fcc . to provide information on the design , operation , and trends of the primary rural health care program , we analyzed data from usac on applications , funding commitments , and disbursements for the first 12 years of the primary rural health care program ( 1998 to 2009 ) . on the basis of interviews with usac officials to understand how these data were handled , stored , and protected , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes specified . to provide information on the pilot program , we conducted a web - based survey of representatives from all 61 pilot projects that had recent contact information on file with usac at the time of our survey to obtain their views on program requirements and on how to improve the program , among other things . our survey response rate was 100 percent . this report does not contain all of the results from the survey ; our questionnaire and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed in an e - supplement to this report . to provide information about performance goals and measures , we reviewed fcc documentation on the agency's performance goals and measures for the rural health care program and compared this information with literature on results - oriented management and effective practices for setting performance goals and measures .