iss research facilities for its own research . as we reported in 2009 , however , nasa's scientific utilization of the iss is constrained by limited crew time . limiting factors include the size of the crew on board the station ; the necessary division of crew work among many activities that include maintenance , operations , and research ; and the need to share research facilities with international partners . per statutory direction , nasa has opened the remaining facilities to other federal government entities and private industry and is operating the iss as a national laboratory . as we reported in 2009 , nasa may face challenges in the management and operation of iss national laboratory research . there is currently no direct analogue to the iss national laboratory , and though nasa currently manages research programs at the jet propulsion laboratory and its other centers that it believes possess similar characteristics to other national laboratories , nasa has limited experience managing the type of diverse scientific research and technology demonstration portfolio that the iss could eventually represent . gao - 10-9 . this database when issuing solicitations for funded opportunities to support research payload activities . since the establishment of casis as the management body of iss research is relatively recent , we have not examined its effectiveness ; therefore , it is too early for us to say whether it will be successful in ensuring full scientific utilization of the station as a national laboratory . we recently reported that nasa has an appropriate and reasonable approach in place to determine the spares needed for the iss as well as to assess iss structural health and safety . estimating iss spares and gauging the structural health and safety of the iss are not simple challenges . among the many factors to be assessed are the reliability of key components , nasa's ability to deliver spares to the iss , the projected life of structures that cannot be replaced , and in - depth analysis of those components and systems that affect safety . while some empirical data exist , because the iss is a unique facility in space , assessing its extended life necessarily requires the use of sophisticated analytical techniques and judgments . nasa's approach to determining necessary spare parts for the iss relies on a statistical process . the statistical process and methodology being used to determine the expected lifetimes of replacement units is a sound and commonly accepted approach within the risk assessment community that considers both manufacturers' predictions and the systems' actual performance . nasa also has a reasonable process for establishing performance goals for various functions necessary for utilization and determining through modeling whether available spares are sufficient to meet goals through 2020 , but the rationale for establishing performance goals has not been systematically documented . nasa is also using reasonable analytical tools to assess structural health and determine whether iss hardware can operate safely through 2020 . nasa currently anticipates that — with some mitigation — the iss will remain structurally sound for continued operations through 2020 . nasa also is using reasonable methodologies to identify replacement units and other hardware that could cause serious damage to the iss if they were to fail .