doe did not accept the 2006 date . instead , it directed the contractor to prepare a new plan for submitting a license application to nrc by december 2004 . the board added that gaps in data and basic understanding cause important uncertainties in the concepts and assumptions on which doe's performance estimates are now based ; providing the board with limited confidence in current performance estimates generated by doe performance assessment model . as recently as may 2001 , doe projected that it could submit a license application to nrc in 2003 . it now appears , however , that doe may not complete all of the additional technical work that it has agreed to do to prepare an acceptable license application until january 2006 . in september 2001 , bechtel completed , at doe's direction , a detailed reassessment in an effort to reestablish a cost and schedule baseline . under the process laid out in the nuclear waste policy act , once the secretary makes a site recommendation , there is no time limit under which the president must act on the secretary's recommendation . however , when the president recommended , on february 15 , that the congress approve the site , specific statutory time frames were triggered for the next steps in the process . figure 1 shows the approximate statutory time needed between a site recommendation and submission of a license application and the additional time needed for doe to meet the conditions for an acceptable license application . the figure assumes that the congress overrides the state's disapproval of april 8 , 2002 . as shown in the figure , nevada had 60 days — until april 16 — to disapprove the site . because of the uncertainty of achieving the 2010 goal for opening the yucca mountain repository , doe is examining alternative approaches that would permit it to meet the goal . for example , in a may 2001 report , doe examined approaches that might permit it to begin accepting wastes at the repository site in 2010 while spreading out the construction of repository facilities over a longer time period . the report recommended storing wastes on the surface until the capacity to move wastes into the repository has been increased . relatively modest - sized initial surface facilities to handle wastes could be expanded later to handle larger volumes of waste . bechtel estimated that doe could complete the outstanding technical work agreed to with nrc and submit a license application in january 2006 . this date , according to the contractor , was due to the cumulative effect of funding reductions in recent years that had produced a “…growing bow wave of incomplete work that is being pushed into the future.” moreover , the contractor's report said , the proposed schedule did not include any cost and schedule contingencies . the contractor's estimate was based on guidance from doe that , in part , directed the contractor to assume annual funding for the nuclear waste program of $410 million in fiscal year 2002 , $455 million in fiscal year 2003 , and $465 million in fiscal year 2004 and thereafter .