this was not addressed in the suspended plan . the arsenals and manufacturing ammunition plants have strategic plans or draft plans providing a mission , vision statements , and goals for the organizations . however , it is unclear whether the extent that the vision these activities have for themselves is the same as the one that army headquarters and the parent commands have for these organizations . neither the army nor most of the parent commands have officially published strategic plans that identify the vision and objectives for these activities . most arsenals' workload and corresponding workforce have been declining for years . the arsenals generally project workload and corresponding workforce requirements primarily by consulting customers and prospective customers regarding their future workload for the arsenals . arsenal officials said that this methodology provides a reasonable workload projection for only 2 years . further , some of the work that is done in the arsenals is not the type of manufacturing work the arsenals used to perform . for example , instead of manufacturing large artillery systems , more than 40 percent of workload performed in the rock island arsenal is manufacturing and assembling tool kits — ranging from carrying - case sized sets to fully equipped maintenance shelters . a recent rand study proposed privatizing the arsenals , but it is unclear to what extent the army will pursue this strategy in the future . the ammunition plants have a fluctuating workload , sometimes increasing and sometimes declining . the work at two government - owned and government - operated ammunition plants has declined in the past years , but it is now increasing . the mcalester , oklahoma , ammunition plant , for example , will hire more than 200 new employees in fiscal year 2003 , primarily because the bomb production workload has increased . according to ammunition plant managers , they are generally aware of their workload from less than 1 year to 2 years in advance . the navy does not have an overall strategic plan that covers all navy depot maintenance activities , but the naval shipyard and aviation communities each have strategic planning efforts . the navy's plan for shipyards , called the naval shipyard business plan for fiscal years 2001 to 2005 , has the essential elements of a strategic plan . it is aligned to the naval sea systems command's corporate strategy . the plan communicates the purpose and direction for naval shipyards and focuses on ship maintenance , workload performance , and associated improvement initiatives , including making investments in training , skills , and facilities necessary through 2005 . it includes workload information from fiscal year 2001 to 2010 . the plan has a strategic workforce goal for the naval shipyard workforce to have the skills and flexibility required to meet the demands of the future workload and business environment . the naval shipyard plan describes the relationship of the naval shipyards , which comprise the public sector's share of the ship industrial base , to the overall industrial basethe total force . according to the plan , the shipyards must have a workforce that is capable of doing all the work .