other structures . pays for damage to fences , tool sheds , freestanding garages , guest cottages , and other structures not attached to the dwelling . personal property . pays for the value of personal possessions , including furniture , electronics , appliances , and clothing damaged or lost even when they are not on the subject property — for instance , when they are in an off - site storage locker or with a child at college . loss of use . pays some additional living expenses while a home is being repaired . personal liability . pays for financial loss from lawsuits for injuries or damages to someone else . medical payments . pays medical bills for people hurt on the property or by a pet . homeowners can purchase several types of insurance policies . these policies differ based on the perils they cover ( see table 1 ) . for example , named perils policies insure against losses caused by perils that are specifically listed in the policies . open peril policies are broader policies that insure against losses caused by all perils , except those that are specifically excluded . however , according to industry participants with whom we spoke , currently no homeowners policies are available that cover every possible peril a homeowner could face . in addition to different policy types , homeowners may choose between three different levels of coverage for their homeowners policies . these options are: actual cash value . this type of coverage pays to replace the home or possessions after deducting for depreciation . value is determined by taking into consideration the age of the home and wear and tear . this level of coverage may not be enough to fully repair or replace the damage . replacement cost . this type of coverage pays the cost of rebuilding or repairing the home or replacing possessions , up to the coverage limit , without a deduction for depreciation . it allows for the repair or rebuilding of the home by using materials of similar kind and quality . guaranteed ( or extended ) replacement cost . this option is the most comprehensive and expensive . it pays a certain percentage , typically 20 to 25 percent , over the coverage limit to rebuild the home in the event that materials and labor costs increase as a result of a widespread disaster . the ho - 2 , ho - 3 , and ho - 5 policies typically provide replacement cost coverage on the structures . contents coverage under homeowner policies is typically provided on an actual cash value basis , unless the replacement cost option is purchased . the ho - 8 typically provides coverage for older homes on an actual cash value basis . full replacement cost policies may not be available for some older homes . several factors affect the premiums consumers pay for their homeowners policies , including the type and characteristics of the home . for example , homes that are primarily brick or masonry typically have lower premiums than wood frame homes , and older homes and homes in poor condition tend to have higher premiums than newer homes and homes in good condition .