we will continue to do work in this area . in closing , i believe that we must engage in a fundamental re - examination of when and under what circumstances we should use contractors versus civil servants or military personnel . this is a major and growing concern that needs immediate attention . this example is one illustrative case . today i will focus on the role of contractors at the department . the importance of the acquisition workforce to dod's mission and the need to strengthen its capabilities and accountability: weaknesses in this area have been revealed in recent contingency situations , but they are present in non - emergency circumstances as well , with the potential to expose dod to significant fraud , waste , and abuse . there may also be opportunities to provide additional authorities to strengthen the acquisition workforce , such as the use of term appointments . dod is experiencing a critical shortage of certain acquisition professionals with technical skills related to systems engineering , program management , and cost estimation . without adequate oversight by and training of federal employees overseeing contracting activities , reliance on contractors to perform functions that once would have been performed by members of the federal workforce carries risk . i would like to emphasize the critical need for actions to be taken to improve the acquisition workforce . the acquisition workforce's workload and complexity of responsibilities have been increasing without adequate agency attention to the workforce's size , skills and knowledge , and succession planning . as a final note , we are continuing to explore acquisition workforce issues in ongoing work and we hope to be making recommendations on these issues . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you might have . service budgets are allocated largely according to top - line historical percentages rather than defense - wide strategic assessments and current and likely resource limitations . capabilities and requirements are based primarily on individual service wants versus collective defense needs ( i.e. , based on current and expected future threats ) that are both affordable and sustainable over time . defense consistently overpromises and underdelivers in connection with major weapons , information , and other systems ( i.e. , capabilities , costs , quantities , schedule ) . defense often employs a “plug and pray approach” when costs escalate ( i.e. , divide total funding dollars by cost per copy , plug in the number that can be purchased , then pray that congress will provide more funding to buy more quantities ) . congress sometimes forces the department to buy items ( eg , weapon systems ) and provide services ( eg , additional health care for non - active beneficiaries , such as active duty members' dependents and military retirees and their dependents ) that the department does not want and we cannot afford . dod tries to develop high - risk technologies after programs start instead of setting up funding , organizations , and processes to conduct high - risk technology development activities in low - cost environments ( i.e. , technology development is not separated from product development ) .