we did not independently verify this . based on lower demonstrated reliability and problems with early program testing , the efv's reliability has not grown as planned . expectations for reliability are now lower , as reflected in the recent reduction to the reliability requirement . when sdd began , the efv was expected to demonstrate 48 hours between failures by september 2005 . actual growth demonstrated 28 hours between failures in august 2005 . at the time of the low – rate initial production decision now planned for december 2006 , demonstrated reliability is projected to be 38 hours between failures . the original and current reliability growth curves for the efv are shown in figures 7 and 8 , respectively . in comparing the planned and actual reliability growth curves , it is clear that the actual test hours accumulated have been significantly less than planned . in fact , the original plan called for conducting 12,000 hours of testing by the original september 2005 production decision ; according to the current plan , test hours will not reach this level until early 2008 . the reduction in test hours is due , in part , to the other problems that occurred in testing . the accumulation of test hours is significant for reliability . in general , reliability growth is the result of an iterative design , build , test , analyze , and fix process . initial prototypes for a complex product with major technological advances have inherent deficiencies . as the prototypes are tested , failures occur and , in fact , are desired so that the product's design can be made more reliable . reliability improves over time with design changes or manufacturing process improvements . the program office acknowledges that even with the changes in mission profile and reduction in the operational requirement , reliability for the efv remains challenging . in addition , the most recent dot&e annual report found that the efv system's reliability is the area of highest risk in the program . dot&e has reviewed the efv's current reliability growth plan and believes that it is realistic but can only be validated during initial operational testing and evaluation in 2010 . according to the program manager , an additional 15 months would have been needed for more robust reliability testing , production qualification testing , and training , after the program entered low - rate initial production in september 2005 , as originally planned . the march 25 , 2005 , rebaselining extended the schedule by 24 months and postponed low - rate initial production until september 2006 , which has now been extended to december 2006 . while dod's december 2004 , program budget decision 753 served as the catalyst for this rebaselining , the program manager stated that he probably would have asked for a schedule extension of 15 months after entering low - rate initial production in september 2005 , even if the budget decision had not occurred . dod and marine corps officials verified that , although the program manager did not officially request this 15-month extension , he had been discussing an extension with them before the budget decision was issued .