all of these results are advantages for the states . highway public - private partnerships potentially provide other benefits , including the transfer or sharing of project risks to the private sector . such risks include those associated with construction costs and schedules and having sufficient levels of traffic and revenues to be financially viable . for example , on one texas project , if the annual return on investment of the private concessionaire is at or below 11 percent , then the state could share in 5 percent of all revenues . if it is over 15 percent , the state could receive as much as 50 percent of the net revenues . while these protections are important , governments in other countries , including australia and the united kingdom , have developed systematic approaches to identifying and evaluating public interest before agreements are entered into , including the use of public interest criteria , as well as assessment tools , and require their use when considering private investments in public infrastructure . these tools include the use of qualitative public interest tests and criteria to consider when entering into public - private partnerships . for example , a state government in australia uses a public interest test to determine how the public interest would be affected in eight specific areas , including whether the views and rights of affected communities have been heard and protected and whether the process is sufficiently transparent . these tools also include quantitative tests such as value for money and public sector comparators , which are used to evaluate if entering into a project as a public - private partnership is the best procurement option available . while similar tools have been used to some extent in the united states , their use has been more limited . for example , oregon hired a consultant to develop public - sector comparators to compare the estimated costs of a proposed highway public - private partnership with a model of the public sector's undertaking the project . according to the innovative partnerships project director in the oregon dot , the results of this model were used to determine that the added costs of undertaking the project as a public - private partnership ( given the need for a return on investment by the private investors ) were not justifiable given the limited value of risk transfer in the project . while this study was conducted before the project was put out for official concession , it was prepared after substantial early development work was done by private partners . neither chicago nor indiana had developed public interest tests or other tools prior to the leasing of the chicago skyway or the indiana toll road . using up - front public interest analysis tools can assist public agencies in determining the expected benefits and costs of a project and an appropriate means to undertake the project . not using such tools may lead to certain aspects of protecting public interest being overlooked . for example , concerns by local and regional governments in texas helped drive statewide legislation requiring the state to involve local and regional governments to a greater extent in future highway public - private partnerships .