i will be happy to respond to any questions . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact me at 202-512-7215 or bertonid@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are michele grgich , assistant director , james bennett , kate blumenreich , julie devault , alex galuten , sheila mccoy , patricia m. owens , anjali tekchandani , kathleen van gelder , and walter vance . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . ssa continues to face delays in completing both comprehensive and other ongoing updates . for example , as of early march 2012 , ssa officials told us they still needed to complete comprehensive revisions for listings of six body systems that have been ongoing for the last 19 to 33 years , after numerous extensions beyond the original expiration periods ( see table 1 ) . two of the remaining six body system listings — mental and neurological disorders , which are among those ssa uses most frequently in its eligibility determination process — have not been comprehensively revised for 27 years.to expire in 2012 . of these four , ssa is developing a notice of proposed rulemaking for three of them and has issued a notice on the fourth . however , it is unclear whether ssa will complete the revisions before they are set to expire . in 2008 , ssa began a multiyear project to develop a new source of occupational information that will replace the outdated information currently being used to determine if claimants are able to do their past work or any other work in the national economy . since the 1960s , ssa has been using the dot , which contains a list of job titles found in the national economy and was last updated in 1991 . the dot provides ssa with descriptions of the physical demands of work — such as climbing , balancing , and environmental requirements — for each of the more than 12,000 occupations listed . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ssa administers two of the largest disability programs: the disability insurance ( di ) program , enacted in 1956 , and the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program , enacted in 1972 . in order to be eligible for di or ssi benefits based on a disability , an individual must meet the definition of disability for these programs — that is , they must have a medically determinable physical or mental impairment that ( 1 ) prevents the individual from engaging in any substantial gainful activity , and ( 2 ) has lasted or is expected to last at least one year or result in death .