we disagree . we believe that the report accurately describes doe's decision to discontinue the core team process . this approach , established as a result of congressional hearings held in 1999 , was designed as a collaborate process to advance progress at the site . furthermore , epa and kentucky viewed this effort as a collaborative process . as we state in the report , doe became concerned about the growing scope of the cleanup and the associated increase in costs , and believed that the core team's recommended actions were excessive . while discussion of the cleanup did continue at the senior management level , according to kentucky officials and doe site staff and contractor officials , doe staff at the paducah site were instructed by doe headquarters not to continue discussing the cleanup with regulatory officials . our report does reflect the progress doe and kentucky have made in addressing near - term cleanup impediments , such as the signing of the agreed order that resolved outstanding regulatory violations . however , the long history of mistrust and lack of shared vision on the cleanup approach at paducah , and the inability of the three parties to agree to and sign the fiscal year 2004 site management plan , issued in draft in november 2003 , indicate that the parties' relationship remains a challenge . we have modified the final report to reflect doe's recent progress on the excavation of the north - south diversion ditch . we disagree with doe's statement that we included post - closure costs in our comparison of past cleanup costs and schedules . for example , post - closure costs are not included in the comparison of current and past cleanup estimates and schedules presented in table 2 . however , because we believe that it is important to provide a complete picture of doe's financial responsibilities at the paducah site , we did include post - closure costs as part of our discussion of doe's total financial responsibilities at paducah . we have also revised our report to more clearly indicate that post - closure environmental monitoring costs are a separate activity from cleanup activities and related costs . we disagree with doe's statement that our report does not provide a balanced presentation of all three parties' responsibilities for the past poor working relationship and delayed progress . we cite throughout our report examples of disagreements between doe and the regulators , providing each side's position on these issues . for instance , we describe the disagreement over a sampling plan for soil excavation at the north - south diversion ditch . we also present doe and kentucky's positions over whether available data was adequate to warrant the installation of sedimentation basins at the site . in addition to the individual named above , nancy crothers , chris ferencik , kerry dugan hawranek , and kurt kershow also made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people .