delivery . in the traditional fms process , the partner country takes custody of materiel in the united states and is responsible for arranging delivery . the partner country may pay to use the u.s. military transportation system , but often uses its own freight forwarder — an authorized agent responsible for managing shipment to the final destination . if shipments are incomplete or otherwise deficient , the partner country may file a supply discrepancy report to seek redress . all bpc program shipments use the u.s. military transportation system or other u.s. government - procured transportation , with the sco responsible for providing the delivery address , ensuring foreign customs requirements can be met , jointly checking shipments for completeness with the partner country , and preparing any needed supply discrepancy reports . implementing agencies are responsible for conducting bpc deliveries and confirming that scos are ready to receive a planned delivery . for both fms and pseudo - fms processes , dod uses the enhanced freight tracking system ( efts ) , a secure web - based application accessible within the security cooperation information portal designed to provide visibility of the security assistance distribution system . case closure . an fms case is a candidate for closure when all materiel has been delivered , all ordered services have been performed , no new orders exist or are forthcoming , and the partner has not requested the case be kept open . at case closure , any remaining case funds may be made available to the country for further use . pseudo - fms cases may be submitted for closure as soon as supply and services are complete . dod has undertaken internal improvement efforts designed to address challenges in implementing security cooperation and security assistance programs and improving timeliness of u.s. efforts . dsca has also undertaken improvements recommended by its internal improvement program , begun in 2008 , which has reviewed dsca and implementing agency processes.initiated a comprehensive review of dod's internal processes . the results of the task force review led to recommendations focusing on areas in fiscal year 2010 , the secretary of defense for improvement including: identification of partner requirements ; acquisition and transportation ; and training , education , and workforce development . dod and dsca have initiated a variety of efforts to implement the recommendations , and a follow - up task force report describes the status of action on the recommendations . in focus groups we conducted in 2012 at all six combatant commands and interviews with the officials at scos in 17 countries , security cooperation officials reported three types of challenges: ( 1 ) optimizing training and workforce structure , ( 2 ) defining partner country requirements , and ( 3 ) obtaining information on the acquisition and delivery status of assistance agreements . dsca has undertaken reforms to address challenges associated with ( 1 ) training and workforce structure , ( 2 ) defining partner country requirements , and ( 3 ) obtaining information on the acquisition and delivery status of assistance agreements.addressing the first two challenges in the short term , reforms to address information system gaps are more long - term focused and are expected to take years to complete .