this finding is consistent with previous reports . all individual lobbyists and lobbying firms reporting specific lobbying activity are required to file ld - 203 reports semiannually , even if they have no contributions to report , because they must certify compliance with the gift and travel rules . compared to our last review , more lobbying firms indicated that they planned to amend their ld - 2 reports as a result of our review . this year , for 28 of the ld - 2 reports in our sample , lobbyists indicated they planned to amend their ld - 1 or ld - 2 reports as a result of our review . these results are generally consistent from 2010 through 2012 . of those that failed to disclose properly , 11 ld - 2 amendments and 2 ld - 1 amendments were filed to properly disclose covered positions and two lobbying firms addressed the omitted covered positions on subsequent ld - 2 filings . two lobbyists said they were confused as to whether intern positions are covered positions . one of those lobbyists amended the ld - 2 report to disclose an unpaid internship . however , officials from the office of the secretary of the senate and the clerk of the house clarified that unpaid internships are not considered covered official positions , and are not required to be disclosed . two other lobbyists in our sample said they were unaware of the hloga requirement to disclose covered positions held within the last 20 years of first acting as a lobbyist for a client . lobbyists for an estimated 85 percent ( 85 of 100 ) of ld - 2 reports filed year - end 2011 or midyear 2012 ld - 203 contribution reports for all lobbyists and lobbying firms listed on the report as required . as of march 2013 , 16 of those 28 lobbying firms had filed an amended ld - 2 report and 3 lobbying firms amended their ld - 1 report to make changes to information that was previously reported . last year , for 17 of the ld - 2 reports in our sample , lobbyists indicated they planned to amend their ld - 2 reports , and as of march 2012 , 9 had done so . table 3 lists reasons lobbying firms in our sample cited for planning to amend their ld - 1 or ld - 2 reports and the number of amendments filed . in addition , 2 lobbying firms did not indicate plans to file an amendment at the time of our review , but later filed amended reports after meeting with us to add an issue area code and remove a lobbyist . similar to our 2012 report , lobbying firms filed amendments for 3 of the ld - 2 reports in our sample after being notified that their ld - 2 reports were selected as part of our random sample , but prior to our review . as part of our review , we compared contributions listed on lobbyists and lobbying firms' ld - 203 reports against political contributions reported in the fec database to identify whether political contributions were omitted on ld - 203 reports in our sample .