subsequently , the program office took steps to do so . in february 2011 , boeing won the competition to develop the air force's next generation aerial refueling tanker aircraft , the kc - 46 . this program is one of a few weapon system programs to use a fixed price incentive ( firm target ) contract for development in recent years . defense officials stated that a fixed price incentive ( firm target ) contract was appropriate for the program because kc - 46 development is considered to be a relatively low - risk effort to integrate mostly mature military technologies onto an aircraft designed for commercial use . the kc - 46 development contract is designed to hold boeing accountable for cost associated with the development of four test aircraft and includes options to manufacture the remaining production lots . the contract limits the government's financial liability and provides the contractor incentives to reduce costs in order to earn more profit . barring any changes to kc - 46 requirements by the air force , the contract specifies a target price of $4.4 billion and a ceiling price of $4.9 billion , at which point boeing must assume responsibility for all additional costs . we previously reported that both the program office and boeing have estimated that development costs would exceed the contract ceiling price . as shown in figure 6 above , the program will be on the idealized reliability growth curve at that point . boeing has also initiated a failure modes and effects analysis that covers 41 subsystems . boeing and the program office rely on this analysis to determine which subsystems on the aircraft are likely to fail , when and why they fail , and whether those subsystems' failures might threaten the aircraft's safety . boeing is also using this information to develop a tool to detect and log equipment failures . the program office plans to share the analysis with aircraft maintenance staff . the program has not yet begun two critical manufacturing and reliability assessment activities . first , the program is not currently tracking reliability growth because the 767-2c first flight is not scheduled to take place until june 2014 and no flight hours have been accrued yet . second , the program has not determined whether manufacturing processes are in control and capable of producing parts consistently with few defects . the program plans to review and verify that process controls are in place to ensure the quality of the manufacturing process as part of its next assessment of critical manufacturing processes prior to the low rate production decision in august 2015 . program officials said their review would be focused on whether these process controls are in place rather than analyzing the data to determine if the processes are actually in control . boeing is making progress manufacturing most of the military unique subsystems , such as the aerial refueling operator station , but the test refueling boom's schedule has slipped by almost a year due to parts delays . boeing's original design included parts that proved challenging to fit within the boom's space constraints , and other parts were redesigned to improve the boom's safety .