iii. ) u.s. officials noted that the provinces are still spending the 2006 funds they were permitted to carry over , which contributes to the low expenditure rate in 2007 . ultimately , actual spending by the provinces should be reflected in official 2007 expenditure data reported by the ministry of finance . u.s. government , coalition , and international agencies have identified a number of factors that challenge the iraqi government's efforts to fully spend its budget for capital projects . first , treasury officials noted that violence and sectarian strife can delay capital budget execution by increasing the time and cost needed to award and monitor contracts , and by reducing the number of contractors willing to bid on projects . second , these officials stated that recent refugee outflows and the de - ba'athification process have reduced the number of skilled workers available and contributed to the exodus of iraq's professional class from the country . third , u.s. and foreign officials also noted that weaknesses in iraqi procurement , budgeting , and accounting procedures impede completion of capital projects . u.s. , coalition , and international officials noted that violence and sectarian strife remain major obstacles to developing iraqi government capacity , including its ability to execute budgets for capital projects . the high level of violence has contributed to a decrease in the number of workers available and can increase the amount of time needed to plan and complete capital projects . however , according to usaid officials , the project experienced significant delays , due in part to a lack of full support by iraqi government officials . usaid suspended assistance to the ministry of finance to implement ifmis in june 2007 , following the kidnapping of five bearingpoint employees . a usaid official stated that the iraqi government continues to rely on its legacy manual accounting system , which contributes to delays in the government's reporting of expenditure data . in lieu of ifmis , treasury and usaid are now assisting provincial governments with the use of inexpensive spreadsheet software to improve their financial management capability , according to treasury officials . national capacity development program . this usaid program is to improve public administration skills at the ministerial level and has provided training in a range of issues , including project management , budgeting , fiscal management , leadership , and information technology . as of october 2007 , the program had trained more than 2,000 ministry officials from 30 different iraqi institutions since november 2006 when the training program was first established , according to usaid officials . the program has trained 500 iraqi government officials specifically in procurement , and 51 of the 500 completed the “train the trainers” course to enable them to train additional ministry officials in procurement . usaid officials also noted that the program includes imbedded teams at the ministry of planning and development cooperation that are helping ministries set up proper procurement units with procurement tracking systems . local governance program . this program , operated under a usaid contract , supports iraq's efforts to improve the management and administration of local , municipal , and provisional governments . according to usaid officials , this program includes several activities to assist with provincial budget execution .