sffas no . 6 was issued in november 1995 and was effective for fiscal years beginning after september 30 , 1997 . previously , the capitalization threshold for federal agencies was $5,000 . we have noted large increases in federal agency capitalization thresholds over the past 5 years , and our audit work at two major agencies has highlighted problems in this area . in prior audit work performed at the internal revenue service ( irs ) , we found that treasury's $50,000 capitalization threshold contributed to a material understatement in pp&e . irs has since revised its capitalization threshold accordingly . we previously raised concerns with the department of defense ( dod ) , which holds the majority of the u.s. government's reported pp&e , about the basis for its $100,000 capitalization threshold , in part because of issues surrounding the quality of the data available to make such a determination . as an initial step to address this issue governmentwide and as part of a series of planned work on key audit issues pertaining to the consolidated financial statement audit , we undertook a survey of pp&e capitalization threshold and useful life policies at 14 federal agencies that reported significant amounts of pp&e . we also surveyed 12 private sector companies on these same pp&e policies . our survey was designed to determine the federal agencies' ( 1 ) current capitalization threshold practices for pp&e and how such policies compare to the practices being applied to pp&e in the private sector and ( 2 ) useful life policies and how they compare to those used in the private sector . our survey work was not designed to conclude on the reasonableness of the capitalization threshold levels being applied by federal agencies . instead , our survey results are intended to provide useful baseline information to responsible parties in federal financial reporting . we plan to review the adequacy of capitalization threshold levels and useful life policies at selected agencies in future work . our work was performed primarily using survey instruments to gather data on pp&e policies at 14 selected federal agencies and 12 private sector companies . appendix ii provides a list of all survey participants . we also held discussions with certain representatives of the participating federal agencies and private sector companies in developing the survey and in gathering follow - up information based upon the survey responses . we did not verify the accuracy of the data provided to us by the survey participants . we conducted our work from may 2001 through february 2002 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the department of the treasury , omb , all 14 federal agencies that participated in the survey , as well as the 12 private sector council member survey participants . further details on our scope and methodology are included in appendix i . the secretary of the treasury , in coordination with the director of omb , is required to submit annually to the president and the congress audited consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government beginning with those for fiscal year 1997 . we are required to audit those statements .