( see fig . other u.s. government agencies also play significant roles in the reconstruction effort . for example , usaid is responsible for projects to restore iraq's infrastructure , support healthcare and education initiatives , expand economic opportunities for iraqis , and foster improved governance . the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) provides engineering and technical services to the pco , usaid , and military forces in iraq , including planning , design , and construction management support for military and civil infrastructure construction . as of march 2005 , u.s. appropriations , iraqi revenues and assets , and international donor pledges totaling about $60 billion had been made available to support the relief and reconstruction and government operations of iraq . u.s. appropriations of more than $24 billion for relief and reconstruction activities have been used largely for security and essential services — including the repair of infrastructure , procurement of equipment , and training of iraqis — and have been reallocated over time as priorities have changed . iraqi revenues and assets , which totaled about $23 billion in cumulative deposits , were turned over to the new iraqi government in june 2004 and have largely funded the operating expenses of the iraqi government . international donor funds have been primarily used for public and essential service reconstruction activities ; however , most of about $13.6 billion pledged over a 4-year period is in the form of potential loans that have not been accessed by the iraqis . as of march 2005 , of the $24 billion in appropriated u.s. funds made available for relief and reconstruction in iraq from fiscal years 2003 through 2005 , about $18 billion had been obligated and about $9 billion had been disbursed . these funds were disbursed for activities that include infrastructure repair of the electricity and oil sectors ; infrastructure repair , training , and equipping of the security and law enforcement sector ; and cpa and u.s. administrative expenses . many current u.s. reconstruction efforts are consistent with initial efforts the cpa developed before june 2004 . as priorities changed , particularly since the transition of power to the iraqi interim government , the u.s. administration reported that it had reallocated about $4.7 billion of the $18.4 billion fiscal year 2004 emergency supplemental among the various sectors . ( see fig . these reallocations were reported in october 2004 , january 2005 , and april 2005 . as of may 2005 , the administration was assessing whether additional reallocations would be needed for short - term reconstruction efforts . in october 2004 , the administration reported that it had reallocated appropriated funds from the $18.4 billion fiscal year 2004 emergency supplemental based on a review of all u.s. reconstruction funding priorities . the administration reported that it had reprogrammed about $1.8 billion to security and law enforcement and about $1.2 billion to economic and private sector development and governance activities . these funds were reallocated from future water and electricity infrastructure projects . in addition , about $450 million in the oil sector had been reprogrammed from refined fuel imports to oil reconstruction projects .