what are technical data ? technical data are recorded information of a scientific or technical nature , regardless of the form or method of the recording . typically , technical data refer to: technical data packages: all applicable drawings , associated lists , specifications , standards , performance requirements , quality assurance provisions , and packaging details necessary to support an acquisition strategy and ensure the adequacy of item performance . technical manuals: publications that contain instructions for the installation , operation , maintenance , training , and support of weapons systems . a maintenance technical manual normally includes maintenance procedures , parts lists or parts breakdown , and related technical information or processes . why are technical data important ? the private sector and the government often have important competing interests in technical data rights . a company's interest in protecting its intellectual property ( ip ) from uncompensated exploitation is of paramount importance — such that they often resist including the contract clauses providing tech data rights to government . the government needs to have adequate rights to support its weapons systems , including developing repair and maintenance procedures , selecting alternate repair sources , and procuring spare parts competitively . when are technical data rights acquired , and how are these data managed ? provision for acquiring weapons systems tech data rights , access , and delivery should be made early in acquisition . tech data rights decisions made during acquisition will affect government's ability to support weapons systems throughout increasingly longer life cycles — up to approximately 40 years . delaying action in acquiring technical data rights can make them cost prohibitive or difficult to obtain . technical data are jointly managed and may be stored at either the government's or contractor's repository . dod directive 5000.1 and instruction 5000.2 provide dod's overall acquisition policy . the defense acquisition guidebook and product support guide offer additional discretionary guidance . 5000.1 “the defense acquisition system” — designates the program managers as the persons with responsibility and authority for accomplishing acquisition program objectives for development , production , and sustainment to meet the users' operational needs . 5000.2 “operation of the defense acquisition system” — instructs program managers to ensure development of a flexible strategy to sustain a program so that the strategy may evolve throughout the weapons system life cycle . discretionary guidebooks — guide program managers to determine minimum data needs to support sustainment strategy over life cycle of system . dod policy does not require program managers to document their strategy for ensuring long - term access to tech data over the life cycle of a weapon system . requires program manager to develop logistics support strategy , including description of how tech data rights or long - term access to tech data is to be obtained . navy's acquisition policy ( secnav instructions 4105.1a and 5000.2c , and navso p - 3692 ) an independent team is required to assess the adequacy of the program manager's logistics support plan , including technical data . however , there is no requirement compelling a system program manager to address how tech data rights or long - term access to technical data is to be obtained .