hhs has not documented procedures for this requirement . this requirement was assigned at the department level . capturing government labor costs . we reviewed each selected departments' it capital planning policies and procedures and government labor estimates within the 2017 it budget submission reported on the federal it dashboard . for each selected department , we identified the processes by which forecasted government labor costs are to be captured within investment proposals submitted with the annual it budget . specifically , we reviewed the data dictionary , data validation rules , and the fiscal year 2016 federal government procurement data quality summary for agency data in the federal procurement data system - next generation . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we supplemented our review with interviews with officials in the departments' offices of the cio , chief financial officer , and program offices to include discussions of our observations of any shortfalls in their processes . we conducted this performance audit from january 2017 to november 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . doe established department - wide it capital planning and budgeting procedures that document the level of detail with which it resources are to be described during the planning and budgeting process . the documented level of detail included omb's required reporting on government labor and certain resources for infrastructure investments . doe documented it capital planning procedures for the level of detail of planned expenditure reporting . however , the procedures did not explicitly require that all transactions with an it component be included in the expenditure reporting . doe's fitara implementation plan stated that the nnsa cio was to work with the chief financial officer and chief acquisition officer to update nnsa's policies to ensure they documented the level of detail for planned expenditure reporting for all it transactions . however , nnsa had not established such policies and procedures . doe documented it capital planning and annual budgeting procedures that included the cio in the planning and budgeting stages for some , but not all programs identified as having it resources . specifically , at the time of our review , the department had not yet documented procedures for ensuring the cio was included in budget decisions for all programs with it resources , including those within nnsa and national laboratories . according to doe's fitara implementation plan and a memorandum from the secretary providing further instructions on fitara , nnsa was to provide an opportunity for the department cio to provide input in its planning and budgeting stages for programs with it resources and to document related review processes . however , at the time of our review , nnsa had not yet established the procedures that were to detail how this process was to be carried out .