gao - 01-459 . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2001 . specifically: 1 . in the combat theater , electronic medical information may be collected for a variety of reasons , including routine outpatient care , as well as serious injuries . these data are stored in the theater medical data store , which can be accessed by unit commanders and others . ( as mentioned earlier , the departments have plans to develop a bhie interface to this system by july 2007 . until then , va cannot access these data. ) some images have successfully been exchanged . through their efforts on these long - and near - term initiatives , va and dod are achieving exchanges of various types of health information ( see attachment 1 for a summary of all the types of data currently being shared and those planned for the future , as well as cost data on the initiatives ) . however , these exchanges are as yet limited , and significant work remains to be done to expand the data shared and integrate the various initiatives . in addition to the information technology initiatives described , dod and va have set up special activities to transfer medical information to va's four polytrauma centers , which are treating active - duty service members severely wounded in combat . polytrauma centers care for veterans and returning service members with injuries to more than one physical region or organ system , one of which may be life threatening , and which results in physical , cognitive , psychological , or psychosocial impairments and functional disability . some examples of polytrauma include traumatic brain injury ( tbi ) , amputations , and loss of hearing or vision . when service members are seriously injured in a combat theater overseas , they are first treated locally . they are then generally evacuated to landstuhl medical center in germany , after which they are transferred to a military treatment facility in the united states , usually walter reed army medical center in washington , d.c. ; the national naval medical center in bethesda , maryland ; or brooke army medical center , at fort sam houston , texas . we have not evaluated the departments' plans or strategy in this area . throughout the history of these initiatives , evaluations beyond ours have also found deficiencies in the departments' efforts , especially with regard to the need for comprehensive planning . for example , in fiscal year 2006 , the congress did not provide all the funding requested for healthevet vista because it did not consider that the funding had been adequately justified . in addition , a recent presidential task force identified the need for va and dod to improve their long - term planning . this task force , reporting on gaps in services provided to returning veterans , noted problems with regard to sharing information on wounded service members , including the inability of va providers to access paper dod inpatient health records . according to the report , although significant progress has been made on sharing electronic information , more needs to be done .