other efforts . other services are expected to account for an additional 15 percent of total revenues , approximately $350,000 , in fiscal year 2009 . these services include tax , accounting , and merchant services for small businesses and subscription sales for a bid - and - response system for veteran - owned business contracts . fund - raising . in fiscal year 2009 , fund - raising is expected to account for 23 percent of revenue , which totals about $532,000 and includes interest income . however , the self - sufficiency plan did not incorporate all of the funds the veterans corporation will raise . the self - sufficiency plan included only the portion retained for overhead costs , 15 percent of funds raised . the veterans corporation's revenue - generating strategy relies to a great extent on first identifying the veteran - owned business population and then successfully marketing its services to this population . the veterans corporation officials explained that its self - sufficiency strategy is modeled on aarp , an organization that markets goods and services to a specific population ( affinity group ) and receives commissions based on sales volume . the veterans corporation's goal to achieve financial self - sufficiency in fiscal year 2009 is based on identifying about 250,000-300,000 veteran - owned businesses . an official at the veterans corporation told us that this number was based on industry guidance for an e - commerce business and represents the minimum number needed to successfully market its products . as of june 2004 , the veterans corporation had identified approximately 12,000 veteran - owned and potential veteran businesses , which represented about 5 percent of its goal . as previously reported , the veterans corporation has been unsuccessful in obtaining names of veteran - owned businesses through government sources . earlier in this report , we discussed the veterans corporation's difficulty in identifying its affinity group , the population of veteran - owned businesses — an ongoing problem because of privacy concerns among federal agencies . according to a veterans corporation official , the success of its marketing programs ( and thus the key to its financial self - sufficiency ) was dependent on its ability to identify and reach transitioning service members and veteran - owned businesses to market their products . as a result , the veterans corporation has developed another strategy in an effort to identify this population . to assist in identifying veteran business owners , in june 2004 the veterans corporation began testing a new marketing strategy with the help of mal dunn associates , a direct marketing firm . using mal dunn associates' database , the veterans corporation is soliciting about 15,000 veterans through e - mail , telemarketing , and direct mail . according to an official at the veterans corporation , the testing of the marketing strategy indicated that the direct mail approach was the most effective way of gaining new members and they plan to meet with mal dunn associates in september 2004 to discuss the possibility of performing some additional market analysis . an official at the veterans corporation further explained that the goal of at least 250,000 names was based on developing an affinity relationship through the veterans corporation's web site membership .