other stakeholders . other stakeholders that could affect pharmacies' labeling practices or provide medical services to individuals who are blind or visually impaired were unaware of the best practices . for example , the four states and an industry group representing physicians told us that they were unaware of the best practices prior to our contact with them . after our outreach , one state published an article about the best practices in its newsletter and discussed these practices with pharmacists , pharmacy staff , and the public at two public meetings in may and july 2016 . of those stakeholders who identified this challenge , many stated that greater dissemination of information on the best practices could increase awareness of the best practices . additionally , ncd officials told us that they would continue to disseminate information on the best practices as long as stakeholders remained unaware of them . low demand and high costs for providing accessible labels . another challenge that stakeholders identified is that pharmacies had low demand and incurred high costs to provide accessible labels . officials from five chain pharmacy companies and four individual retail pharmacy locations told us that they have had relatively few or no customer requests for accessible labels . some stakeholders reported that the demand for these labels does not justify the costs to provide accessible labels . these costs include staff costs — such as training or the time needed to produce these labels — as well as the costs associated with the technology required to produce the labels — such as purchasing software , printers , or labels . two stakeholders told us that the initial costs to purchase this technology may range from a few hundred to a few thousand dollars for each individual retail pharmacy location . further , these pharmacy locations may incur ongoing costs , such as annual fees of up to a few hundred dollars to cover technical assistance and other services or fees of up to a few dollars to purchase additional accessible labels . additionally , many stakeholders stated that it may be costly for larger chain pharmacy companies to implement technology and train staff in many locations , while smaller independent pharmacies may have difficulty absorbing the costs of purchasing the new technology they need to produce accessible labels . of those stakeholders who identified this challenge , some stated that financial support for pharmacies , such as third - party reimbursement , could address high costs that pharmacies incur to provide accessible labels that meet the best practices . these stakeholders stated that there is currently no direct financial support for providing these labels and these labels are provided free of charge to customers . officials from four chain pharmacy companies told us that pharmacies may be willing to provide accessible labels that meet the best practices if third parties , such as health plans , were willing to reimburse or share in the costs of producing these labels . additionally , officials from one industry group representing pharmacists stated that pharmacies may be more willing to provide accessible labels that meet the best practices if grant money were available to cover costs for producing these labels . technical challenges for providing accessible labels .