the full text of these comments is reproduced in appendix ii . in response to the board's comments , we added information regarding its plans for surveying participants . we also added information regarding the board's recent announcements that it will review the service provided by private plan managers . the department of labor was also provided a draft of this report for review and advised us that it had no comments . in its written comments , the board disagreed with our recommendation regarding the implementation of an evaluation effort to assess the level of customer satisfaction . the board stated that our recommendation was moot because the board had previously announced its intention to survey tsp participants on a variety of topics , including client satisfaction . however , in its february 2004 monthly meeting , the board said that such a survey would not be conducted for at least another 2 years . as we state in our report , the private sector plan managers that we spoke with believe that direct , ongoing participant feedback is needed to respond to the changing needs of plan participants . without obtaining more frequent feedback from participants , tsp managers cannot determine what improvements would best satisfy participants' needs . the board also suggested that certain aspects of plan performance indicate increased participant satisfaction . in particular , the board stated that tsp's high participation rate , increased number of transactions , and low account withdrawal rate among inactive participants , such as retirees or former employees , imply a high level of participant satisfaction . although such performance measures provide an indication of participant satisfaction , more sophisticated efforts , such as participant surveys , are needed to provide direct information on the changing needs of plan participants and what improvements would best satisfy those needs . we recognize that these efforts may require substantial resources , which is why other means , such as exploring the use of web - based and automated telephone call evaluation tools to randomly survey tsp participants , are needed as supplementary efforts . without a systematic effort to obtain feedback from participants , the board is not in the best position to determine participant satisfaction . the board also disagreed with our recommendation that it should routinely solicit information from the largest private plan managers to assess whether their practices would be advantageous and cost - effective if adopted by tsp . the board said that it has conducted and will continue to conduct on - site reviews of the largest private plan managers to determine the services they provide and the technological capabilities they plan for the future . while the board's recent visits to such plan managers are a positive step , we believe that a routine and systematic effort to survey practices used in the private sector customer service industry should be institutionalized as a regular aspect of tsp's operations . further , in considering which new practices to adopt , the board would need to weigh the costs of making changes to tsp's services against the potential benefits to participants and the plans themselves . conducting such cost / benefit analyses is a management function and would be inappropriate for gao to initiate .