we disagree . as we stated in the report ( see p. 2 ) , financial monitoring was not within the scope of our work . it is important to note that the scope of our work was based on agreements with our requesters and was not influenced by whether or not financial monitoring information is included in ojp's annual financial statement audit . according to the ojp handbook: policies and procedures for the administration of ojp grants ( feb. 1992 ) , official grant files kept by the office of comptroller control desk are to contain documents relating to each grantee , including progress and financial reports and site visit reports . in addition , for documentation to be readily available for examination , as required by the comptroller general's internal control standards , keeping them in the official grant files seems appropriate . as we reported , in our review of closeout procedures , we waited more than the required 180 days before reviewing grant files to allow sufficient time for bja and vawo to complete the grant closeout process ( see footnote 24 , p. 18 ) . however , the files we reviewed did not contain the required closeout documents . as we reported , bja and vawo officials told us that supervisors discuss monitoring activities with staff through informal discussions or meetings , which could include one - on - one meetings with staff . desk reviews . 15 of 46 byrne files contained monitoring plans that specified the frequency of desk reviews to be conducted . however , none of the files showed evidence that any desk reviews were conducted . our assessment of the vawo files provided enough cases to develop a representative sample of all available vawo monitoring plans . specifically , our review of planned to actual monitoring activities — phone contacts , site visits , and desk reviews — showed the following: phone contacts . 59 of 84 vawo files contained monitoring plans that specified the planned number and frequency ( eg , monthly or quarterly ) of telephone contacts to be made . however , none contained documentation to show that the planned number of telephone contacts occurred . site visits . 25 of 46 byrne files contained monitoring plans that specified the number of grantee site visits to be conducted , but only 4 of 25 files contained documentation that showed that the planned number of site visits occurred . only 1 of the 25 files had documentation that some , but not all , of the site visits had been made , and the remaining 20 of the 25 files contained no documentation that any site visits occurred . furthermore , we estimate that 56 percent of vawo files had documentation that some , but not all , of the planned telephone contacts had been made , and 44 percent of vawo files with monitoring plans containing criteria for a specific number of telephone contacts had no documentation that any telephone contacts occurred . site visits . 53 of 84 vawo files contained monitoring plans that specified the number of grantee site visits to be conducted . we estimate that 10 percent of vawo files contained documentation that the planned number of site visits occurred .