the industry standard is 10 days . in addition to actions already taken , va's plan has several other initiatives under way for improving billing times and increasing collections . for example , the pfss is designed to integrate the health care billing and accounts receivable software systems to replace va's current legacy system . the system is intended to increase staff efficiency through a streamlined , standardized , re - engineered process ; create more accurate bills ; and shorten bill lag times through automation . va officials believe that this initiative , when implemented , will reduce manual intervention noted earlier in our report as a reason for delayed billings . however , implementation is behind schedule . another effort under way , the electronic medicare remittance advice project , helps to address obtaining allowable payments from secondary insurance companies , rather than accepting partial payments that are significantly lower than billed amounts as full payment . this project involves the electronic submission of claims to a fiscal intermediary to receive remittance advice on how medicare would have paid the claim if it were legally bound to pay va for care . the remittance advice , which will be attached to va health care claims , will enable secondary insurance companies to determine the correct amount to reimburse va. further , va believes it will be able to more accurately reflect the amount of its outstanding receivables and be in a strengthened position to follow up on partial payments , which it deems incorrect . the completion date for this project was november 2003 but has been delayed due to software issues . va officials told us they plan to roll out the new system beginning in august 2004 . although the plan provides another step forward in potentially improving operations and increasing collections , it is still in progress and many of the actions are not scheduled for implementation until at least fiscal year 2005 . therefore , it is too early to determine whether the plan will successfully address operational problems and increase collections when fully implemented . the unpaid balance is to be written down to zero . va is making progress in developing and implementing procedures to identify patients who can be billed for services , to bill for services correctly and in a timely manner , and to pursue collections . va's plan to further improve billing and collection operations , however , is still a work in progress and could benefit from the performance of a workload analysis . in the interim , strengthening internal controls such as clarifying billing and claims follow - up procedures and consistently implementing policies and procedures could help reduce billing times and increase collections . a summary of our results is shown in table 1 . promptly invoicing insurance companies for care provided is a sound business practice and should result in improved cash flow for va. officials at each of the three medical centers cited verifying and updating patients' third - party insurance information as a continuing impediment to billing third - party insurance companies in a timely manner .