jamaica . inl and pm have provided boats to the government of jamaica to increase the government's capacity to conduct counternarcotic operations ( see fig . throughout the caribbean . inl supports activities providing training , technical assistance , policy guidance , and basic equipment to enhance the capacity of cbsi countries to combat illicit small arms and ammunition trafficking through operational forensic ballistics . throughout the caribbean . state uses an interagency agreement to support the technical assistance field team ( taft ) program . this program , supported by both fmf and incle funds , aims to build maritime capacity of partner countries throughout the caribbean . the team is composed of 15 coast guard and dod engineers , technicians , specialists , and logisticians , based at u.s. southern command , who assist caribbean maritime security forces with maintenance and sustainment issues . the advisors have worked to implement inventory management systems within cbsi countries and conduct regular site visits to cbsi countries to assist in the maintenance and logistics of maritime assets . promoting social justice . usaid and its implementing partners — multilateral and nongovernmental organizations , for the most part — use esf funds in an effort to increase economic opportunities for at - risk youth and vulnerable populations , improve community and law enforcement cooperation , improve the juvenile justice sector , and reduce corruption in public and private sectors . dominican republic . usaid has provided assistance for community - based activities , such as the community justice houses . these centers are designed to provide services related to the justice sector , such as public defense and mediation efforts for populations in areas of high violence that have limited access to traditional justice institutions . dominican republic and barbados . usaid's implementing partners work with at - risk youth to provide skills training and education for those individuals in vulnerable populations . jamaica . usaid's implementing partners work with youth in the juvenile justice system to provide marketable technical skills , life skills , and individualized psychosocial attention to assist in their reintegration into society . eastern and southern caribbean . usaid partners use a community - based approach to crime prevention to identify the underlying causes of crime and violence by collecting standardized crime data across the region . increasing public safety and security . state uses incle to fund activities to increase the rule of law and reduce transnational crime . usaid uses esf to support public safety and security activities by funding training and support programs that aim to build institutional capacity for police and judicial systems . jamaica . inl works to enhance the government of jamaica's capacity to disrupt and deter money laundering operations and other financial crimes by providing technical assistance , equipment and training for combating money laundering and financial crime , and for the seizure of criminally - acquired assets . eastern caribbean . inl uses training , technical assistance , equipment purchases , and operational support to combat financial crimes and increase asset forfeiture efforts . dominican republic . reducing illicit trafficking .