treatment . two of the 12 initiatives included a treatment component . officials with the barrow concussion and brain injury center in arizona and the northside hospital duluth concussion institute in georgia told us they provided treatment to victims who were referred by local domestic violence shelters . providers affiliated with one of these initiatives told us that treatment for brain injuries resulting from intimate partner violence does not differ from treatment for other brain injuries . a provider with one of these initiatives said that treatment could include exercises and movements that decrease dizziness , vertigo , and imbalance ; occupational , physical , or speech therapies ; or treatment for pain management . an intimate partner violence victim's brain injury treatment jane doe was abused by her partner . zieman , glynnis , ashley bridwell , and javier f. cardenas . “traumatic brain injury in domestic violence victims: a retrospective study at the barrow neurological institute.” journal of neurotrauma , vol . the following table provides a brief overview of each of the 12 initiatives we identified based on information provided by the department of health and human services , the department of justice , and other stakeholders . these initiatives engage in various efforts to address intimate partner violence and brain injuries , including traumatic brain injury and anoxic injuries resulting from strangulation . our list includes those efforts identified during the course of our review and may not be exhaustive . the descriptions of initiatives are based on our review of documentation and information obtained from interviews with officials . in addition to the contact named above , shannon slawter legeer ( assistant director ) , danielle bernstein ( analyst - in - charge ) , and ashley dixon made key contributions to this report . also contributing were leia dickerson , kaitlin farquharson , drew long , and ethiene salgado - rodriguez . an advocate at a domestic violence shelter screened jane for a brain injury and referred her for assessment . she was diagnosed and began treatment for a brain injury . jane doe told us that the treatments she received , which included nerve blockers — often used by neurologists to lessen chronic pain — helped to relieve the persistent headaches and debilitating migraines she experienced in the aftermath of her abuse . she told us that as a result of the treatment she received , she feels better able to function . officials from the barrow concussion and brain injury center told us that individuals with brain injuries resulting from intimate partner violence may face a longer period of recovery compared to others with brain injuries , in part , because of living in unsafe home environments . as a result , special considerations are sometimes needed due to additional barriers faced by domestic violence victims . for example: victims may need safety planning and housing . as a part of the barrow concussion and brain injury center's domestic violence initiative , a social worker will help ensure that victims' other needs are met . officials from the northside hospital duluth concussion institute noted that transportation could also be a barrier for victims of intimate partner violence .