training volunteers . volunteers should be provided with training that prepares them to “adopt culturally appropriate lifestyles and exercise judgment that promotes safety and reduces risk in their home , at work , and while traveling.” developing volunteer housing and work sites . volunteers should be placed in “appropriate , safe , and secure housing and work sites.” criteria for selecting sites include the potential for volunteers' obtaining and maintaining “acceptance” in the communities where they will live and work . monitoring sites and volunteers and responding to safety concerns and criminal incidents . post staff should make periodic visits to volunteer sites and respond to volunteer safety and security concerns and incidents , including crimes against volunteers . planning for emergencies . posts must maintain accurate contact information on all volunteers and develop and annually test emergency action plans ( eap ) to guide staff and volunteers in the event of a natural disaster , political unrest , or other emergency . headquarters is to review the eaps and the eap test results . headquarters has developed written guidance and training for headquarters and field staff to support implementation of safety and security policies . in collaboration with other agency officials , the coordinator for volunteer safety and security has developed a variety of guidance materials for posts , including information on “best practices” in safety and security operations from posts around the world , crisis management and rape response handbooks , and training modules that posts can apply in preparing volunteer safety and security training programs . these materials are generally nonprescriptive and can be adapted to country - specific conditions . peace corps staff , including country directors and program managers at posts , are given training in safety and security procedures as part of their introduction to their positions . for example , all new program managers attend a 4-week overseas staff training session in washington , d.c. , that addresses safety and security issues and other aspects of their work . agency staff also attend periodic in - service training events that may include safety and security matters . in addition to these regional directors , peace corps' office of volunteer safety and overseas security ( headed by a coordinator for volunteer safety and security ) and the office of the inspector general contribute to headquarters' supervision and oversight of post practices . a field - based regional safety and security officer works in each of the three regions . at the request of regional or country directors , these officers review and provide advisory reports on post safety and security practices . the office of the inspector general , among other things , reviews safety and security operations at posts and issues formal recommendations that require an official post response . peace corps country directors are responsible for developing procedures to ensure the effective implementation in specific countries of the agency's broadly phrased policies , as previously mentioned . for example , country directors develop safety and security criteria for prospective volunteer sites and procedures for ensuring that sites meet these criteria before volunteers arrive . they also develop and provide volunteer safety and security training programs in accordance with agency policies . volunteers are expected to exercise responsibility for their own safety and security .