exporter frequency . we classified a company as a high , medium , or low frequency exporter based upon its number of export applications submitted to commerce , for the commerce ecass d&e product group licenses ; and state for detra permanent technical data licenses , using the following categories: high — 800 or more licenses , medium — 100-799 licenses , and low — 1-99 licenses . had a foreign employee presence . were new exporters or potential exporters , in the process of applying for an export license to either commerce or state . we did not generalize the information and findings we developed from our work with these 46 companies to the broad universe of all u.s. companies that export . defense did not have any comments on our draft report . commerce generally agreed with our recommendations to assess potential vulnerabilities related to export - controlled information and to conduct more targeted outreach and compliance activities . commerce , in its response , described planned and recent activities related to its oversight and outreach efforts on deemed exports , such as the deemed export advisory committee and increased export outreach and compliance activities . while these activities address some unique cases where companies are required to have a technology control plan ( tcp ) in place when employing foreign nationals , they do not fully address how to protect export - controlled information when transferred electronically and by other intangible means . as noted in our report , almost half of the company officials we interviewed told us they have difficulty determining the proper measures to protect export - controlled information . commerce also cited a september 2006 american society for industrial security trade association meeting where it addressed the protection of export - controlled information . actions such as this , if conducted on a regular basis , could improve companies' understanding of how to protect export - controlled information in today's commonplace business transactions , such as e - mail , e - commerce exchanges , and intracompany transfers . state agreed with our recommendation to improve guidance for exports of controlled information and disagreed with our report's finding that it does not assess the potential vulnerabilities associated with export - controlled information . state responded that it recently tasked its defense trade advisory group to develop a best practice guide for industry on how to comply with the regulations . such guidance , particularly if it addresses export - controlled information and is shared on state's web site , can help to improve companies' understanding of accepted practices for protecting such information . regarding its assessment of potential vulnerabilities associated with export - controlled information , state responded that its individual licensing and compliance activities strategically target its concerns related to exports of controlled technical data . state added that its assessments of the vulnerabilities and risks associated with export - controlled information form the basis for topics addressed at training events and industry conferences , as well as many regulatory changes .