( app . i contains a detailed discussion of our data sources and analysis of the data reported to us from the federal entities. ) as revenues from card payments have increased , so has the total amount of merchant discount fees paid by the federal entities from which we collected data . these federal entities reported paying a total of almost $433 million in merchant discount fees in fiscal year 2007 ( see table 1 ) . this figure represents an almost 12 percent increase over the amount paid in fiscal year 2006 and an almost 27 percent increase over the amount paid in fiscal year 2005 . the average merchant discount rate increased about 4 percent from fiscal year 2005 to fiscal year 2007 . among the entities included in our review , amtrak , fms , and the postal service provided data specifically showing the amount of interchange fees associated with their visa and mastercard transactions ( their acquiring banks provide them with these data ) . these three entities paid a total of approximately $205 million in interchange fees during fiscal year 2007 , out of a total $218 million in merchant discount fees specifically for mastercard and visa transactions . these interchange fees accounted for the majority of total merchant discount fees these entities paid for accepting all card types . as card revenues and merchant discount fees increased for these three entities , so did the interchange fees they paid . interchange fees increased by almost 36 percent , from almost $151 million in fiscal year 2005 to $205 million in fiscal year 2007 ( in fiscal year 2006 , they were $179 million ) . for a variety of reasons , some of the department of defense and department of homeland security nafis were not able to separate interchange fees from the total merchant discount fees they paid . ( for example , according to an official from one entity , its contract with its acquiring bank specified that all credit card transactions would be charged a fixed percentage fee , regardless of the interchange fees associated with a particular transaction ; therefore , the entity did not have specific information on interchange fees. ) the data provided by these entities showed that both card revenues and the associated merchant discount fees increased over the 2005 to 2007 period . according to information provided by iaa , average merchant discount rates have declined in israel since 1998 , especially for visa cards ; however , other factors may have contributed to the overall decline in merchant discount rates in israel . for example , other regulatory actions relating to limiting merchant discount rates also were being taken during this period . in addition , officials from the antitrust authority expressed the belief that the increased competition in the visa issuing market since 1998 has contributed to the lower merchant discount rates . evidence relating to impacts on consumers since the interchange rate intervention in these countries is limited . in australia , where the reforms have been in effect long enough to allow for some study , cardholders have experienced a decline in the value of credit card reward points for most cards and an increase in annual and other consumer credit card fees .