therefore , we do not provide any assurance on them . we did not obtain the loan application received by the local tv board , nor did we review the board's assessment of the application . the second component includes the board's estimate of salaries and expenses incurred by the working group members to support the board that totals approximately $597,000 . the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act of 2002 provided $2 million to usda for administrative expenses . during fiscal year 2002 , usda obligated the entire $2 million by issuing an order for its anticipated needs to govworks , which subsequently awarded , on the board's behalf , two contracts totaling about $1.2 million . the first contract was awarded to ernst & young llp for approximately $749,000 ( including govworks fees ) . of this amount , govworks obligated and disbursed approximately $640,000 to ernst & young llp to develop the underwriting criteria and program regulations and $22,000 in fees to govworks . the second contract was issued to arnold and porter llp for legal services in the amount of $500,000 . no obligations or disbursements were made for this contract , and during the first quarter of fiscal year 2005 , the board decided to terminate it . as of december 31 , 2004 , the remaining available balance was approximately $1.3 million , including $800,000 that was never awarded and $500,000 from the terminated arnold and porter llp contract . separate from the $2 million administrative appropriation , based on authority granted in the act , the local tv board established a working group , consisting of senior level officials from various departments and agencies that are represented on the board , to assist it with implementing the local tv program . the program did not have full - time staff but depended on staff from the various agencies supporting individual board members as a collateral duty . the costs incurred by the working group members to support their board members have been borne by the respective departments and agencies from within their existing budgetary resources ( i.e. , salaries and expenses appropriations or accounts ) . the local tv board estimated that the working group incurred a total cost from initial funding of the program through september 30 , 2004 , of approximately $597,000 . table 2 provides a summary of the reported estimated administrative costs incurred by the working group for fiscal years ended september 30 , 2002 through 2004 . because no applications were accepted and no loan guarantees were issued , none of the costs in table 2 were recovered by fees charged to loan guarantee applicants . the congress has rescinded the funding to support loan guarantees under the local tv act , and the president's budget for fiscal year 2006 did not propose additional funds for the local tv program . unless the congress appropriates additional budget authority for loan guarantees , usda may not need the balance of the administrative funds ( about $1.3 million ) transferred to and remaining unobligated by contract in the govworks account .