program . the office of information services centrally administers nara's it the office of information services centrally administers nara's it security program at the archives ii facility . the assistant archivist for security program at the archives ii facility . the assistant archivist for information services , who also serves as the chief information officer information services , who also serves as the chief information officer ( cio ) , is the head of the office of information services . as described in ( cio ) , is the head of the office of information services . as described in table 3 , nara has designated certain senior managers or divisions at table 3 , nara has designated certain senior managers or divisions at headquarters to fill the key roles in it security designated by fisma and headquarters to fill the key roles in it security designated by fisma and agency policy . agency policy . fisma also requires the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) to provide standards and guidance to agencies on information security . nara has a directive in place to establish its policy and guidance for information security , delineate its security program structure , and assign security responsibilities . however , nara did not always include required controls in its system security plans . for example , 7 of the 13 system security plans reviewed did not include a system component inventory or address where that inventory could be found . in addition , nara has not updated its badge and access system security plan since 2003 , despite replacing the system in 2007 . nara had scheduled to correct this weakness by the end of 2009 , but as of september 2010 it had not been corrected . further , nara system security plans varied in documenting security roles and responsibilities for key individuals . some plans were missing one or more assignments for these roles . specifically , 6 of the 13 plans did not have the required information system owner role identified , and none of the plans reviewed had the information owner role identified or assigned . by not addressing inventory control and assigning key security responsibilities in the system security plan , nara increases the risk that critical information may not be available to those responsible for implementing system security plans , potentially causing a misapplication of controls to the system . according to fisma , an agencywide information security program must include security awareness training for agency personnel , contractors , and other users of information systems that support the agency's operations and assets . this training must cover ( 1 ) information security risks associated with users' activities and ( 2 ) users' responsibilities in complying with agency policies and procedures designed to reduce these risks . fisma also includes requirements for training personnel with significant responsibilities for information security . in addition , omb requires that personnel be trained before they are granted access to systems or applications . the training is intended to ensure that personnel are aware of the system or application's rules , their responsibilities , and their expected behavior .