the document is in english . we also asked usda officials to identify any research assessing whether the five programs were meeting their nutrition education goals . we then compared the lists they provided with our own list of studies to ensure that all studies meeting our criteria were included in our review . altogether , 20 items met our criteria for review . many of the items we eliminated were published prior to 1994 and therefore do not satisfy our definition of recent studies . some items were eliminated because they were published as reviews or summaries of original research but did not include any original research . other items provide descriptive information about nutrition education recipients and staff but do not evaluate the nutrition education efforts . we then conducted detailed reviews of the 20 studies . ( 3 ) do these officials incorporate these actions during service delivery ? ( 4 ) do these officials incorporate these actions during program evaluation ? to identify the key components believed to contribute to successful nutrition education , we conducted interviews with experts in the field of nutrition education research , reviewed key research on the topic , and reviewed gao reports and other documents on performance - based management . to answer the questions related to usda's nutrition education efforts , we conducted interviews with officials from each of the five usda programs and reviewed program reports and studies . we also conducted interviews with cognizant state and local officials from each of the five programs in three states ; we conducted site visits in maryland and california and conducted telephone interviews with michigan officials . we selected these states because they represented a range of geographic locations and received a range of funding levels for nutrition education . our observations on the delivery of nutrition education are primarily based on our site visits and cannot be generalized to the programs nationwide . finally , we identified and reviewed studies and evaluations of the programs' nutrition education efforts that were conducted over the last 10 years to determine whether these programs were meeting their nutrition education goals . ( see app . i for more information on our scope and methodology. ) we conducted our study from may 2003 to april 2004 in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards . efforts to educate individuals about the benefits of healthy eating and nutrition occur at the federal , state , and local levels through a variety of different agencies and programs . however , the usda leads the nation's nutrition education efforts , providing nutrition education through the efnep program and through four of its major nutrition assistance programs . the extent to which nutrition education is integrated into nutrition assistance programs varies . in some programs , such as wic , it is a mandatory component of the program . in others , it plays a lesser role . each program has different legislative requirements and administrative structures for its nutrition education efforts . in addition , each program has a particular funding level to support its nutrition education efforts . several federal agencies support nutrition education .