, leading to the weapon's yield . ( see table 2. ) nnsa has requested almost $7 billion in funding for these campaigns over the next 5 years . ( see table 3. ) finally , while we support the development of qmu and believe it must be effectively managed , we also believe it is important to recognize and acknowledge that the development and application of qmu , especially the complexities involved in analyzing and combining uncertainties related to potential failure modes and performance margins , represents a daunting research challenge that may not be achievable in the time constraints created by an aging nuclear stockpile . to ensure that the weapons laboratories will have the proper tools in place to support the continued assessment of the existing stockpile or the certification of redesigned nuclear components under the rrw program , we recommend that the administrator of nnsa take the following two actions: require the three weapons laboratories to formally document an agreed upon , technical description of the qmu methodology that clearly recognizes and reconciles any methodological differences . establish a formal requirement for periodic collaboration between the three weapons laboratories to increase their mutual understanding of the development and implementation of qmu . within nnsa , the office of defense programs is responsible for managing the campaigns and the stockpile stewardship program in general . within this office , two organizations share responsibility for overall management of the scientific campaigns: the office of the assistant deputy administrator for research , development , and simulation and the office of the assistant deputy administrator for inertial confinement fusion and the national ignition facility project . the first office oversees campaign activities associated with the primary and secondary campaigns — as well as the asc , advanced radiography , and dynamic materials properties campaigns — with a staff of about 13 people . the second office oversees activities associated with the icf campaign with a single staff person . actual campaign activities are conducted by scientists and other staff at the three weapons laboratories . lanl and llnl conduct activities associated with the nuclear explosive package , while snl performs activities associated with the nonnuclear components that control the use , arming , and firing of the nuclear warhead . nnsa has endorsed the use of a new common methodology , known as the quantification of margins and uncertainties , or qmu , for assessing and certifying the safety and reliability of the nuclear stockpile . nnsa and laboratory officials told us that they have made progress in applying the principles of qmu to the certification and assessment of nuclear warheads in the stockpile . however , qmu is still in its early stages of development , and important differences exist among the three laboratories in their application of qmu . to date , nnsa has commissioned two technical reviews of the implementation of qmu at the weapons laboratories . while strongly supporting qmu , the reviews found that the development and implementation of qmu was still in its early stages . the reviews recommended that nnsa take steps to further define the technical details supporting the implementation of qmu and integrate the activities of the three weapons laboratories in implementing qmu .