civilians comprise 20 percent of the medical workforce . in providing technical comments to a draft of this report , dod noted that among the military services , the army has the highest percentage of civilians . we found it sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this audit . according to the 2007 military health system human capital strategic plan , the medical workforce is comprised of several specialty medical corps , including medical , dental , nurse , medical service , medical specialist , biomedical sciences , veterinary , warrant officers , medical enlisted , and dental enlisted . this plan also states that the largest corps is the active duty medical enlisted corps , which consists of about 75,000 individuals and makes up about 65 percent of dod's active duty medical force . figure 2 represents the distribution of active duty medical personnel by specialty . a more detailed breakout of each of the services' medical specialty personnel levels is presented in appendix ii . that appendix shows , for fiscal year 2009 , how each of the services allocated its positions within each of its medical specialties based on identified needs , financial resources , and personnel availability . while dod has emphasized jointness and undertaken joint initiatives across the department , the extent to which the services have incorporated cross - service collaboration in their planning efforts for determining their medical personnel requirements has been limited . the army uses its automated staffing assessment model to determine manpower requirements for army fixed military treatment facility and other army medical command organizations . this model is based primarily on approved population and workload data , but it also incorporates industry performance data to determine manpower requirements for the various medical specialties . the automated staffing assessment model consists of over 240 modules for determining essential medical requirements for many medical specialties such as physicians , nurses , dentists , medical service corps , and veterinarians , to name a few , at the work center level across army fixed military treatment facilities . the model uses the current population of the various military treatment facilities as the major determinant of the number of medical personnel needed at each facility . in addition , a number of key , workload - based assumptions inform the model , including patient care hours , population projections , provider - to - patient ratio , and provider - to - support technician ratio . however , in certain cases , our analyses of selected modules revealed areas that need improvement . for example , our analyses of the inpatient nursing and dental modules revealed the use of some obsolete assumptions . specifically , we found that the army's nursing requirements module had not been updated or used since 2005 to determine nursing requirements . further , according to dental command officials , the dental module in use is an army legacy model that is over 40 years old and does not reflect the more advanced level of dental care currently being provided , such as the increased need for complex dental repair work rather than simple extractions . dod noted in technical comments on a draft of this report that the nursing and dental modules were recently updated and submitted for validation .