revenue effects . tax expenditures may , in effect , be viewed as spending programs channeled through the tax system . tax expenditures can be viewed this way because they grant special tax relief for certain kinds of behavior by a taxpayer or for taxpayers in special circumstances . revenues foregone through tax expenditures either reduce funding available for other federal activities or require higher tax rates to raise a given amount of revenue . like decisions about spending , deciding whether to extend an expiring tax expenditure involves considering whether the benefit of the intended outcome is worth the effect on other programs or tax rates . revenue the government would have collected absent a tax expenditure could have been used for other federal priorities , deficit reduction , or tax rate reductions . gao - 05-1009sp . gain that is said to improve economic efficiency . these gains improve peoples' well - being in a variety of ways , including increased income and consumption opportunities . estimating efficiency gains and losses can be challenging . studies may be limited by what can be quantified ; for example , studies may examine dollars spent on qualified research or the number of economic development projects built , rather than whether the use of funds for these activities constitute a better use of resources . simplicity , transparency , and administrability . since 1981 , the research tax credit has provided significant subsidies ( an estimated $6 billion for fiscal year 2011 ) to encourage business to invest in research and development . the most recent version of the credit expired after december 31 , 2011 . despite the widespread support for the concept of a credit for increasing research activities , concerns have been raised about the cost - effectiveness of the design of the current credit and its administrative and compliance costs . we found that the research tax credit , as currently designed , distributes incentives unevenly across taxpayers and provides many recipients with windfall benefits , earned for research that they would have done anyway . for example , we found that for those claiming the regular credit , more than half of the credit such claimants earned was a windfall . the disparities in incentives can lead to an inefficient allocation of investment resources across businesses , and the windfall benefits represent foregone tax revenue that does not contribute to the credit's objective . accordingly , we suggested that congress modify the research tax credit to reduce economic inefficiencies and excessive revenue costs . jct estimates the budgetary effect of the president's proposal to enhance and make permanent this provision would be about $99 billion in fiscal years 2012- 2022 . our past work on the research tax credit also provides insight into how tax expenditure design can affect transparency and administrability . in 2009 , we reported that there are numerous areas of disagreement between irs and taxpayers concerning what types of spending qualify for the research credit because of issues such as the definitions used to determine eligibility and the documentation needed to support the claim . these disputes raise the cost of the credit to both taxpayers and irs and diminish the credit's incentive effect by making the ultimate benefit to taxpayers less certain .