is lethal . this capability is referred to as “discrimination. various challenges have recently emerged that have affected the availability of the threat assessments mda needs to inform the agency's acquisition decisions . challenges include an upsurge in threat missile activity , which has increased the overall demand for threat assessments ; a transition period as the defense intelligence community works through how to implement recent revisions to its processes and products ; and mda's request for accelerated support from the defense intelligence community . defense intelligence community officials say they are contending with all of these challenges without the provision of additional manpower or resources . consequently , defense intelligence community officials have stated that their manpower and resources are constrained , which can affect the timely delivery of threat assessments to customers , such as mda . if mda does not have the threat information it needs when it is needed , the delay of information could result in setbacks for the agency's weapon system design , development , and testing , or could put the agency in the position of moving forward without the requisite information , thereby increasing the risk of performance shortfalls and costly retrofits . however , mda has opportunities to mitigate these challenges by collectively prioritizing its threat assessment requests and working through existing venues with the defense intelligence community to determine what additional resources may be needed to secure the accelerated support that it needs . one challenge for the defense intelligence community is a recent upsurge in threat missile activity , which has increased mda's requests for threat assessments . for example , ballistic missile flight testing has more than doubled from 2005 to 2016 , from about 70 tests in 2005 to nearly 180 tests in 2016 , and the most notable increases have occurred since 2010 ( see figure 4 ) . this upsurge of threat missile activity increases the urgency for the defense intelligence community to provide the requisite type of threat assessments to mda to enable the agency to counter and defeat such threats ; however , defense intelligence community officials have said that manpower and resource constraints have limited their ability to do so . in 2016 , we reported on how the defense intelligence community's manpower and resource constraints have impacted its ability to provide threat assessments . since then , defense intelligence community officials have said that the manpower and resource constraints have not been resolved , but threat missile activity has increased . for example , some countries have recently displayed or flight tested new threat missiles capable of reaching the united states . when new threat missiles emerge , mda requests missile - specific threat assessments — known as reference documents — from the defense intelligence community to understand their size , performance characteristics , and signature when detected by a sensor . this detailed information on the threat missiles enables mda to build the threat models used to design , develop , and test bmds weapon systems . defense intelligence community officials have said that , although important , missile - specific threat assessments utilize considerable manpower and resources because they can be labor - intensive , lengthy , and take months , and at times a year or longer , to prepare .