programming . according to nnsa policy , in this phase , scheduled to begin annually in february , nnsa is to determine which program activities and funding levels it will include in its budget proposal to doe for the fiscal year beginning in october of the following calendar year . this determination is based on analysis of the activities' estimated costs , as well as the need to meet the nnsa goals defined in the planning process . to determine these activities , nnsa program offices are to work with their contractors to obtain estimates for the cost of the program activities identified in the planning phase and determine how to accomplish these activities within anticipated funding levels , which are defined in annual nnsa program and fiscal guidance . nnsa program offices are to then rank these activities in order of priority for meeting program goals and document these decisions in integrated priority lists . these lists can include proposed program activities above the anticipated funding levels specified in nnsa guidance — these proposed activities are known as unfunded requirements . using these lists , as well as other briefing materials , a group of senior nnsa officials including the heads of all program offices — the program review council — then is to meet with the principal deputy administrator to discuss and defend each program's proposed program activities . furthermore , they stated that the need for a formal review of budget estimates is minimized , in part , because of the inherent trust between nnsa and its m&o contractors . additionally , we identified three key problems in nnsa's formal budget validation review process: it occurs too late to affect budget decisions , is not sufficiently thorough , and includes other weaknesses that limit its effectiveness . nnsa does not have a thorough , documented process for assessing the validity of its budget estimates prior to their inclusion in the president's budget submission to congress , thereby limiting the reliability and credibility of the budget submission . specifically , according to nnsa officials from nnsa's offices of management and budget , defense programs ; defense nuclear nonproliferation ; and the site offices for los alamos , sandia , and y - 12 , during the programming phase of ppbe , site and headquarters program office officials conduct informal , undocumented reviews of the budget estimates that m&o contractors submitted to determine their reasonableness , though some officials noted that the level of review may vary across site and headquarters program offices . according to these officials , this informal review is often conducted by comparing current budget estimates with those from previous years because the work is largely the same from year to year . if the estimates are similar , and no major programmatic change has taken place , site office and headquarters program office officials said that they generally view these budget estimates as reasonable for inclusion in nnsa's budget estimate . however , site office officials told us that their ability to thoroughly review budget estimates is limited .