we added a reference to these programs . pec officials also indicated that there were opportunities to reduce the overlap and improve the efficiency of agencies' outreach efforts . they believed agencies could collaborate and reduce the multiplicity of outreach conferences , thereby saving costs and time for both government agencies and targeted small businesses . we incorporated these observations into the discussion of both barriers and suggestions for increasing contracting with wosbs . finally , pec officials emphasized that , notwithstanding the potential noted above for some improvements in the efficiency of outreach efforts , attempts to increase contracting within various small business contracting programs is largely a zero - sum problem — that is , increased efforts in one area are likely to adversely affect other programs . they noted that the workload pressures on contracting officers are contributing further to the use of contracting practices that some have alleged limit opportunities for small businesses to compete for federal contracts . we expanded our discussion of these issues and added an observation about the value of overseeing this trend and its possible adverse effects on wosbs and other small business groups . we also received oral comments from the co - chair of the osdbu council , who represented the views of a number of their members . the council members were generally positive about the report and supported the recommendation but expressed concern that the significant efforts and successes of various agencies were not reflected in the report . they believed the draft overemphasized the achievement of goals , particularly noting that we described how no agency had met both its prime and subcontract goals over the 4-year period examined . they stated that this focus failed to recognize that some agencies set “stretch” goals and that some agencies have continually achieved or exceeded procurement levels for wosbs above the 5-percent governmentwide goal . we retained our observations about the achievement of agency goals since individual agency goals ( whether above or below 5 percent ) are key to the achievement of the governmentwide goal . however , we did incorporate a reference to the one agency that has continually achieved or exceeded the 5-percent governmentwide goal . osdbu council members also provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate . we received written comments from dod and nasa . dod's under secretary of acquisition technology and logistics provided written comments stating that dod generally agreed with the facts in the report and supports our recommendation to sba , including that sba officials seek the active collaboration and support of dod officials in the study . separately , dod provided us with several technical comments , which we incorporated into the final report as appropriate . dod's letter to us appears in appendix iv . a nasa associate deputy administrator provided us with written comments stating that nasa agreed with our recommendation to sba . he noted that when establishing the 5-percent goal for wosbs , fasa specified that the goal be no less than 5 percent of the total value of all prime and subcontract awards for each fiscal year and it was not until november 1999 that ofpp interpreted the requirement to mean that there were separate 5- percent goals for prime and subcontracts .