gao - 16-781 . washington , d.c.: september 26 , 2016 . , a presumptive service connection ) . specifically , va provides disability compensation benefits to veterans who served in southwest asia for illnesses that fall into the following three categories: ( 1 ) undiagnosed illnesses ( established in 1994 ) ; ( 2 ) medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illnesses ( established in 2001 ) ; and ( 3 ) nine specific infectious diseases ( established in 2010 ) . washington , d.c.: june 1 , 2004 . regarding training on gulf war illness for its medical examiners , va said it plans to make its 90-minute web - based training course mandatory for its medical examiners who conduct gulf war illness exams . va also stated it will improve how it communicates decisions to veterans and is in the process of updating its guidance to the regional offices to clarify the language required for its gulf war illness decision letters . finally , va said it will convene a group of subject matter experts to work on a plan — as described in our report — to establish a single case definition of gulf war illness . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of veterans affairs , the under secretary for health , and the under secretary for benefits . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0534 or emreyarrasm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . the objectives of this report were to examine ( 1 ) the trends in gulf war illness disability claims in recent years , ( 2 ) challenges associated with accurately processing and clearly communicating decisions on gulf war illness disability claims , and ( 3 ) how the department of veterans affairs ( va ) uses research on gulf war illness to inform its disability compensation program . to address all three objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations as well as va policies , procedures , guidance , training materials , and va documents describing its gulf war illness research program . we also reviewed federal standards for internal controls . further , for all three objectives , we interviewed veterans benefits administration ( vba ) and veterans health administration ( vha ) officials , regional staff , and several veterans' advocacy organizations . we conducted this performance audit from october 2015 to june 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .