enplanements annually . large hubs ( 31 ) : at least 1 percent or more of all enplanements . medium hubs ( 35 ) : at least 0.25 percent , but less than 1 percent of all enplanements . small hubs ( 71 ) : at least 0.05 percent , but less than 0.25 percent of all enplanements . what types of projects have general aviation airports funded using general aviation entitlement grants ? what changes , if any , do state aviation officials , general aviation airport managers , and faa officials suggest to general aviation entitlement grants ? to answer these questions , we reviewed faa's data on grants and information on eligible projects listed in the npias . we discussed this information with faa headquarters staff and resolved any discrepancies with them . we reviewed data from an faa survey that its field offices completed on the use of these grant funds by general aviation airports . we also surveyed state aviation officials , by telephone , from all 50 states and 2 territories and a sample of officials representing 56 general aviation airports nationwide . the small sample size of general aviation airport officials was not designed to be projectable to the population of general aviation airports . in addition to interviewing cognizant faa officials , we interviewed officials of general aviation industry groups . appendix i explains this report's scope and methodology in greater detail . we performed our work from june 2002 through february 2003 , in easton , maryland ; odenton , maryland ; greenville , texas ; mesquite , texas ; and washington , d.c. , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . prior to air - 21 , which was signed into law on april 5 , 2000 , general aviation airports received aip funding through funds apportioned to states by using geographic area and population - based formulas , as well as through discretionary funds . these airports also received funds through faa's small airport fund . air - 21 amended the general aviation state apportionment grant program , in part , by creating a special rule , which provides general aviation entitlement grants for any fiscal year in which the total amount of aip funding is $3.2 billion or more . under this rule , the amount available for state apportionments increases from 18.5 percent of total aip funding to 20 percent when aip's total funding is $3.2 billion or more . from the state apportionment , faa computes and allocates the amount available for general aviation entitlements and the remaining funds are provided for “unassigned” state apportionment . the general aviation entitlement grant amount for any one airport represents one - fifth of the estimate of that airport's 5-year costs for its needs , as listed in the most recently published npias , up to an annual maximum of $150,000 . after the aggregate amount of general aviation entitlements has been determined , the remainder is provided for the same type of airports within a state on an unassigned basis , the allocation of which is determined by a state's area and population relative to all other states .