public law no . 108-108 prohibited the use of appropriated funds in fiscal year 2004 for special event permits on the mall , unless the permit “expressly prohibits the erection , placement , or use of structures and signs bearing commercial advertising.” the law still allowed for recognizing the sponsors of special events , providing “the size and form of the recognition shall be consistent with the special nature and sanctity of the mall and any lettering or design identifying the sponsor shall be no larger than one - third the size of the lettering or design identifying the special event.” as a result of this legislation , the park service has drafted policy guidance to restrict “the size , scale , scope and location of corporate logos and script.” in addition , national capital parks - central officials now require permit applicants to provide detailed lists of planned signage along with a scaled replica of each sign to the park service for approval at least 30 days in advance of an event . park service regulations for the national capital region state that the decision to issue a special event permit must be based on a consideration of a number of factors , including whether the park area requested is reasonably suited in terms of size , accessibility , and nature of the event . the nfl kickoff event , although permitted , raised a number of access issues . for example , while the permit for the event stipulated that “all sidewalks , walkways , and roadways must remain unobstructed to allow for the reasonable use of these areas by pedestrians , vehicles , and other park visitors,” some groups complained that large portions of the mall were inaccessible for days leading up to the nfl event . ii ) . the park service is required by law to collect costs and location fees associated with permits for commercial filming and still photography and authorized to collect costs for other permitted activities . because costs recovered from permitting activities are used by park units for managing their permit program and other park programs , failing to recover such costs decreases the financial resources park units have for processing permits and monitoring permitted activities . unless steps are taken to ensure that units fully identify and collect administrative and management ( including monitoring ) costs associated with special event permits and with commercial filming and still photography permits , the park service will continue to deprive itself of funds important for managing and carrying out agency policy and delivering agency services . this is particularly evident in the national capital region , where only recently has consideration been given to charging administrative fees to recover costs . because our review was limited to six park units , the extent to which other park units are not consistently applying existing cost recovery guidance is unclear . conducting a systemwide review would help identify park units that are not fully recovering costs for special events and filming and still photography , and the measures necessary to ensure that all park units identify and collect all appropriate permitting fees .