we provided a copy of the draft to hhs . hhs concurred with our recommendation and provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . hhs's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . cms conducts a range of program integrity activities . first , cms calculates a national - level improper payment error rate through the payment error rate measurement program . second , cms also contracts with entities to , among other things , audit claims , identify overpayments , and educate providers and others on medicaid program integrity issues . for example , since 2009 , there have been changes to the medicaid program such as expanding medicaid as allowed under the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) , and states have made changes to their medicaid programs . these changes have increased medicaid enrollment in some states resulting in more nemt trips . more recently , cms issued a nemt program integrity tool kit in june 2014 . this toolkit includes educational materials summarizing the general scope of medicaid - covered nemt and key principles applicable to such coverage , such as trip eligibility and nemt fraud and abuse definitions . however , these materials are targeted for patients and providers rather than state medicaid programs . however , state medicaid programs may also benefit from updated information on strategies to implement a program integrity program that could help to prevent nemt fraud and abuse . updated guidance is important because it is a way to communicate an entity's objectives to help ensure its objectives are carried out . state medicaid agencies rely on it when designing and administering their nemt programs to help ensure compliance with federal requirements while incorporating current practices to meet beneficiaries' needs . according to cms officials , some states do not always understand the nemt benefit , in part , because nemt guidance is not specific to the benefit . for example , states must generally follow overarching federal medicaid requirements in providing nemt under their state plans , such as requirements on granting beneficiaries the freedom to choose to obtain medicaid services from any provider that is qualified and willing to provide services , unless states establish an nemt transportation brokerage program . officials from two states reported that clarifying nemt requirements would be helpful and three stakeholders ( one transportation broker and two industry groups ) reported that additional nemt guidance would be helpful . for example , a transportation broker reported that additional guidance would help prevent states from implementing unnecessarily stringent requirements , which could restrict the supply of providers and limit access to nemt . standards for internal control in the federal government states that management should ensure that there are adequate means of communicating with , and obtaining information from , external stakeholders that may have a significant impact on the agency's ability to achieve its goals . effective communication can take many forms such as through guidance , training , or publication of best practices . cms officials reported that the agency is considering assessing whether additional nemt guidance is needed , but has not established time frames for doing so .