bsm . in november 1999 , dla initiated an effort to replace its materiel management systems — the standard automated materiel management system ( samms ) and the defense integrated subsistence management system — with bsm . dla has used the two existing systems for over 30 years to manage its inventory . bsm is intended to transform how dla conducts its operations in five core business processes: order fulfillment , demand and supply planning , procurement , technical / quality assurance , and financial management . bsm was deployed in july 2002 and is operating at the defense supply center columbus — columbus , ohio ; the defense supply center philadelphia — philadelphia , pennsylvania ; the defense supply center richmond — richmond , virginia ; the defense distribution center — new cumberland , pennsylvania ; the dla logistics information service — battle creek , michigan ; and dla headquarters — fort belvoir , virginia . the initial deployment included low - volume , low - dollar - value items . bsm has about 900 users and is populated with over 170,000 inventory items valued at about $192 million . once it becomes fully operational , bsm is expected to have about 5,000 users and control and account for about 5 million inventory items valued at about $12 billion . dla currently estimates that it will invest approximately $850 million to fully deploy bsm . lmp . in february 1998 , the u.s. army materiel command ( amc ) began an effort to replace its existing materiel management systems — the commodity command standard system and the standard depot system — with lmp . the army has used the existing systems for over 30 years to manage its inventory and depot maintenance operations . lmp is intended to transform amc's logistics operations in six core processes: order fulfillment , demand and supply planning , procurement , asset management , materiel maintenance , and financial management . lmp is a 12-year acquisition requirements contract . lmp became operational at the u.s. army communications and electronics command ( cecom ) , fort monmouth , new jersey , and tobyhanna army depot , tobyhanna , pennsylvania , in july 2003 . the initial deployment of lmp consisted of inventory items such as electronics ; electronic repair components ; and communications and intelligence equipment such as night vision goggles , electronic components such as circuit boards , and certain munitions such as guidance systems included in missiles . currently , lmp has 4,500 users at 12 locations and is populated with over 2 million inventory items valued at about $440 million . when lmp is fully implemented , its capacity is expected to include more than 15,000 users at 149 locations and will be populated with 6 million army - managed inventory items valued at about $40 billion . the army currently estimates that it will invest approximately $1 billion to fully deploy lmp . for fiscal year 2004 , dod requested approximately $28 billion in it funding to support a wide range of military operations as well as dod business system operations , of which approximately $18.8 billion is for the reported 2,274 business systems — $4.8 billion for business systems development / modernization and about $14 billion for operation and maintenance .