however , we have not analyzed this directly . it is therefore essential to understand the market for gasoline . in this context , you asked us to discuss ( 1 ) how gasoline prices are determined nationally , ( 2 ) what factors cause california's prices to be consistently among the nation's highest , and ( 3 ) some of the important factors that will determine gasoline prices in the long run . finally , the structure of the gasoline market can play a role in determining prices . for example , we recently reported that some mergers of oil companies during the 1990s led to reduced competition among gasoline suppliers and may have been responsible for an increase in gasoline prices by as much as 2 cents per gallon . gasoline prices in california , and in other west coast states , have consistently been among the highest in the nation and recent experience is no different . for example , for the last week in april , when the national average price for regular grade gasoline was $2.20 , the california price was $2.57 . explanations for why california's prices have been higher than the national average include ( 1 ) california's unique gasoline blend , which is cleaner burning and more expensive to produce than any of the other commonly used gasoline blends ; ( 2 ) a tight balance between supply and demand in the west coast , and the long distance to any viable sources of replacement gasoline in the event of local supply disruptions ; and ( 3 ) california's higher level of gasoline taxes — california currently taxes a gallon of gasoline at 30 cents per gallon more than the state with the lowest taxes , alaska . future gasoline prices will reflect world supply and demand balance . if demand for oil and petroleum products continues to rise as it has in past years — eia projects that u.s. demand for crude oil will rise about 38 percent by the year 2025 — then oil supply will have to expand significantly to keep up . currently , world surplus crude oil production capacity — the amount by which oil production can be increased in the short run without installing more drilling equipment or developing new oil fields — is very small . moreover , many of the world's known and easily accessible crude oil deposits have already been developed and many of these are experiencing declining volumes as the fields become depleted . as a result , new production facilities will have to be built , and perhaps new oil deposits will need to be developed , to meet rising demand for gasoline and other petroleum products . in so doing , entities may encounter higher costs of extracting and processing oil . for example , there are large stores of crude oil in tar sands and oil shale , or potentially beneath deep water in the ocean , but these sources are more costly to extract and process than many of the sources of oil that we have already tapped .