this was a condition for these applicants to retain this benefit in 2016 . none of the four fictitious applicants had filed a 2014 tax return but all were approved for the 2016 subsidies . marketplace officials told us that they allowed applicants to attest to filing taxes if information from the irs indicated that the applicant did not file tax returns . marketplace officials said one reason they allow attestations is the time lag between when tax returns are filed and when they are reflected in irs's systems . cms officials said they are rechecking the 2014 tax - filing status and will remove subsidies for applicants that have not filed a 2014 tax return . for eight applications , we used new fictitious identities to test verifications related to identity or citizenship / immigration status and , in each case , successfully obtained subsidized coverage . when the marketplaces directed 11 of the 12 applicants to provide supporting documents , we submitted fictitious documents as follows: for five applications , we provided all documentation requested , and the applicants were able to retain coverage . for three applications , we provided only partial documentation , and the applicants were able to retain coverage . two of these applicants were able to clear inconsistencies through conversations with marketplace phone representatives even though the information provided over the phone did not match the fictitious documentation that we previously provided . for three applications , we did not provide any of the requested documents , and the marketplaces terminated coverage for one applicant but did not terminate coverage for the other two applicants . marketplace officials told us that without specific identities of our fictitious applicants — which we declined to provide , to protect the identities — they could not comment on individual outcomes . in general , however , they told us our results indicate their marketplace processes worked as designed . for example , according to officials from cms , some of our application outcomes could be explained by decisions to extend document filing deadlines . cms regulations authorize the marketplace to extend the standard 90-day inconsistency resolution period if the applicant demonstrates a good - faith effort to obtain the required documentation during the period . under good - faith - effort extensions for 2016 , documentation requirements are not waived , but applicants were provided additional time to submit documents . for covered california applications , when our applicants could not clear online identity proofing and contacted representatives by phone , the representatives were correct in first seeking to direct the applicants to visit enrollment counselors , so they could verify identities in person . while in - person presentation of identity documentation is never required , the officials said , an in - person visit provides an opportunity to examine identity documents . in discussing these outcomes for our fictitious applicants , federal and state marketplace officials reaffirmed , as we have reported previously , that the marketplaces do not seek to identify fraudulent document submissions . federal marketplace officials said document - review standards — in which cms's documents - processing contractor is not required to examine documents for fraud — remain unchanged .