workforce planning model . this agencywide management tool projects the number , type , and location of staff needed to accomplish the agency's mission , based on expectations for future program funds as well as the size and location of overseas missions . however , the model does not incorporate data on either the current a&a staffing levels or the competencies of existing a&a staff . effective workforce planning entails that an agency determine the number of staff , and critical competencies of those staff , to achieve the agency's goals . taken together , these efforts do not constitute a strategic a&a workforce plan that takes into account the entire a&a workforce . usaid has yet to take an integrated approach to develop and implement such a workforce plan . usaid has not implemented an evaluation mechanism to provide adequate oversight of its a&a function . oaa's evaluation division is responsible for providing this oversight to ensure that a&a operations follow usaid policies , primarily by assessing the agency's a&a operations worldwide . gao's internal control standards emphasize the importance of evaluations — whether in the form of self - assessments or other means — to ensure an agency's operational effectiveness and compliance with applicable policies . in fiscal year 2007 , the evaluation division developed an annual scorecard evaluation , intended to be completed by all cos as a self - assessment of their a&a operations . the division was to review the scorecard evaluations and use a risk - based approach to determine locations for further on - site visits . the division has finished piloting the scorecard evaluations at four missions and identified weaknesses in a&a operations . for example , the division found that one mission lacked resources to adequately monitor contractor performance . the division has set a goal of implementing the scorecard evaluation and on - site visits to at least 5 missions within a 2-year period . however , agency officials informed us that the evaluation division did not have the staff needed to fully implement the evaluation mechanism . in addition , officials told us that the agency lacked a system that contains all the missions' a&a files , which could facilitate the evaluation process . without implementing the evaluation mechanism it has developed , usaid cannot certify the overall adequacy and effectiveness of management controls for the a&a function . i will focus on three topics . first , i will discuss usaid's capacity to develop and implement a strategic a&a workforce plan . second , i will describe the extent to which usaid has implemented a mechanism to evaluate its a&a function . finally , i will summarize our recent recommendations regarding the importance of a workforce plan for the a&a function , as well as the actions that usaid has taken in response to our reported findings and recommendations . in preparing this testimony , we largely relied on our september 2008 report and additional information provided by usaid in april 2009 on the management of usaid's a&a function . to address our objectives , we focused on usaid's administration of the a&a process .