gao - 07-15 . washington , d.c.: november 13 , 2006 . this is not because little or no progress has been made . in many cases there has been progress . rather , it is because some of these challenges — such as improving mobility and transportation safety — are so vast , and the department's ability to address them is so indirect , that years of focused efforts will be needed to see measurable improvements . in addition to our completed work on these issues , we have a body of ongoing work that should be of use to congress and the department as our country moves forward to improve the design of transportation programs , delivery of services , and accountability for results ( see app . each year , fhwa distributes billions of dollars — $34.2 billion in fiscal year 2006 — to state governments for projects aimed at improving the nation's highway systems . finally , a high priority should be maximizing the benefits of federal investments in transportation infrastructure and ensuring accountability for results . however , we have found that often formal analyses are not used in deciding among alternative projects , projects often do not meet anticipated outcomes , and evaluations of outcomes are not typically conducted . furthermore , we have reported on the need for improving accountability for results in fhwa's oversight of projects , through goals and performance measures , for example . the agency has made progress in this area , partly in response to mandated improvements in safetea - lu , but a continued focus on efforts to improve accountability will be important . finally , faa provides funds to airport operators to provide increased capacity at the nation's airports and has estimated that the total cost for planned projects eligible for federal grants for fiscal years 2007 through 2011 will be $42 billion . while changes the administration is proposing may reduce the amount faa provides , it will be essential to ensure that public benefits from these investments are maximized . each year , tens of thousands of people are killed and millions are injured in transportation accidents in the united states . in 2005 alone , over 44,000 people were killed and over 2.5 million were injured in highway , aviation , railroad , transit , and pipeline accidents . ( see fig . motor vehicle crashes , in particular , exact an enormous personal and economic toll on this country and are the leading cause of death for people aged 3 through 33 . while transportation safety has improved considerably over the past 4 decades , in recent years , fatalities have plateaued . since the highest pay - off actions — such as improvements in vehicle crashworthiness and increases in seat belt use — have occurred , future progress will be more difficult . of particular concern is the limited progress in improving safety on our nation's roads , where about 95 percent of all transportation fatalities occur . furthermore , motorcycle fatalities have steadily increased over the past decade ( to over 4,500 in 2005 ) .