gao - 10-567t . washington , d.c.: march 25 , 2010 . what does this mean , exactly ? after all , the census is fundamentally a head count . further , a less - than - complete count could result in the inefficient allocation of taxpayer dollars . businesses use the aggregated census data to plan for and provide their services and goods . census data about population trends help businesses succeed — and provide jobs in the process — by alerting them of opportunities to provide new services and products and to tailor existing ones to reflect demographic changes . census data also help businesses efficiently target their advertising dollars and better meet the needs of their clients and customers . for example , a free issue of a magazine focused on the interests of hispanic readers can be distributed based on information at the census block level . likewise , retail chains can use census data to inform decisions on what mix of multicultural products — from cosmetics to music — they should carry . companies also use population data to locate where to place new stores , as well as where to place production facilities where they can expect to find a suitable labor force . while the bureau does a lot with the information people report , there are a number of things the bureau will not do with it . for example , the answers that are provided cannot be shared with anyone , including law enforcement or tax collection agencies . the answers cannot be used in court , and they cannot be obtained with a freedom of information act request . federal law protects respondents' privacy and keeps the information confidential . further , in march 2010 , the u.s. justice department confirmed that provisions of the patriot act that pertain to the gathering and sharing of information do not override legal provisions that protect the confidentiality of census data . in short , everyone who lives in the country should feel safe about participating in the census , regardless of their immigration status . nationally , following up on nonresponding households is a daunting task , and l.a. presents its own challenges and opportunities . for example , data from a planning database the bureau developed placed l.a. county first on a list of the top 50 u.s. counties with the highest number of people living in hard - to - count areas , based on data from the 2000 census . specifically , 4.4 million people of l.a. county's total population of more than 9 million people ( 46 percent ) lived in hard - to - count census tracts in 2000 . factors contributing to the area's hard - to - count challenges include poverty , unemployment , and language barriers .