( app . iii contains additional financial information on the regional airlines. ) demand for air travel began weakening in 2000 due to a number of external changes in the aviation environment . an economic downturn that began in 2000 precipitated a decrease in demand for air travel , while the terrorist attacks of september 11 , the iraq war , and the outbreak of sars have compounded this trend . these events have accelerated the structural changes in the demand for air travel that is likely to suppress revenue for the foreseeable future , including the inability of airlines to charge premium business fares . ( 3 ) what is the current financial and operating condition of the airline industry ? ( 4 ) how has the competitiveness of the domestic airline industry changed since 1998 ? to help answer these questions , the congress , in the conference report accompanying the 2003 emergency wartime supplemental act , directed the 64 u.s. commercial airlines that received assistance under the act to provide us with a plan demonstrating how they would reduce their operating expenses by 10 percent . working with airlines , we devised a data collection template for airlines to submit their financial plans ( see app . because of the amount of information and proprietary nature of these plans , for the purposes of this report , we focused our analysis on the 30 largest domestic airlines and aggregated the financial information contained in these plans into one of three airline categories — legacy airlines , low cost airlines , and regional airlines ( see app . ii for a list of these airlines by category ) . the body of this report focuses on the cost - cutting activities and financial condition of the largest seven legacy and largest seven low cost airlines ( in terms of passenger volume ) . although regional airlines have carried more passengers over the past several years , they have done so largely under contract with legacy airlines . hence , we present their results in appendix iii . we also used airline financial and operating data as reported to the department of transportation ( dot ) to examine airline financial condition and changes in competition in the largest 5,000 airline markets in the u.s. to assess the reliability of those data , we reviewed the quality control procedures that dot applies and subsequently determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we also met with airlines and their trade associations , airline equity and credit analysts , government experts , and academics to discuss airline cost - cutting efforts and the current financial condition of airlines . we had sufficient information to make informed judgments on the matters covered by this report . we performed our work between december 2003 and august 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in 1978 , under the airline deregulation act , the united states deregulated its domestic airline industry . the main purpose of deregulation was to remove government control and open the air transport industry to market forces . prior to the act , the civil aeronautics board regulated all domestic air transport , controlling fares and setting routes .