we provided a draft of this report to hhs for review . hhs's comments are reprinted in appendix i. hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . it may be several years before relevant data are available . according to a health care workforce researcher we interviewed , there is going to be an inevitable lag in obtaining data given that some delivery system models , such as acos , are still being set up , and time will be needed to collect and analyze data and publish any findings . in addition , other researchers have pointed out that workforce - relevant data are not being systematically collected from new models being supported and tested in response to ppaca . hrsa officials also have cited challenges due to limited research on nonphysician providers . for example , more research is needed to determine how much nonphysician providers offset the demand for physicians across different specialties . in our review of hrsa's clinician specialty models , we observed that for some specialties , the addition of nonphysician providers has the potential to turn projected shortages into surpluses . another challenge hrsa officials said they need to address stems from an inherent limitation of utilization - based models , namely , that they project forward the utilization patterns of the past and therefore do not adequately account for rapid changes in the health care system . hrsa officials said that this modeling limitation has caused surpluses and shortages that do not reflect anticipated workforce trends and require time to analyze . ( see table 2 for a summary of the contracts and their status. ) as of july 2013 , hrsa had received three reports resulting from these contracts , and two more reports were under development . we assessed these policies and procedures using criteria from standards for internal control in the federal government . we also compared dates contained in the timeline hrsa created in 2012 for publishing updated national health care workforce projections with contractual dates for product deliveries , as well as with status updates provided by bhpr officials to evaluate hrsa's progress . we also interviewed health care workforce researchers and representatives from health care professional associations to gain additional perspectives on the challenges of creating workforce projections . contractor b delivered the second report , which updated hrsa's 2008 physician workforce projections using more recent data , in february 2011 . however , according to hrsa officials , the agency decided not to publish this report because it did not incorporate nonphysician providers , which they have since determined should be accounted for when assessing the adequacy of the health care however , officials also said that research conducted under workforce.this contract regarding the health care workforce effects of ppaca was incorporated into hrsa's later projection models . the third report , the clinician specialty report , which projects the supply of and demand for health care professionals by specialty through 2025 , was delivered in november 2012 and is still under hrsa's review . hrsa has missed one of its timeline goals for finalizing its review and publishing new reports containing national projections and has created a new timeline that postpones publication dates for this and two other health care workforce reports .