these instruments are currently in varying stages of development . figure 1 depicts the schedule for both the program and key instruments . noaa has made several important decisions about the cost , scope , and schedule of the goes - r program . after reconciling the program office's cost estimate with an independent cost estimate , the agency established a new program cost estimate of $7.67 billion , an increase of $670 million from the previous estimate . agency officials plan to revisit this cost estimate after the spacecraft and ground segment contracts are awarded but stated that it was developed with a relatively high level of confidence and that they believe that any adjustments would be well within the $7.67 billion program budget . to mitigate the risk that costs would rise , program officials decided to remove selected program requirements from the baseline program and treat them as options that could be exercised if funds allow . these requirements include the number of products to be distributed , the time to deliver the remaining products ( product latency ) , and how often these products are updated with new satellite data ( refresh rate ) . specifically , program officials eliminated the requirement to develop and distribute 34 of the 68 envisioned products , including aircraft icing threat , turbulence , and visibility . program officials explained that these products are not currently being produced by legacy goes satellites ; they are new products that could be produced from the advanced goes - r instruments . in addition , the program slowed planned product latency on the remaining products by as much as 10 minutes for hurricane intensity and 6 minutes for volcanic ash detection and height . it also reduced the refresh rates on these products by as much as 55 minutes for sea surface temperatures , cloud top observations , and vertical moisture profiles in the atmosphere . program officials included the restoration of the products , latency , and refresh rates as options in the ground segment contract — items that could be acquired at a later time . noaa also delayed goes - r program milestones including the dates for issuing the requests for proposals by up to 6 months and awarding the contracts for the spacecraft and ground segments by 12 and 10 months , respectively . the dates when the satellites would be available for launch have also slipped by 4 months , with the first satellite launch now scheduled for april 2015 . program officials attributed these delays to providing more stringent oversight before releasing the requests for proposals , additional time needed to evaluate the contract proposals , and funding reductions in fiscal year 2008 . recent events have raised doubts about the feasibility of the goes - r launch date . specifically , after the spacecraft segment contract was awarded and then protested in december 2008 , nasa decided to re - evaluate the proposals . nasa now plans to re - award the contract in may 2009 . because nasa has agreed to a 72-month development cycle for the spacecraft segment ( from contract award date to launch readiness ) , the launch date of goes - r will likely be delayed until at least may 2015 .