r . finally , to address our third research objective , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , as well as available reports and other information that offered a national perspective on va's oversight of saa and schools and interviewed va officials . we also interviewed representatives from national officials . regarding oversight of saas , we obtained and reviewed the contract between va and its 57 saas for fiscal year 2010 . in addition , we reviewed the state - by - state results of va's joint peer review group from fiscal years 2009 and 2010 , which annually evaluates saa performance . w also obtained data from va on the number of saa supervisory visits to schools , by state , in fiscal years 2009 and 2010 . regarding oversight of schools , we obtained data on the number of va audits , known as compliance surveys , conducted in fiscal years 2009 and 2010 . finally , we reviewed national data on the organizations representing saas and school se audits from va's weams database . in addition to national reports and data , we examined va's monitoring and oversight activities in four states: california , georgia , kentucky , and massachusetts . we selected these states for a number of reasons , including geographic location , as well as to obtain variation in: ( 1 ) the number of schools within a state that have been approved to participate in va education benefit programs , ( 2 ) program expenditures , and ( 3 ) the number of va education beneficiaries . in addition , we made sure that one of our four states ( kentucky ) had a va education liaison representative based at a va office located outside of the assigned state , as this is the situation for 17 states . for each of the four states , we conducted interviews with relevant va and saa officials and reviewed the most recent oversight reports from va and the saa for randomly selected schools . we used va's weams data to randomly select 12 schools for each of our four states , using their numeric facility codes: two public , two private nonprofit , and two private for - profit schools in each of the following two categories: 2-year community or junior colleges and college and universities offering 4-year degrees and graduate degrees . we found that some of our selected schools did not have a current saa supervisory visit or va compliance survey report on file because it was a newly approved school and had not yet been scheduled for either one or both of these types of site visits ( see table 6 ) . overall , we reviewed 43 saa supervisory visit reports and 40 va compliance survey reports . on january 4 , 2011 , the president signed the post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance improvements act of 2010 , which revises the post - 9 / 11 gi bill program , established in 2008 . some major provisions o the new law are summarized below: eligibility of servicemembers and veterans: expands current definition of active duty service under the post - 9 / gi bill to include national guard activation for events like nationa emergencies .