public law no . 99-581 , enacted in 1986 , directed the secretary of the interior to convey title to the robert f. kennedy memorial stadium building to the district . also , in accordance with the law , the underlying land and associated parking facilities were leased to the district government . proposed lease activities are subject to authorization under a concession contract or commercial use authorization if the director of nps determines , in accordance with regulations and guidance , that the proposed activities meet applicable requirements for issuance of such instruments . a partnership is usually defined as a type of cooperative business relationship ; however , cooperative efforts in a public project may also be referred to as a partnership and can be established through legislation . for example , in an effort to coordinate government and private sector activities in the development and implementation of an integrated resource management plan for certain boston harbor islands , congress established the boston harbor islands national recreation area , administered by a partnership including representatives from nps , the u.s. coast guard , state and local government offices , and various private sector organizations . the law established the framework for administration of the area , parameters for operation of and membership in the partnership , minimum requirements for the management plan to be submitted to interior , and establishment of an advisory council to represent interested groups and make recommendations to the partnership . similarly , nps properties in the district may be identified with recreational potential that could be maximized through such partnerships . we provided the department of the interior with a draft of this report for review and comment . the department provided written comments that are included in appendix viii . the department provided us with some comments with technical clarifications , which we have incorporated as appropriate . in addressing the condition of properties , the department stated that nps is diligently implementing an asset management plan that addresses deficiencies and that needed repair and rehabilitation of properties are evaluated and prioritized against the needs of the entire national park system . projects of greatest need are undertaken in priority order , focusing on critical health and safety and resource protection issues . in addition , the department said that nps does not have the authority to enter into a lease that allows erection of a structure on such property . while we agree that the agency's authority is limited , nps regulations authorize a lease to include a provision allowing for the construction of minor additions , buildings , and other structures as long as it is ( 1 ) necessary for the support of authorized lease activities , ( 2 ) otherwise consistent with the protection and purposes of the park area , and ( 3 ) approved by the director . we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of the interior ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .