transmission pipelines . the estimated 298,000 miles of onshore transmission pipelines carry natural gas , sometimes over hundreds of miles , to communities and large - volume users ( eg , factories ) . transmission pipelines tend to have the largest diameters and pressures of any type of pipeline , generally ranging from 12 inches to 42 inches in diameter and operating at higher pressures ranging from 400 to 1,440 psi . distribution pipelines . the estimated 2,170,000 miles of natural gas distribution and service pipelines transport natural gas from transmission pipelines to residential , commercial , and industrial customers . these pipelines tend to be smaller , sometimes less than 1 inch in diameter , and operate at lower pressures , from 0.25 to 100 psi . a specific pipeline only carries one type of gas . these gases may be colorless and odorless , which is why odorizing them may be necessary to safely alert people of a leak . all odorants used in the united states contain sulfur . according to phmsa officials , there are nine primary sulfur - based odorants used domestically for transporting combustible gas , all but one contain mercaptan — a type of chemical with a distinctive sulfur smell — which is blended with other chemicals for stability . pipeline operators select the odorant blend that works best for their pipeline network . distribution pipeline operators add the odorant to their gas , usually at the “city gate” , or the place where transmission pipelines connect to a distribution pipeline network . the odorant is transported and stored in a concentrated liquid form that has a strong smell , is flammable , and is toxic . the odorant is injected into the gas stream at the “city gate” odorization station and vaporizes into the gas . phmsa and ntsb officials and about half of the stakeholders said that before these items are produced , operators must remove any added ( or naturally occurring ) sulfur from their combustible gas , adding another step to production . one expert and three stakeholders told us that removing the odorant also resulted in added cost for some operators . in its diluted form , the odorants are nontoxic . in addition , some stakeholders warned that accidental spills of concentrated odorant , using more odorant than needed , or releasing excessive amounts of odorant during operators' maintenance activities can lead to false alarm calls . one pipeline operator told us that an employee spilled odorant on a glove and the public made several false alarm calls due to the odorant's potent smell as the employee drove through town with the glove on the back of a truck . officials from phmsa , an official from a pipeline safety organization and representatives from two pipeline industry associations told us that the public could get accustomed to these types of odorant leaks and begin to ignore them or have a false sense of security when a real gas leak does occur . for example , the official from the pipeline safety organization told us that he has heard of at least one location where odorant leaks frequently occurred , and the public began to ignore the smell .