( see fig . on the other hand , if discretionary spending grew at the same rate as the economy in the near term and if all tax cuts were extended , by 2040 federal revenues may just be adequate to pay only some social security benefits and interest on the growing federal debt . ( see fig . addressing the projected fiscal gaps shown here will require policymakers to examine the advisability , affordability , and sustainability of existing programs , policies , functions , and activities throughout the entire federal budget — spanning discretionary spending , mandatory spending , including entitlements , and tax policies and programs . neither slowing the growth of discretionary spending nor allowing tax cuts to expire — nor both options combined — would by themselves eliminate our long - term fiscal imbalance . additional economic growth is critical and will help to ease the burden , but the projected fiscal gap is so great that it is wholly unrealistic to expect that we will grow our way out of the problem . the president's 2007 budget released last week included some proposals to reduce the growth in medicare spending . whether or not these proposals are adopted , they should serve to raise public awareness of the importance of health care costs to both today's budget and tomorrow's . this could also serve to jump start discussion about appropriate ways to control a major driver of our long - term fiscal outlook — health care spending . clearly , tough choices will be required . changes in existing budget processes and financial , fiscal , and performance metrics will be necessary to facilitate these choices . early action to change existing programs and policies would yield the highest fiscal dividends and provide a longer period for prospective beneficiaries to make adjustments in their own planning . the longer we wait , the more painful and difficult the choices will become and the less transition time we will have . by waiting , an important window is lost during which today's relatively large workforce can increase saving and begin preparing for the necessary changes in fiscal policy , social security , and health care as well as other reforms that may be necessary parts of the solution to this coming fiscal crunch . however , the long - term challenge is fast becoming a short - term one as the retirement of the baby boomers' generation will begin as early as 2008 and since overall workforce growth has already begun to slow . while our long - term fiscal imbalance cannot be eliminated with a single strategy , reducing the tax gap is one approach that could help address the looming fiscal challenges facing the nation . the tax gap is an estimate of the difference between the taxes — including individual income , corporate income , employment , estate , and excise taxes — that should have been timely and accurately paid and what was actually paid for a specific year .