concerns over such violations are longstanding . for example , in march 1999 , the dod inspector general also found that insurance companies were frequently employing improper sales practices as part of marketing to service members . among the activities prohibited by dod that the inspector general report found were occurring included presentations being made by unauthorized personnel , presentations being made to group gatherings of service members , and solicitation of service members during duty hours or in their barracks . similarly , a may 2000 report commissioned by the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness also reviewed insurance solicitation practices on dod installations and identified many of the same concerns and recommendations as those the dod inspector general had identified . as result of these two reports , dod officials began efforts to revise its directive governing commercial solicitation on military installations . a few broker - dealers have marketed a unique securities product , often referred to as a contractual plan , to military service members that has proven to be more costly than other commonly available products . these contractual plans were primarily being sold by one large firm and several smaller firms that generally marketed only to service members . these products involve making periodic investments into a mutual fund under contractual agreements with much of the first year's investments going to pay a sales load that compensates the selling broker - dealer . purchasers that make all required payments for the entire term of the contractual mutual fund plan would pay charges slightly less than the amount charged by other load funds . however , regulators found that most military purchasers were not making all required payments , resulting in them paying higher sales charges than would have been paid on other commonly available mutual funds . regulators indicated that contractual plans are rarely sold to civilians and the products have been associated with sales practice abuses for decades . regulators recently sanctioned the largest seller of these plans for inaccuracies in its marketing materials . investigations into the activities of other broker - dealers selling contractual plans are also underway . this state becomes its state of domicile . insurers may obtain approval to market products in multiple states , and therefore the sales by insurers can be overseen by multiple state regulators , though financial solvency of each company is primarily overseen by the regulator in the company's state of domicile . some insurance companies market their products using their own proprietary sales force . unlike the insurance companies that targeted junior service members , this broker - dealer generally marketed its products to more experienced military members , including commissioned officers and senior noncommissioned officers . in addition , they remain reluctant to share information about all instances in which sellers of financial products violate dod solicitation policies . however , such information could allow financial regulators to determine whether such situations also represent potential violations of federal or state laws .