the authority is taking steps to improve its cost estimates . to make its operating - cost estimate more comprehensive and better documented , the authority has contracted with the international union of railways to evaluate the existing methodology and data and help refine its estimates . in addition , to improve the construction cost estimates , the authority will have the opportunity to validate and enhance , if necessary , the accuracy of its cost estimates once actual construction package contracts are awarded for the initial construction in the central valley in 2013 . the bids for the first 30-mile construction package are due in january 2013 and will provide a check on how well the authority has estimated the costs for this work as well as provide more information on potential risks that cost estimates of future segments may encounter . in addition to challenges in developing reliable cost estimates , the california high - speed rail project also faces other challenges . these include obtaining project funding beyond the first construction segment , continuing to refine ridership and revenue estimates beyond the current forecasts , and addressing the potential increased risks to project schedules from legal challenges associated with environmental reviews and right - of - way acquisitions . one of the biggest challenges facing california's high - speed rail project is securing funding beyond the first construction segment . while the authority has secured $11.5 billion from federal and state sources for project construction , almost $57 billion in funding remains unsecured . a summary of funding secured to - date can be found in table 1 . as with other large transportation infrastructure projects , including high - speed rail projects in other countries , the authority is relying primarily on public financial support , with $55 billion or 81 percent of the total construction cost , expected to come from state and federal sources . a summary of the authority's funding plan can be found in table 2 . of the total $55 billion in state and federal funding , about $38.7 billion are uncommitted federal funds , an average of over $2.5 billion per year over the next 15 years . most of the remaining funding is from unidentified private investment once the system is operational — a model that has been used in other countries , such as for the high speed one line in the united kingdom . as a result of the funding challenge , the authority is taking a phased approach — building segments as funding is available . there could be a significant number of at - risk properties . for example , authority officials told us there are about 400 parcels in the first construction package , about 200 of which are in priority construction zones . of these , about 100 parcels ( 50 percent ) are considered to be potentially at - risk for timely delivery . since right - of - way acquisition has not yet begun , the extent that at - risk properties will ultimately affect project schedules or cost is not known . however , there may be an increased risk given the initial high percentage of at - risk parcels .