diplomatic mission . mnstc - i was established in june 2004 to assist in the development , organization , training , equipping , and sustainment of iraqi security forces . mnc - i is responsible for the tactical command and control of mnf - i operations in iraq . mnc - i's major subordinate commands were responsible for distributing equipment to some iraqi security forces in 2003 and 2004 . as of july 2007 , dod and mnf - i had not specified which dod equipment accountability procedures , if any , apply to the train - and - equip program for iraq . congress funded the train - and - equip program for iraq under irrf and isff but outside traditional security assistance programs , which , according to dod officials , allowed dod a large degree of flexibility in managing the program . dod defines accountability as the obligation imposed by law , lawful order or regulation accepted by an organization or person for keeping accurate records , to ensure control of property , documents or funds , with or without physical possession . dod officials stated that , since the funding did not go through traditional security assistance programs , the dod accountability requirements normally applicable to these programs — including the registration of small arms transferred to foreign governments — did not apply . further , mnf - i does not currently have an order or orders comprehensively specifying accountability procedures for equipment distributed to iraqi military forces under the ministry of defense , according to mnstc - i officials . according to dod officials , because iraq train - and - equip program funding did not go through traditional security assistance programs , the equipment procured with these funds was not subject to dod accountability regulations that normally apply in the case of these programs . for traditional security assistance programs , dod regulations specify accountability procedures for storing , protecting , transporting , and registering small arms and other sensitive items transferred to foreign governments . for example , the security assistance management manual , which provides guidance for traditional security assistance programs , states that the u.s. government's responsibility for equipment intended for transfer to a foreign government under the foreign military sales program does not cease until the recipient government's official representative assumes final control over the items . other regulations referenced by the security assistance management manual prescribe minimum standards and criteria for the physical security of sensitive conventional arms and require the registration of small arms transferred outside dod control . during our review , dod officials expressed differing opinions about whether dod regulations applied to the train - and - equip program for iraq . for example , we heard conflicting views on whether mnf - i must follow the dod regulation that requires participants to provide small arms serial numbers to a dod - maintained registry . although dod has not specified whether this regulation applies , mnstc - i began to consolidate weapons' serial numbers in an electronic format in july 2006 and provide them to the dod - maintained registry , according to mnstc - i officials .