lack of accessibility to the unit . a number of federal and local officials noted that some cbrs units are not easily accessible or are located in remote locations that are not desirable to developers . for example , a number of units , such as the bay joe wise complex in louisiana , are only accessible by boat . other units , such as the boca chica unit in texas , are in such remote locations that an official said developers are not willing to build there . for usda's water and waste programs , we requested the environmental assessment forms statements for the projects in the counties that included a cbrs unit we identified as having 100 or more structures . we then reviewed these records to determine if they indicated that usda officials had considered whether the projects would impact a cbrs unit when reviewing them . fema provided data from its national emergency management information system on disaster assistance provided to counties and territories in our review , including data for the u.s. virgin islands and puerto rico . the data were from november 1998 through july 2006 . we reviewed assistance designated by fema as being within a cbrs unit . however , we determined that this designation was not sufficiently reliable to identify all projects within the cbrs . we could not determine the full extent of assistance provided to cbrs units because the cbrs designation in the data was not always reliable . in addition , some assistance was provided countywide , and we could not determine if this assistance was provided to the unit . as a result , we provide examples of disaster assistance in our report . where data were available , we electronically mapped the location of the assistance to verify it was within a cbrs unit . we obtained data for projects receiving federal aid that received federal funds between january 1996 and july 2006 in counties with a cbrs unit that we identified as having 10 or more structures . federal highway administration ( fhwa ) officials extracted the data for these projects from the financial management information system — - a database that tracks projects that receive federal funding . to determine whether assistance was provided that is prohibited by law , we identified new construction projects or projects that added capacity to existing roadways . we gathered additional data to determine whether civil works projects administered by the corps and permits issued by the corps or epa - authorized state agencies were for an activity within a cbrs unit . we asked agency officials to provide latitude and longitude data for every project that occurred or permit that was issued in any of the counties that contained at least one of the 37 cbrs units . then we electronically mapped the coordinates to determine if the activity occurred within the boundaries of a cbrs unit . corps officials , however , were unable to provide latitude and longitude data for a large percentage of the permits issued .