dod issued its report in september 2015 . we reviewed dod's report and determined the extent to which dod had ( 1 ) identified the root causes of improper documentation and packaging of hazmat shipments throughout the dod transportation system and any corrective actions taken since the report's issuance to address those root causes , and ( 2 ) reported on the department's use of tps carriers to transport shipments that could have been safely and securely transported using less costly alternatives . for objective one , we identified the root causes that dod reported in september 2015 for hazmat shipments being delayed because of improper documentation and packaging and compared those root causes with the associated plan of action and milestones that dod described in its report . by continuing to identify and address the root causes for these transportation delays , the department will be able to continue to develop and implement corrective actions to mitigate delays of its hazmat shipments in support of the warfighter . in its september 2015 report , dod addressed the committee direction to report on the extent to which it used tps for hazmat shipments that could have been safely and securely transported using less costly alternatives , and identified two corrective actions . however , the report did not fully disclose the assumptions and limitations associated with its analysis . in its report , dod concluded that between june 1 , 2013 , and july 31 , 2014 , it had used tps motor carriers to transport 518 of 31,373 hazmat shipments that could have been transported using less costly alternatives and that doing so had resulted in a total unnecessary cost of approximately $126,000 . dod reported that in the majority of these instances transportation officers had either made errors or conscious decisions that two drivers were necessary to meet tight time frame delivery requirements or , when transportation officers could not obtain complete cargo documentation to determine whether a tps designation was needed , they had erred on the side of safety and opted to use the tps carriers to transport the shipments . in fiscal year 2016 dod transported approximately 313,354 hazmat shipments . we conducted this performance audit from april 2016 to july 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in its september 2015 report , dod addressed the committee direction to identify root causes regarding the improper documentation and packaging of hazmat shipments and any needed corrective actions , but it is too soon to determine the effectiveness of the department's efforts . for example , air hazmat shipment documentation and packaging discrepancies resulted from hazmat shipments arriving at an aerial port without certain required documentation for air transportation .