dod concurred with this recommendation . however , dod subsequently determined that no changes to guidance were needed . we also highlighted important lessons for dod in making decisions to cancel individual programs as well as in managing its broader investment portfolio . for example , when considering cancellation of individual programs , contract termination costs are generally not a compelling reason to continue programs or contracts that otherwise warrant ending . moreover , while incurred or “sunk” costs in programs being considered for cancellation may be substantial , they must be paid regardless of whether or not a contract is terminated . therefore , the decision to terminate a contract or cancel a program should not be driven by sunk costs . in addition , when a contract warrants termination , the decision should be made as soon as possible because delaying a termination almost always results in higher settlement costs to the government . finally , we noted when a program or contract ends , dod can make choices that would allow the government to retain value from the work completed . weapon programs acquire various types of assets throughout a program's life cycle ; assets that may include property , including computer hardware , equipment , material , special tooling , facilities , and real property ; and software and technical data , which can include manuals , engineering drawings , specifications , data rights , and data delivery . when a program ends , activities related to shutting down the program include determining how to retain the most value from the government's investment , which , for the purposes of this report , is the government's expenditures on the program up to the date of cancellation . this can include terminating or otherwise restructuring contracts , and assessing how best to leverage the program's assets . for example , program officials might identify technologies and facilities that can be realigned for use on other programs . alternately , the government may ultimately sell assets or determine that they are not suitable for continued development . in some cases , assets that are not reused may be destroyed or dismantled . figure 1 illustrates some examples of program assets . the types of assets a program owns will depend , in part , on the phase of the program . a program in production is more likely to own hardware and other types of tangible assets than a program in development . for this report , our sample included a range of programs in the development phase . program cancellations often result in contract terminations , creating immediate impacts on programs and their contractors as program offices work with the prime contractor to end work under the contract and determine the costs associated with contract termination . however , the impact of a weapon program cancellation can extend beyond the immediate program and its contractors and ultimately affect a broader industrial base and local economies , as well as other programs and agencies . consideration of these various effects and consultation with various stakeholders enables officials to have a better understanding of the costs , benefits , and legal requirements involved in a particular cancellation and to take steps that can help mitigate negative effects .