total u.s . compact assistance — direct funding , program assistance , and federal services — to the two countries for fiscal years 1987 through 2001 is estimated to have been at least $2.6 billion . further , the compact allows for migration from the fsm and the rmi to the united states , with limited restrictions , and establishes u.s. defense rights and obligations in the region . provisions of the compact that deal with economic assistance were scheduled to expire in late 2001 ; however , they will remain in effect up to 2 additional years while the united states and each of these pacific island nations renegotiate the affected provisions . these expiring provisions must be renegotiated and reauthorized by the congress by late 2003 in order for compact economic assistance to continue uninterrupted . during the past 2 years , as negotiations have been underway , we have been asked to review how key compact provisions have functioned since the agreement went into effect . my testimony today will draw on the compact - related reports that we have published since september 2000 . specifically , i will discuss the results of our work that addressed ( 1 ) the impact of and accountability over u.s. funding provided to the fsm and the rmi for fiscal years 1987 through 1998 ; ( 2 ) the experience and impact of migration from the fsm and the rmi to the u.s. island areas of guam , hawaii , and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , or cnmi ; and ( 3 ) the experiences of and the assistance strategies used by other donors to pacific island nations . while they address separate issues , these reports are related because they provide insight into how key compact provisions have functioned over the past 15 years and identify issues that the u.s. government might consider as it renegotiates expiring compact provisions with the fsm and the rmi . finally , before i continue , i should point out that we will publish two more compact - related reports in january that address ( 1 ) effectiveness and accountability issues related to u.s. program assistance ( such as head start ) to the fsm and the rmi ; and ( 2 ) the use of the compact's defense and security provisions , as well as u.s. defense interests in the region . however , because these reports have not been finalized , i will not be discussing our work in these areas at this hearing . located just north of the equator in the pacific ocean are the two island nations of the fsm and the rmi ( see fig . the fsm is a grouping of 607 small islands — including 65 of which are inhabited — in the western pacific totaling 270 square miles . the country , which is comprised of four states — pohnpei , chuuk , yap , and kosrae , was home to an estimated 107,000 people in 2000 . the rmi , which is made up of more than 1,200 islands , islets , and atolls , has a total land area of about 70 square miles and a population that numbered 50,840 in 1999 .