repayments . repayments allow financial institutions to redeem their preferred shares in full . institutions have the contractual right to redeem their shares at any time provided that they receive the approval of their primary regulator ( s ) . institutions must demonstrate that they are financially strong enough to repay the cpp investments to receive regulatory approval to proceed with a repayment exit . as of december 31 , 2016 , 262 institutions had exited cpp through repayments . restructurings . restructurings allow troubled financial institutions to negotiate new terms or discounted redemptions for their cpp investment . treasury requires institutions to raise new capital from outside investors ( or merge with another institution ) as a prerequisite for a restructuring . with this option , treasury receives cash or other securities that generally can be sold more easily than preferred stock , but the restructured investments sometimes result in recoveries at less than par value . according to treasury officials , treasury facilitated restructurings as an exit from cpp in cases where new capital investment and the redemption of the cpp investment by the institutions otherwise was not possible . treasury officials said that they approved the restructurings only if the terms represented a fair and equitable financial outcome for taxpayers . treasury completed 43 such restructurings through december 31 , 2016 . auctions . auctions allow treasury to sell its preferred stock investments in cpp participants . treasury conducted the first auction of cpp investments in march 2012 , and has continued to use this strategy to sell its investments . as of december 31 , 2016 , treasury had conducted a total of 28 auctions of stock from 190 cpp institutions . through these transactions , treasury received over $3 billion in proceeds , which was about 80 percent of the investments' face amount . as we have previously reported , thus far treasury has sold investments individually but noted that combining smaller investments into pooled auctions remained an option . whether treasury sells cpp investments individually or in pools , the outcome of this option will depend largely on investor demand for these securities and the quality of the underlying financial institutions . as of december 31 , 2016 , 11 institutions remained in cpp ( see fig . the largest outstanding investment , about $125 million , accounted for almost two - thirds of the outstanding cpp investments . the investments at the 10 other institutions ranged from about $1.5 million to $17 million . as figure 4 illustrates , treasury's original cpp investments were scattered across the country in 48 states and puerto rico and the amount of investments varied . almost 4 percent ( 25 ) of the investments were greater than $1 billion and almost half ( 314 ) of the investments were less than $10 million . the largest investment totaled $25 billion and the smallest investment totaled about $300,000 . the 11 institutions that remained in cpp as of december 31 , 2016 were in arkansas , california ( 2 ) , colorado , florida , kentucky , maryland ( 2 ) , massachusetts , missouri , and puerto rico .