the process for rules is less complex than for legislation . however , in addition to the definitions and seven general exclusions for legislation , there are four additional restrictions that apply to federal mandates in rules: umra's requirements do not apply to provisions in rules issued by independent regulatory agencies . preparation of an umra statement , and related estimate or analysis of the costs and benefits of the rule , is not required if the agency is “otherwise prohibited by law” from considering such an estimate or analysis in adopting the rule . the requirement to prepare an umra statement generally does not apply to any rule for which the agency does not publish a general notice of proposed rule making in the federal register . umra's threshold for federal mandates in rules is limited to expenditures , in contrast to title i which refers more broadly to direct costs . thus , a rule's estimated annual effect might be equal to or greater than $100 million in any year — for example , by reducing revenues or incomes in a particular industry — but not trigger umra if the rule does not compel nonfederal parties to spend that amount . umra generally directs agencies to assess the effects of their regulatory actions on other levels of government and the private sector . the agencies only need to identify and prepare written statements on those rules that the agencies have determined include a federal mandate that may result in expenditures by nonfederal parties of $100 million or more ( adjusted for inflation ) in any year . within the omb , the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) is responsible for reviewing compliance with umra as part of its centralized review of significant regulatory actions published by federal agencies , other than certain independent regulatory agencies . under executive order 12866 , which was issued in september 1993 , agencies are generally required to submit their significant draft rules to oira for review before publishing them . in the submission packages for their draft rules , federal agencies are to designate whether they believe the rule may constitute an unfunded mandate under umra . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . for further information , please contact orice williams at ( 202 ) 512-5837 or williamso@gao.gov or tim bober at ( 202 ) 512-4432 or bobert@gao.gov . key contributors to this testimony were boris kachura and michael rose . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . our january 2004 database search has resulted in no legislation containing this language . few laws containing federal mandates at or above the cost thresholds were enacted in 2001 and 2002 . further , there is some evidence that the existence of umra may have indirectly discouraged the enactment of some federal mandates in proosed legislation and reduced the potential costs of others . of 377 laws enacted in 2001 and 2002 , cbo identified at least 44 containing a federal mandate under umra .