arrangements . the ability to identify bankruptcy filers who have child support obligations the ability to identify bankruptcy filers who have child support obligations is essential for many of the new provisions in the act to work . while the is essential for many of the new provisions in the act to work . while the federal bankruptcy system and the cse program have national databases , federal bankruptcy system and the cse program have national databases , none identify bankruptcy filers who owe or pay child support . the none identify bankruptcy filers who owe or pay child support . the bankruptcy reform act , therefore , required that we study and report on bankruptcy reform act , therefore , required that we study and report on the feasibility , effectiveness , and cost of identifying such filers through the feasibility , effectiveness , and cost of identifying such filers through database matching of bankruptcy records with child support enforcement records . to determine in what ways matching bankruptcy and child support data might facilitate the identification of bankruptcy filers with child support obligations as well as to assess the feasibility and estimated costs of matching on a recurring basis , we interviewed officials in both the federal / state cse program and bankruptcy system . we interviewed officials at ocse as well as officials at state agencies in alabama , california , illinois , new york , texas , and west virginia . we chose these six states for their diverse geography , caseload sizes , and administrative structures . more specifically , to illustrate whether a routine match could facilitate the identification of bankruptcy filers who fail to report their child support obligations , we conducted a match of national bankruptcy filings with child support enforcement data from the texas state cse agency to identify all bankruptcy filers between october 17 , 2005 , and october 17 , 2006 , who had a child support order in texas open at any time during this same time period . using the matched results , we then reviewed publicly accessible bankruptcy files of a simple random sample of 100 to determine whether they had reported their child support obligation in their bankruptcy filing . the results of this case study cannot be generalized nationwide ; however , they can be generalized to the population of 1,931 noncustodial parents who filed for bankruptcy nationwide and also had child support orders in texas . we assessed the reliability of both the bankruptcy and child support enforcement data by reviewing documentation about the systems that produced them , interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data , and performing electronic testing of the relevant data elements . because hhs conducted the test match of the bankruptcy data and national child support enforcement data itself , we were unable to conduct electronic testing as a part of our data reliability assessment . however , hhs performed the analysis to meet certain specifications we provided and included some information to allow us to assess the work performed . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .