we provided a draft of this report to state and usaid . state operates in similar environments . for example , in its 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review , state noted that more than 25 percent of state and usaid personnel serve in 30 countries classified as high risk for conflict and instability , including yemen , democratic republic of congo , sudan , and kyrgyzstan . for the purposes of this report , we use the term “contingency operations” to encompass the range of potentially dangerous or uncertain environments in which usaid and state operate . our work over the past 5 years , as well as that of others in the accountability community , has found that state and usaid have experienced systemic challenges that have hindered their ability to manage and oversee contracts in contingency environments . in our reports issued annually between 2008 and 2011 , we consistently found that state and usaid lacked reliable data and systems to report on their contracts and contractor personnel in iraq and afghanistan . having reliable data on contracts and contractor personnel is a starting point for informing agency decisions and ensuring proper management . in 2012 , we reported that the agencies had made improvements to their contractor personnel data and related systems that could result in more reliable data , but data comparability across years and agencies was limited . we also reported in 2012 that state had not assessed the skills and workforce mix needed to meet future contracting requirements in iraq and afghanistan . further , we found that state had insufficient personnel with the necessary expertise to conduct acquisition planning and oversight functions to support the department's mission in iraq , and , as a result , relied on the department of defense ( dod ) for acquisition support . we also found weaknesses in usaid's oversight and monitoring of project and program performance in afghanistan . specifically , we reported that usaid did not consistently follow its established performance management and evaluation procedures for afghanistan agriculture and usaid subsequently issued new guidance , approved a water projects.new performance management plan , and took steps to improve its third - party monitoring of projects . similarly , others in the accountability community have reported on the acquisition challenges faced by state and usaid in contingency environments . for example , inspectors general at both agencies identified aspects of contracting in contingency environments as a serious management challenge in the agencies' fiscal year 2012 financial reports . state's inspector general found that the department continued to face challenges managing contracts and procurements , and reported that it has identified instances in iraq and pakistan in which poor contract monitoring resulted in increased costs and poor performance . similarly , usaid's inspector general identified usaid's work in high - threat environments such as afghanistan , pakistan , iraq , and south sudan , as one of the agency's most serious management challenges , in part due to audits that disclosed weak contract management in these environments . in addition , the special inspector general for iraq reconstruction and the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction have reported on similar contracting issues .