stroke . spinal cord injury . congenital deformity . amputation . major multiple trauma . fracture of femur ( hip fracture ) . brain injury . neurological disorders ( including multiple sclerosis , motor neuron diseases , polyneuropathy , muscular dystrophy , and parkinson's disease ) . burns . active , polyarticular rheumatoid arthritis , psoriatic arthritis , and seronegative arthropathies resulting in significant functional impairment of ambulation and other activities of daily living that have not improved after an appropriate , aggressive , and sustained course of outpatient therapy services or services in other less intensive rehabilitation settings immediately preceding the inpatient rehabilitation admission or that result from a systemic disease activation immediately before admission , but have the potential to improve with more intensive rehabilitation . systemic vasculidities with joint inflammation , resulting in significant functional impairment of ambulation and other activities of daily living that have not improved after an appropriate , aggressive , and sustained course of outpatient therapy services or services in other less intensive rehabilitation settings immediately preceding the inpatient rehabilitation admission or that result from a systemic disease activation immediately before admission , but have the potential to improve with more intensive rehabilitation . severe or advanced osteoarthritis ( osteoarthritis or degenerative joint disease ) involving two or more major weight bearing joints ( elbow , shoulders , hips , or knees , but not counting a joint with a prosthesis ) with joint deformity and substantial loss of range of motion , atrophy of muscles surrounding the joint , significant functional impairment of ambulation and other activities of daily living that have not improved after the patient has participated in an appropriate , aggressive , and sustained course of outpatient therapy services or services in other less intensive rehabilitation settings immediately preceding the inpatient rehabilitation admission but have the potential to improve with more intensive rehabilitation . ( a joint replaced by a prosthesis no longer is considered to have osteoarthritis , or other arthritis , even though this condition was the reason for the joint replacement. ) knee or hip joint replacement , or both , during an acute hospitalization immediately preceding the inpatient rehabilitation stay and also meet one or more of the following specific criteria: a . the patient underwent bilateral knee or bilateral hip joint replacement surgery during the acute hospital admission immediately preceding the irf admission . b . the patient is extremely obese , with a body mass index of at least 50 at the time of admission to the irf . c. the patient is age 85 or older at the time of admission to the irf . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . cms generally agreed with our recommendations . the 75 percent rule was established in 1983 to distinguish irfs from other facilities for payment purposes .