dot ? ( please check one. ) n=7 71.4% yes when was your plan approved ? 91.5% no please go to question 50 . 8.5% yes when was your plan submitted ? to track and monitor the information identified in the revised dbe regulation ? ( please check one. ) n=81 43.2% yes when was your system implemented ? †††† check here to list this person as your program's contact . †††† check here to list this person as your program's contact . office / department: phone number: email address: †††† check here to list this person as your program's contact . office / department: phone number: email address: thank you very much for taking time to complete this questionnaire . if you would like to make additional comments concerning any of the questions or comment on topics not covered , please feel free to use this page or to attach additional pages . the transportation equity act for the 21st century directed us to evaluate the impact of the u.s. department of transportation's ( usdot ) disadvantaged business enterprise ( dbe ) program throughout the nation and address 11 specific objectives . we grouped the statute's 11 objectives into the following 4 researchable questions: 1 . how has the dbe program changed since 1999 ? what are the characteristics of dbes and non - dbes that receive usdot - assisted highway and transit contracts ? what do selected sources indicate about discrimination or other factors that may limit dbes' ability to compete for usdot - assisted contracts ? what is the impact of the dbe program on costs , competition , and job creation as well as the impact of discontinuing federal and nonfederal dbe programs ? to determine how the dbe program has changed since 1999 and to identify the characteristics of dbes and non - dbes that receive usdot - assisted contracts , we reviewed usdot's regulations and guidance pertaining to the dbe program . we also interviewed usdot officials and representatives from minority - owned business and transportation associations . in addition , we surveyed the departments of transportation of the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico , and 36 transit authorities throughout the nation . ( we planned to survey all transit authorities required to submit plans for a dbe program . however , the federal transit administration could not provide an accurate list of these transit authorities. ) the 36 transit authorities we surveyed are the largest transit authorities in the nation as defined by the number of unlinked passenger trips in 1999 . they also received about two - thirds of all federal transit grant funds obligated in 1999 . our survey was designed to obtain information on the issues that tea - 21 directed us to examine , including the participation rates of dbes in usdot - assisted contracts , the annual gross receipts of dbes and non - dbes , and the cost of administering the dbe program . to help design our survey , we obtained input from usdot , states , and transit authorities . after we developed our survey , we pre - tested the questionnaire with officials of 4 state departments of transportation ( states ) and 5 transit authorities .