this review is not yet complete . to improve publications oversight , the relevant executive committees must approve all new publications proposed by the secretariat pursuant to the 2002 reform plan . overall , officials stated that the implementation of publications reform will depend on the willingness of secretariat officials and the general assembly to identify unneeded publications and discontinue duplicative mandates . on a positive note , in december 2003 , the general assembly approved the secretary general's 2004-2005 budget proposal calling for the discontinuation of 192 publications and reports . in recent years , management of the secretariat's human rights office has been complicated by several factors , such as weak financial and program management and a heavy reliance on voluntary funding to administer core activities . we interviewed senior officials from u.n. departments in new york city and geneva . specifically , we met with the deputy secretary general and her staff , and officials from the department of management , the office of human resources management ( ohrm ) , the office of program planning , budget , and accounts ( oppba ) , the department of public information ( dpi ) , and the acting high commissioner for human rights . we also met with officials from oios and the joint inspection unit ( jiu ) . during the course of our review , we also discussed the status of u.n. reforms with u.s. department of state officials in washington , d.c. ; new york ; and geneva . we selected reforms in the areas of human capital management , the performance - oriented budgeting system , public information activities , and the human rights program to assess in more detail . in our discussions with u.n. and u.s. officials , and in our review of u.n. documents , we determined that these were key areas of the secretary general's 1997 and 2002 reform plans . a detailed assessment of the reforms for peacekeeping and improving the coordination among u.n. departments and offices and between the u.n. and civil society was beyond the scope of this review . to assess the status of human capital management reforms , we compared the secretariat's human capital reform strategy with criteria from gao's model of strategic human capital management . this model provides a framework for examining an organization's human capital practices and is based upon the actions that are characteristic of high - performing organizations . to collect information on the secretariat's progress in implementing its reform strategy , we reviewed internal and public human resources documents detailing the new recruitment and hiring system , the performance appraisal system , human resources action plans , and a survey of u.n. staff views on human capital reforms . we discussed human capital management reforms with ohrm officials who are planning and implementing the office's reform initiatives . we also met with the chief personnel officer for the u.n. geneva office , as well as personnel officers at the office for the high commissioner for human rights , the u.n. high commissioner for refugees , and the internal labour organization , to discuss the status and problems of human capital reforms in their organizations . we did not evaluate the effectiveness of implemented human capital reforms .