other variations . variations in other regional office practices may also have contributed to the inconsistency in cms oversight . for example , management oversight of rate - setting reviews in regional offices varied . a kansas city regional official who reviews states' rate setting told us that , prior to approving states' rates , she submitted memoranda outlining the impact of states' proposed rate changes and the rationale for recommending approval of the package to her regional office managers . in contrast , officials from the new york regional office told us that most officials responsible for reviewing and approving states' rate setting worked independently and managers did not review a completed checklist . other variations in practices that may have had an effect on cms oversight included differences in training and standard procedures for conducting and documenting reviews . as a result of our review , cms took a number of steps that may address some of the variation in regional office practices . for example: officials from two regional offices told us that their offices were implementing new standard procedures to address inconsistencies in reviews identified through the course of gao's work ; and in december 2009 , cms began requiring that regional offices use the checklist in reviewing all states' rate - setting submissions and assure central office of its use before approving a state's rates . however , as we reported above , variations existed even when the checklist was used , such as in the extent to which cms officials using the checklist cited evidence of compliance for each of the actuarial soundness requirements . cms's efforts to ensure the quality of the data used to set rates were generally limited to requiring assurances from states and health plans , which did not provide the agency with sufficient information to ensure data quality . cms regulations require states to describe the data used as the basis for rates and provide assurances from their actuaries that the data were appropriate for rate setting . the regulations also specify that states using data submitted by the health plans as the basis for rates must require executives from the health plans to attest that the data are accurate , complete , and truthful . the regulations do not include requirements for the type , amount , or age of data or standards for the reasonableness or adequacy of rates . additionally , cms does not require states to submit documentation about the quality of the data used to set rates . in our interviews with regional office officials , we found that , when reviewing states' descriptions of the data used for rate setting , cms officials focused primarily on ensuring the appropriateness of the data used by states to set rates rather than their reliability . this included reviewing the specific services and populations included in the base - year data or checking for assurances of appropriateness from the states' actuaries . cms officials noted that if they had concerns with the quality of a state's data they would ask the state questions . none of the officials , however , reported taking any action beyond asking questions .