escorts . to further build confidence and improve security , amis troops have also provided escorts for groups of women foraging for firewood outside idp camps . according to african union and u.s. officials , the presence of amis troops has prevented these groups from being attacked . we accompanied an amis escort of a group of women as they walked more than 9 miles outside the town of kass in south darfur to find firewood for the next several days . escorted by amis protection force troops and civilian police , as well as sudanese government police , the 79 women went about their activities freely and without incident ( see fig . amis officials also told us that they have escorted ngo convoys to prevent theft and banditry . however , in several instances , amis troops or those being escorted have been threatened or killed . for example , several people were killed in rebel attacks on convoys , including four nigerian soldiers and two local contractor staff in october 2005 . in july 2006 , 32 amis soldiers escorting a fuel convoy in north darfur were abducted by one slm / a faction ; although the soldiers were eventually released , two fuel tanker drivers , the fuel tankers , and four amis vehicles were not released at that time . according to a senior u.s. contracting official working in darfur , the drivers and tankers were released in october 2006 , and the vehicles have not been returned . according to a december 2005 african union - led assessment of amis ( with participation from the un , european union , and united states ) , such incidents “undermine the mission's credibility in the eyes of civilians and embolden those who may target amis.” further , a un official emphasized that amis's ability to provide services such as firewood escorts is limited and that amis cannot begin to cover all instances where such escorts would be useful . amis has intervened to prevent violence in some cases but not in others amis troops have also intervened to protect civilians under imminent threat of violence , as directed by the african union mandate . for example , according to the december 2005 assessment of amis , amis troops were deployed to zalingei in west darfur to prevent retaliation against idps when there was heightened tension following the kidnapping of civilians by the slm / a . another amis deployment to muhajariya halted a sudanese military advance on the town that could have resulted in the substantial displacement of idps . in addition , following attacks on the town of labado in south darfur in late 2004 , a deployment of amis troops in january 2005 deterred further attacks and led to the return of many town residents , who began to repair their homes and rebuild their lives . however , in other instances , amis has not intervened to prevent violence . for example , according to un and u.s. documentation , amis did not maintain a regular presence around mershing and its surroundings in south darfur despite concerns about security in the area and repeated requests from the international community for a continuous amis presence .