the president has delegated inksna authorities to state . the deputy secretary of state exercises this authority by making sanctions determinations , and authorizing delivery of inksna reports to the committees . state arranges to have the names of the foreign persons deemed to have engaged in the sanctioned transfers or acquisitions published in the federal register soon after it delivers the reports to the committees . if state had submitted a report every 6 months during this 6-year period as required by law , they would have produced 11 reports . instead , each of the six reports covered a period spanning an entire calendar year and focused on transfers that first came to state's attention in one of the six calendar years occurring between 2006 and 2011 ( see fig . state provided these six reports at irregular intervals that have averaged 16 months , ranging between 7 and 22 months apart . it provided its most recent report in december 2014 , 22 months after its previous report . comment 1: the scope of inksna , as currently written , has not changed since 2006 , which was the start time for gao's analysis . the report shows that the time state requires to produce the reports for congress has increased since 2006 , despite no additional changes to the scope of the law . while inskna's six month reporting deadlines may be tight , the report demonstrates that the state department should consider more efficient processes for meeting those deadlines . for example , state's practice of reporting transfers in entire groups could allow a single problematic transfer to delay the reporting of other transfers that state may have already investigated and vetted . comment 2: we recognize state's need to carefully prepare and thoroughly vet each inksna report . we also recognize that some transfers that are reportable under inksna may require several years to investigate and vet prior to being included in an inksna report . however , our review found that state's process could allow a single such problematic transfer to delay state's reporting to congress of other transfers that state may have already investigated and vetted . comment 3: the report highlights the fact that state has opted to submit annual reports instead of the six - month reports required by law . however , it does not assume that state's decision to do so is the key driver of the current backlog . the report instead calls attention to state's current process that could allow a single problematic case in a group to delay its reporting on other transfers within that group . it then sends them to the state bureau of legislative affairs ( h ) . h adds a cover letter and provides the report to the clerks / security officers of recipient committees: the house committee on foreign affairs and the senate committee on foreign relations . within days , the federal register publishes the notice announcing the names of the foreign persons who have been sanctioned .