improving communication with passengers . some airlines have taken steps to notify passengers about potential denied boardings earlier in the travel process — in some cases before travelers have left for the airport — in an effort to encourage volunteers , according to stakeholders we interviewed . these stakeholders said that providing advance notice likely further reduces any burden on passengers associated with changing their travel plans . in 2018 , five of the nine airlines we interviewed told us they had begun soliciting volunteers to give up their seat earlier in the process . more specifically , according to representatives from an industry association that represents airlines , some airlines call passengers prior to their arrival at the airport to gauge their willingness to give up their seat . other airlines solicit volunteers at the check - in kiosk , which limits the need for airlines to identify passengers during the boarding process at the gate . none of the stakeholders we interviewed described any communication methods that were specific to passengers with disabilities . nevertheless , as previously mentioned , four airlines ( out of seven ) explicitly state in their contracts of carriage that they generally do not deny boarding to passengers with disabilities . increasing and diversifying compensation for passengers . some airlines have offered additional incentives or increased compensation amounts to encourage passengers to voluntarily give up their seat . while airlines have historically provided passengers with travel vouchers to solicit volunteers , some have started offering alternative forms of compensation , such as gift cards for amazon and other retailers , ipads , or travel vouchers with fewer restrictions or that also cover ancillary fees . reducing the rate or eliminating overbookings . some airlines have reduced their rate of overbooking or eliminated them altogether in an effort to reduce voluntary and involuntary denied boardings , according to stakeholders and our prior work . in our 2018 report , representatives from three airlines told us their airline had reduced or stopped overbooking flights . providing passengers with the opportunity to propose acceptable voluntary denied boarding compensation . some airlines solicit passengers with flexible travel plans to identify compensation amounts they would willingly accept in exchange for voluntarily giving up their seats and taking another flight . once passengers submit their required compensation amount to the airline , the airline can then use that information to select passengers with the lowest amount of required compensation to accept a denied boarding . this process allows airlines to , among other things , potentially avoid involuntary denied boardings , and identify which passengers require the least compensation in exchange for their travel flexibility . airlines conduct this process on their website , via their mobile app , or at the check - in kiosk . our review of seven airlines' customer service documents found that two airlines explicitly stated that they do not overbook their flights . improving the ability to predict no - shows or rebook passengers . according to representatives from an industry association representing airlines , airlines have made investments to improve their software for predicting the number of passenger no - shows in an effort to reduce voluntary and involuntary denied boardings .