( see fig . 1 for differences in the timing , depth , and duration of state downturns compared to the national recessions of 2001 and 2007. ) medicaid enrollment , and the state funding needed to support the program , increase during and after national recessions , when the number of people with incomes low enough to qualify for medicaid coverage rises as economies weaken . researchers have estimated that for every 1 percent increase in national unemployment , medicaid enrollment increases by 1 million . moreover , as the economy weakens , states have reduced revenues with which to fund their share of the medicaid programs in place prior to the recession . under the regular fmap , the federal government pays a larger portion of medicaid expenditures in states with low per capita income ( pci ) relative to the national average , and a smaller portion for states with higher pcis . use of pci was , by design , intended to adjust for differences in state funding ability . pci also serves as an indicator for the number of people eligible for medicaid in a given state . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) calculates and publishes the regular fmap for each state for each federal fiscal year based on a statutory formula that incorporates pci . the regular fmap for federal fiscal year 2010 for states ranged from 50.00 percent to 75.67 percent , and was calculated using the following formula: fmapstate = 1 - ( ( pci state ) / ( pci u.s. ) pci is a poor proxy for the size and cost of serving states' poverty populations , which vary considerably . for example , the elderly and disabled constitute about 25 percent of the medicaid population , but constitute approximately 67 percent of all medicaid expenditures . as a result , two states with low pcis may have very different proportions of elderly persons potentially eligible for medicaid , and thus very different amounts of medicaid spending . in addition , the regular fmap for each state is generally published in the federal register a year in advance of the federal fiscal year in which it will apply . for example , regular fmaps for fiscal year 2011 ( which began october 1 , 2010 ) were published november 27 , 2009 , based on a 3-year average of pci data from 2006 through 2008 . this lag time between the publication and implementation of the regular fmap provides states with an opportunity to adjust to changing levels of federal assistance . however , it also means that the pci amounts used to calculate fmaps for a given fiscal year do not reflect states' economic conditions for that year . to help states meet additional medicaid program needs , and to provide fiscal relief , congress established temporary fmap increases for states in 2003 , 2009 , and 2010 . increased fmaps help states maintain their medicaid programs during downturns . they may also free up funds states would otherwise have used for medicaid and make them available to address other state budget needs .