stakeholders . we interviewed representatives from 18 ngos , each of which has interests in various aspects of forced labor in the seafood industry . we selected ngos using internet searches for groups that have an interest in seafood and forced labor and recommendations from federal agency officials and ngo representatives we interviewed . more specifically , we selected ngos with various goals and missions , including ( 1 ) helping u.s. seafood importers remain compliant with section 307 or ( 2 ) assisting survivors of forced labor overseas . we asked representatives from each of the ngos we interviewed a standard set of questions that addressed , among other things , information they share with cbp . to examine stakeholder perspectives on cbp's communication of information needs to enforce section 307 for seafood , we reviewed cbp documents and interviewed cbp officials about how they communicate their information needs to stakeholders , specifically regarding the types of information they need to initiate and investigate forced labor cases . additionally , we interviewed representatives of 18 ngos about the extent to which they understood cbp's information needs for enforcement of section 307 , the extent to which they shared information with cbp about potential forced labor they identified , and factors that may affect sharing information with cbp . statements these stakeholders made are not generalizable to all stakeholders but provide perspectives on information related to enforcing section 307 . we also compared the agency's existing communication efforts to federal standards for internal control , as appropriate . appendix i provides more detailed information on our objectives , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from february 2019 to june 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . prevalence of forced labor in thailand a 2020 report by the united nation's international labor organization included research on hundreds of thai workers employed on seafood vessels or in processing facilities . the report found that nearly 10 percent of interviewees shared circumstances of involuntary work and coercion that , taken together , constituted forced labor . the report concluded that if its selection of interviewees is representative of workers employed across the thai seafood industry , it would indicate that tens of thousands of workers in thai fishing and seafood processing are working in forced labor conditions . fishing activities are vulnerable to a number of illicit practices , including illegal , unreported , and unregulated ( iuu ) fishing and forced labor . iuu fishing is a broad term that includes a variety of fishing activities with social , economic , and environmental impacts and concerns all aspects and stages of the capture and marketing of fish , according to the united nations' food and agriculture organization .