documents that are in bold are overdue . however , multiple risks remain . all three agencies also concurred with this recommendation . further , commerce noted that dod and nasa executives need to weigh in to resolve issues at , or immediately below , their levels in order to ensure prompt completion of the key acquisition documents . nasa noted that difficulties in gaining consensus across all three npoess agencies have delayed the signature of key acquisition documents , and reported that they are committed to moving these documents through the signature cycle once all of the issues and concerns are resolved . in summary , over the past year , program officials have completed major activities associated with restructuring the npoess program and have made progress in developing and testing sensors , ground systems , and the npp spacecraft . agency executives have still not signed off on key acquisition documents that were originally to be completed in september 2006 , and now dod is threatening to withhold funding if the documents are not completed by august 2008 — even though dod has contributed to the delays in completing these documents . also , one critical sensor has experienced technical problems and schedule delays that have led program officials to delay the npp launch date by about 8 months . any delay in the npp launch date shortens the time available for incorporating lessons learned from npp onto future npoess missions and could also lead to gaps in critical climate and weather data . in addition , risks to the program remain in resolving interagency disagreements on the appropriate level of system security and in revising estimated costs for satellite operations and support . the program office is aware of these risks and is working to mitigate them , but continued problems could affect the program's overall schedule and cost . in addition to prioritizing the sensors , nasa , noaa , and dod identified a variety of options for obtaining key sensor data over the next two decades and continue to seek other options . the agencies identified options including adding sensors back to a later npoess satellite , adding sensors to another planned satellite , and developing a new satellite to include several of the sensors . examples of options for several sensors are provided in figure 1 . in addition , in december 2007 , noaa released a request for information to determine whether commercial providers could include selected environmental sensors on their satellites . in addition to prioritizing sensors and identifying options , over the last year , nasa , noaa , and dod have taken steps to restore three sensors on a near - term basis . specifically , in april 2007 , the npoess executive committee decided to restore the limb component of the ozone mapper / profiler suite to the npp satellite ; in january 2008 , to add the clouds and the earth's radiant energy sensor to npp ; and in may 2008 to add the total solar irradiance sensor to the first npoess satellite . these decisions are expected to provide continuity for these sensors through approximately 2015 . table 7 shows the latest planned configuration of npoess satellites .