not all grantees may have used these descriptions . we worked with grant officials to identify the most appropriate grant selection criteria . one registered cert was no longer active . we determined that these data were reliable for the purposes of this review . we are conducting this performance audit from february 2008 through october 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in summary , fema faces challenges measuring performance for citizen corps , partner programs , and the ready campaign because ( 1 ) it relies on states to verify that data for its principal performance measure — the registered number of established volunteer organizations across the country — are accurate and does not have a process for monitoring state validation efforts and ( 2 ) although the ready campaign controls the content of its message , it is not positioned to control the distribution of its message or measure whether its message is changing the behavior of individuals . fema officials said that fema expects to use a new , 2010 registration process to collect more comprehensive data on membership and council activities . among other things , fema counts requests for literature , web site hits , and the number of television announcements made to gauge performance for the ready campaign , but fema does not control when its message is viewed in various media because it relies on donated media , such as time to air television and radio announcements . because changes in individuals' behavior can be the result of a variety of factors , including preparedness campaigns sponsored by other organizations , it is difficult to measure the ready campaign's effect on changes in individuals' preparedness behavior . fema's challenges in measuring the performance of citizen preparedness programs are compounded by the fact that it has not developed a strategy to encompass how citizen corps , its partner programs , and the ready campaign are to operate within the context of the national preparedness system . in april 2009 , we recommended that npd develop a strategic plan to implement the national preparedness system that contains such key elements as goals , objectives , and how progress in achieving them will be measured . fema agreed and reported that it is taking actions to strengthen strategic planning . fema stated that it is reviewing implementation plans and policy documents , such as the national preparedness guidelines , and that community preparedness is a key element being considered in this process . fema has not yet set a date for completion of the national preparedness system strategy , and the extent to which citizen corps , its partner programs , or the ready campaign will be included when the strategy is complete is not clear . we will continue to assess fema's efforts to measure the performance of the community preparedness programs and develop a strategy for integrating them into the national preparedness system as part of our ongoing work .