health effects . the guidelines found that , on average , the higher an individual's salt intake , the higher an individual's blood pressure . decreasing salt intake is advisable to reduce the risk of elevated blood pressure . the eight members of the subcommittee all voted “yes,” that trans fats are more adverse with respect to coronary heart disease . one member of the subcommittee commented that the yes answer did not reflect the considerable uncertainty discussed by the subcommittee as to whether this difference is significant from a public health perspective at the level of trans fat intake that is typical in the united states . we provided fda with a draft of this appendix and asked the agency to provide its views on the impact of these sources' findings on the gras status of trans fats in partially hydrogenated vegetable oils . in its response , the agency stated that partially hydrogenated oils ( which contain trans fats ) are considered gras based on a history of use prior to 1958 . the partial hydrogenation process was developed in the 1930s and has been in widespread commercial use since the 1940s . two partially hydrogenated oils have been affirmed by fda as gras — partially hydrogenated low erucic acid rapeseed oil and partially hydrogenated menhaden oil . a number of “standards of identity” in fda's regulations also implicitly permit their use ( for example , those for margarine and shortening ) . fda is in the process of re - evaluating the gras status of partially hydrogenated oils , and has received two citizen petitions on this topic . with regard to the findings of the dietary guidelines for americans , the dietary reference intakes , and the fda food advisory committee , fda indicated that it is aware of the findings from these sources and will take them into account in its review of the gras status of trans fat . previous versions of the dietary guidelines for americans and the dietary reference intakes were referenced in the 2003 trans fat labeling rule . fda indicated that it has the authority to review and revoke the gras status of partially hydrogenated oils that are used as ingredients intentionally added to food . the agency also indicated that it has the legal authority to regulate the amount of trans fat added to foods in interstate commerce . in addition , the agency noted that naturally occurring trans fats ( such as those in meat and dairy products ) would not be subject to regulatory action . regarding what the agency has done to reduce the use of partially hydrogenated vegetable oils and the levels of trans fat in foods , fda indicated that it published a final rule in 2003 ( effective on january 1 , 2006 ) that required that trans fat content be declared in the nutrition facts panel of food immediately under the line for saturated fat . as a result of this labeling change , consumers have additional information to help them make heart - healthy dietary choices . in addition , because of trans fat labeling , industry has voluntarily reformulated foods by reducing the levels of added trans fat . fda is currently evaluating the effect of trans fat labeling on daily intake .