providing census results . this includes processes to tabulate and summarize census data and disseminate the results to the public . figure 1 illustrates key decennial activities . geographic information and support to aid the bureau in establishing where to count u.s. citizens are provided by the master address file / topologically integrated geographic encoding and referencing ( maf / tiger ) system . the decennial response integration system ( dris ) is to provide a system for collecting and integrating census responses from all sources , including forms and telephone interviews . in another effort to improve executive - level oversight , the decennial management division began producing ( as of july 2008 ) a weekly executive alert report and has established ( as of october 2008 ) monthly dashboard and reporting indicators . however , these products do not provide comprehensive status information on the testing progress of key systems and interfaces . for example , the executive alert report does not include the progress of testing activities , and although the dashboard provides a high - level , qualitative assessment of testing for key operations and selected systems , it does not provide information on the testing progress of all key systems and interfaces . further , the assessment of testing progress has not been based on quantitative and specific metrics . for example , the status of testing key operations removed from the dress rehearsal was marked as acceptable , or “green,” although the bureau does not yet have plans for testing these activities . bureau officials stated that they marked these activities as acceptable because , based on past experience , they felt comfortable that a plan would be developed in time to adequately test these operations . the lack of quantitative and specific metrics to track progress limits the bureau's ability to accurately assess the status and progress of testing activities . in commenting on a draft of this report , the bureau provided selected examples in which they had begun to use more detailed metrics to track the progress of end - to - end testing activities . finally , although the bureau announced in august 2008 that it was planning to hire a senior manager who would have primary responsibility for monitoring testing across all decennial systems and programs , the position had not been filled as of january 2009 . instead , agency officials stated that the role is being filled by another manager from the decennial statistical studies division , who has numerous other responsibilities . the bureau also has weaknesses in its testing guidance ; it has not established comprehensive guidance for system testing . appendix i contains further details about our scope and methodology . the bureau's mission is to provide comprehensive data about the nation's people and economy . its core activities include conducting decennial , economic , and government censuses ; conducting demographic and economic surveys ; managing international demographic and socioeconomic databases ; providing technical advisory services to foreign governments ; and performing other activities such as producing official population estimates and projections . conducting the decennial census is a major undertaking that includes the following major activities: establishing where to count .