hrsa is responsible for administering and overseeing the 340b program . eligibility for the 340b program , which is defined in the phsa , has expanded over time , most recently through the patient protection and affordable care act , which extended eligibility to additional types of hospitals . entities generally become eligible by receiving certain federal grants or by being one of six hospital types . eligible grantees include clinics that offer primary and preventive care services , such as federally qualified health centers , clinics that target specific conditions or diseases that raise public health concerns or are expensive to treat , and state - operated aids drug assistance programs , which serve as a “payer of last resort” to cover the cost of providing hiv - related medications to certain low - income individuals . we are in the early stages of this work , and we expect to issue a future report on 340b contract pharmacies . chairman murphy , ranking member degette , and members of the committee , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . for further information about this statement , please contact debra a. draper at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or draperd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . key contributors to this statement were michelle rosenberg , assistant director ; rotimi adebonojo , jennie apter ; and amanda cherrin . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we recommended that hrsa further clarify its nondiscrimination guidance for cases in which distribution of drugs is restricted and require reviews of manufacturers' plans to restrict distribution of drugs at 340b prices in such cases . in response , hrsa issued a program notice in may 2012 that clarified hrsa's policy for manufacturers that intend to restrict distribution of a drug and provided additional detail on the type of information manufacturers should include in such restricted distribution plans . in addition , we found a lack of specificity in hrsa's guidance on two other issues — the definition of an eligible patient and hospital eligibility for program participation . specifically , we found that hrsa's guidance on the definition of an eligible patient lacked the necessary specificity to clearly define the various situations under which an individual was considered eligible for discounted drugs through the 340b program . as a result , covered entities could interpret the definition either too broadly or too narrowly .