( app . iii provides a list of these 38 high - impact programs and the component agencies that are responsible for them. ) of these 23 major departments and agencies , 16 were responsible for at least one high - impact program ; several were responsible for more than one . programs that were identified included weather service , disease monitoring and warnings , public housing , air traffic control , food stamps , and social security benefits . these programs , as well as the others listed in appendix iii , continue to perform important functions for the public . the y2k planning to support these high - impact programs included coop planning and specifically addressed interdependencies . planning included identifying partners integral to program delivery , testing data exchanges across partners , developing complementary business continuity and contingency plans , sharing key information on readiness with other partners and the public , and taking other steps to ensure that the agency's high - impact program would work in the event of an emergency . although the identification of essential functions was established as the first step in coop planning , fpc 65 also identified an additional seven other planning topics that make up a viable coop capability . the guidance provided a general definition of each of the eight topics and identified several actions that should be completed to address each topic . table 1 lists the eight topic areas covered in fpc 65 and provides an example of an action under each . the identification of essential functions is a prerequisite for coop planning because it establishes the planning parameters that drive the agency's efforts in all other planning topics . for example , fpc 65 directs agencies to identify alternative facilities , staff , and resources necessary to support continuation of their essential functions . the effectiveness of the plan as a whole and the implementation of all other elements depend on the performance of this step . of the 34 agency coop plans we reviewed , 29 plans included at least one function that was identified as essential . these agency - identified essential functions varied in number and scope . the number of functions identified in each plan ranged from 3 to 399 . in addition , the apparent importance of the functions was not consistent . additionally , in its oversight role , fema had the opportunity to help agencies refine their essential functions through an interagency coop test or exercise . according to fpc 65 , fema is responsible for coordinating such exercises . fema is developing a test and training program for coop activities , but it has not yet conducted an interagency exercise to test the feasibility of these planned activities . fema had planned a governmentwide exercise in 2002 , but the exercise was cancelled after the september 11 attacks . fema is currently preparing to conduct a governmentwide exercise in mid - may 2004 . improper identification of essential functions can have a negative impact on the entire coop plan , because other aspects of the coop plan are designed around supporting these functions . if an agency fails to identify a function as essential , it will not make the necessary arrangements to perform that function .