we have highlighted this issue in our report . gao - 11-565 . additionally , in july 2012 , we updated our review of fdcci's status and found that , while agencies' 2011 inventories and plans had improved as compared to their 2010 submissions , only 3 agencies had submitted a complete inventory and only 1 agency had submitted a complete consolidation plan . in addition , we noted that 3 agencies had submitted their inventory using an outdated format , in part , because omb had not publicly posted its revised guidance . notwithstanding these weaknesses , we noted that 19 agencies reported anticipating about $2.4 billion in cost savings between 2011 and 2015 . we also reported that none of five selected agencies had a master program schedule or cost - benefit analysis that was fully consistent with best practices . to identify notable consolidation successes and challenges in achieving cost savings , we reviewed agencies' cost savings documentation , including quarterly reports on cost savings and avoidances submitted to omb , total cost of ownership models , contract and budget documentation , internal agency status reports , and other documentation , and interviewed agency officials . to determine the types of successes experienced , we identified areas reported in agencies' documentation with directly attributable cost savings or avoidances . we also interviewed agency officials to identify additional successes in achieving cost savings , including areas where the agency may not have been able to quantify the savings . to assist agencies with their data center consolidation efforts , omb had sponsored the development of a fdcci total cost of ownership estimated costs for consolidation ; however , agencies were not required to use the cost model as part of their cost estimating efforts . accordingly , we reiterated our prior recommendation that agencies complete missing plan and inventory elements and made new recommendations to omb to publically post guidance updates on the fdcci website and to require agencies to use its cost model . model that was intended to help agencies refine their omb generally agreed with our recommendations and has since taken steps to address them . more specifically , omb posted its 2012 guidance for updating data center inventories and plans , as well as guidance for reporting consolidation progress , to the fdcci public website . further , the website has been updated to provide prior guidance documents and omb memorandums . in addition , omb's 2012 consolidation plan guidance required agencies to use the cost model as they developed their 2014 budget request . omb refers to total cost of ownership as all associated data center - related activities and costs without regard to ownership , project association , or funding line . had not measured agencies' progress against key performance measures , including its cost savings goal , or ensured that other key oversight responsibilities , such as approving agencies consolidation plans on the basis of their completeness , were being fully executed .