coo . this official has oversight responsibility for the agency's core business operations , including financial management , procurement and grants , human resources , and information technology , among others . cdc's coo is consistent with a commonly agreed - upon governance principle that “a single point” within an agency should have the responsibility and authority for the agency's management functions . it also parallels the experience of successful organizations that place this type of management position among the agency's top leadership . deputy director for science and public health and deputy director for public health service . these officials function largely as technical advisors , working with the centers on various issues but having no oversight responsibility for them . five od offices report directly to the deputy director for science and public health . no offices report directly to the deputy director for public health service . the senior advisor for strategy and innovation . this advisor is responsible for the agency's strategic planning efforts and , apart from the official's own office staff , has no direct reports . chief of staff . the chief of staff serves as a principal advisor and assistant to the director and is responsible for od's day - to - day management . this responsibility includes routing to the appropriate od or center official the agency's incoming inquiries or requests from the congress , the administration , and the public health community . two od offices report directly to the chief of staff — the office of the executive secretariat and the office of program planning and evaluation . director , cdc washington office . this official manages the cdc washington office , which acts as a liaison between cdc and its washington - based stakeholders , which include other agencies , associations , policymakers , and others interested in public health . senior advisor to the director . this advisor is responsible for providing research , analysis , outreach activities , and strategy formulation to meet the needs of the director and , apart from the official's own office staff , has no direct reports . associate director for terrorism preparedness and response . this official's responsibilities include managing od's office of terrorism preparedness and emergency response ( otper ) as well as cdc's national bioterrorism program . as of november 1 , 2003 , a total of 20 officials , including the 11 center directors , reported to the cdc director . ( see fig . whether this structural arrangement can support effective oversight of the agency's programmatic work is uncertain , given the growth in the demands on the cdc director's time along with the likely change in directors over time . since the first west nile virus outbreak in 1999 , cdc has responded to a steady stream of high - profile public health emergencies , including the anthrax incidents and the more recent outbreak of sars . ( see fig . responding to these events has required the focused attention of the cdc director .