trade payables . trade payables help finance the goods and services the sector acquires in the conduct of its operations . accordingly , our base - case simulations let trade payables grow at the same rate as other consumption expenditures , which , in turn , grow with inflation plus population growth . as noted above , the historical tendency has been for the state and local government sector to run small deficits and an occasional surplus as measured by net lending or borrowing . the method we have described documents how we use the accounting identity to grow financial assets and liabilities in similar circumstances . if the sector runs large deficits , however , as we find within a few years of our simulation , this methodology generates unrealistic financial outcomes . in particular , if the method were used throughout our simulation analysis , ever - increasing deficits would lead to declining values of financial assets — because under this method , assets are the residual variable that balances the accounting identity . in later years assets would decline so substantially that they would become negative . since this makes no economic sense because governments require funds to meet current expenses , we developed an alternative method that is triggered when key relationships become out of balance in our simulation . our methodology “switch” is triggered when receipts fall so substantially short of expenditures — i.e. , the sector is a substantial net borrower — that assets grow less than gross domestic product ( gdp ) . if this occurs , in the next period the model changes how short - term debt is projected . rather than being independently projected , short - term debt then becomes the residual variable that satisfies the accounting identity . in this alternative case , assets grow with gdp . income receipts on assets are part of the sector's receipts while its interest payments are part of its expenditures . we have described how the model determines the change in assets and liabilities in each year . these earnings or payments are calculated by setting an appropriate rate and applying that rate to these asset or liability values , respectively . in this section we describe how we determine the effective rates earned and paid and how we use those rates and the values of assets and liabilities to project asset income and interest payments of the state and local sector . income receipts on assets are reported as a category of receipts in the national income and product accounts ( nipa ) . we divide the income receipts on assets by the value of financial assets at the end of the previous year to calculate historical values for the effective rate earned on assets in each past year . the evolution of these past effective rates reflects the turnover of old assets and the acquisition of new financial assets by state and local governments . this process can be captured by setting the effective rate earned on assets in a given year equal to a weighted average of the prior period's effective rate and the given year's prevailing market rate on the types of assets that the sector purchases .