gao - 05-366 . washington , d.c.: april 22 , 2005 . medicare covers these services only if they are language pathology . medicare covers these services only if they are needed to improve a patient's condition ( for example , to aid stroke needed to improve a patient's condition ( for example , to aid stroke recovery or combat the effects of parkinson's disease ) and are reasonable recovery or combat the effects of parkinson's disease ) and are reasonable in amount , frequency , and duration . in 2002 , the most recent year for in amount , frequency , and duration . in 2002 , the most recent year for which complete data are available , an estimated 3.7 million , or about which complete data are available , an estimated 3.7 million , or about 9 percent , of medicare beneficiaries received one or more of these types of 9 percent , of medicare beneficiaries received one or more of these types of outpatient therapy.outpatient therapy . such an exception process could be invoked to review the medical records of beneficiaries whose providers seek permission for coverage of medicare payments in excess of the caps . cms officials agreed that an appeal process or waiver from the caps could be a short - term approach to focus resources on needy beneficiaries . they added that possible criteria for waiving the caps could include ( 1 ) having multiple conditions ; ( 2 ) having certain conditions , levels of severity , or multiple conditions suggested by research as having greater need for treatment ; ( 3 ) having needs for more than one type of service , such as occupational therapy and speech - language pathology ; or ( 4 ) having prior use of services or multiple episodes in the same year . hhs does not , however , currently have the authority to implement a process , or to conduct a demonstration or pilot project , to provide exceptions to the therapy caps . medicare payments for outpatient therapy continue to rise rapidly , and 20 percent or more of claims may be improper . to date , however , hhs has made little progress toward a payment system for outpatient therapy services that is based on patients' needs . furthermore , while cms is considering ways to reduce improper payments , it has not implemented the contractor's proposals for improving its claims - processing system . hhs has been required for years to take steps toward developing a payment system based on beneficiaries' needs , which would require developing a process for collecting better assessment information . studies contracted by cms to respond to requirements under three laws suggest that the department would need to develop a standard patient assessment instrument to define a patient's diagnosis and functional status and thereby determine the patient's medical need for therapy . in response to a statutory requirement to report on the standardization of patient assessment instruments in a variety of settings , hhs and cms have an effort under way to study and report to congress on the development of standard terminology that medicare providers could use to assess patients' diagnosis and functional status .