both centcom and the services have issued predeployment training requirements . however , some of centcom's training requirements lack associated conditions and standards , and confusion exists over which forces the requirements apply to . in addition , the army and marine corps have not included certain centcom required tasks in their predeployment training requirements , and unit commanders can certify their units for deployment even if all the required individual and collective training tasks have not been successfully completed . the services provide combat skills training to their servicemembers , including support forces , at various points throughout their careers . during initial entry training , recruits are trained on service tasks and skills , including basic military tactics , weapons training , and marksmanship . in addition , servicemembers participate in annual training that is focused on tasks such as crew - served weapons training , reacting to chemical and biological attacks , and offensive and defensive tactics . soldiers and marines also participate in combat skills training prior to deploying for any overseas operations . as a result , the predeployment combat skills training that support unit personnel receive should be viewed as a significant piece of their training to operate in an asymmetric environment , but not as their only training to operate in that environment . centcom has issued a list of training tasks that all individuals assigned to its area of responsibility , including support unit personnel , must complete before deploying in support of ongoing operations in iraq and afghanistan . while the centcom training requirements outline tasks that must be trained , the command does not always clearly define the conditions and standards to which all of the tasks should be trained . at the training sites , we interviewed and collected various training - related documents from army and marine corps active and reserve component units participating in predeployment training as well as training command officials on the implementation of service training guidance . we also obtained information from army active component support forces stationed at fort hood . to assess the extent to which the services and central command have information to validate the completion of required combat skills training , we reviewed army and marine corps policies on training , including army regulation 350-1 , which outlines requirements for servicewide tracking through the digital training management system , and marine corps order 3502.6 , marine corps force generation process . we also coordinated with the u.s. army audit agency regarding their ongoing efforts in reviewing the digital training management system . we interviewed service headquarters officials to discuss the processes the services use to track completion of training requirements . we reviewed joint publication 1 , and other joint and service policies that document the role and responsibilities of unit commanders in tracking and reporting completion of training requirements . we interviewed department of the army training directorate , marine corps training and education command , u.s. army forces command , marine forces command , first army , and u.s. army reserve command officials and reviewed documents from these commands , which are involved in the process of tracking the completion of combat skills training .