securitization . fhfa has specified the need for greater clarity about requirements for loans to be securitized by the enterprises , saying that the lack of clarity was likely restricting access for some creditworthy borrowers . fhfa noted in its 2014 strategic plan that some originators and mortgage insurers have been requiring higher minimum credit score requirements than would be required by the enterprises , resulting in the rejection of many loans that would otherwise meet enterprise credit standards . the fhfa director acknowledged that these higher credit standards were the result of lender uncertainty about having to repurchase these loans in the future if they were found to violate enterprise requirements for securitization . servicing . cfpb established new mortgage servicing rules that took effect in january 2014 requiring servicers to follow certain standards and procedures when working with troubled borrowers in an effort to avoid unnecessary foreclosures . according to va , the va home loan program oversees mortgage servicers by reviewing every loan to ensure that the servicer has made all reasonable efforts to help the veteran avoid foreclosure . in cases of mortgage default , va employees in regional offices serve as intermediaries between the veteran and servicer to negotiate a resolution to the default . fha requires servicers to address delinquencies through an early intervention process , which could include default counseling , prior to engaging in formal foreclosure mitigation actions . a 2012 hud study found that 69 percent of housing counseling clients enrolled in foreclosure and prepurchase counseling obtained a mortgage remedy , and 56 percent were able to become current on their mortgages with a counselor's help . in the 2014 strategic plan for the conservatorships of fannie mae and freddie mac , fhfa requires the enterprises to continue , and improve upon servicing standards and loss mitigation outcomes for borrowers . some participants in our discussion groups noted that cfpb's ability - to - repay and qualified mortgage standards rule , which went into effect on january 10 , 2014 , promotes borrower protection by requiring mortgage lenders to consider borrowers' ability to repay the loans before extending them credit . however , some participants have noted the rule could limit access to the housing finance market for some creditworthy borrowers who do not satisfy certain qm standards , such as the 43 percent debt - to - income ratio for private loans . several industry groups that participated in our discussions jointly submitted a letter to cfpb and hud regarding their concerns about potential liability for fair lending violations based on disparate impact ; they expressed concern that the qm criteria may tighten credit and inadvertently exclude a disproportionate number of minorities and protected classes . in an interagency statement about fair lending compliance and the ability - to - repay rule issued in october 2013 , five federal agencies noted that they do not anticipate that a creditor's decision to offer only qm mortgage loans would , absent other factors , elevate a supervised institution's fair lending risk . the agencies counseled creditors to continue to evaluate fair lending risk for qm loans as they would for other types of product selections , including by carefully monitoring policies and practices and implementing effective compliance management systems .