these are not costs of corrective action or rework . the costs incurred in connection with the investigation are generally not allowable . not all such investigations involve a work stoppage , however . of the 31 work stoppages reported to us by doe officials , costs are available only for the july 2007 spill at the tank farm , since doe specifically required the contractor to separately identify and report those costs . the costs of that incident totaled $8.1 million and included expenditures for cleaning up contamination resulting from the spill , investigating the causes of the accident , investigating health effects of the accident on workers , administrative support , and oversight of remediation activities . these were all considered allowable costs , and doe has reimbursed the contractor for them . although a subsequent investigation took place to determine whether nuclear safety rules had been violated , the costs to participate in that investigation ( $52,913 ) were segregated as directed by doe's office of enforcement and were not billed to the government . although doe officials said that none of the reported work stoppages involved lost - productivity costs , the work stoppage to address the tank spill could well contribute to delays and rising costs for tank waste retrieval activities over the long run . given that doe was emptying only about one tank per year when we reported on hanford tanks in june 2008 , the 1-year suspension of waste retrieval activities , without additional steps to recover lost time , may contribute to delayed project completion . many factors already contribute to delays in emptying the tanks . doe has acknowledged that it will not meet the milestones agreed to with washington state and the environmental protection agency in the tri - party agreement . we found that doe's own internal schedule for tank waste retrieval , approved in mid - 2007 , reflects time frames almost 2 decades later than those in the agreement . ultimately , delays contribute to higher costs because of ongoing costs to monitor the waste until it is retrieved , treated , and permanently disposed of , and estimated costs for tank waste retrieval and closure have been growing . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or aloisee@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to determine the number of times work was suspended at the hanford site , we obtained from the department of energy's ( doe ) office of river protection officials a listing of work stoppages occurring from january 2000 through december 2008 at either the waste treatment plant or the tank farms . we did not review other work stoppages that may have occurred elsewhere at the hanford site during this period . about 900 workers were laid off as a result . doe does not routinely collect or formally report information about work stoppages , in part because federal regulations governing contracts do not require contractors to track work stoppages and the reasons for them .