this concludes my statement . i would now be happy to answer any questions for the subcommittee . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8816 . stephen l. caldwell , deena d. richart , and kathryn e. godfrey also made key contributions to this statement . maritime security: enhancements made , but implementation and sustainability remain key challenges . to what extent has cbp developed strategies and related management tools for achieving the program's goals ? regarding csi , i will address the following issues: what factors affect cbp's ability to target shipments at overseas seaports ? under csi , to what extent have high - risk containers been inspected overseas prior to their arrival at u.s. destinations ? to what extent has cbp developed strategies and related management tools for achieving the program's goals ? my statement today represents a summary of two unrestricted reports we have provided to congress on these programs — that is , our march 2005 report on c - tpat and our april 2005 report on csi . cbp maintains two overarching goals: ( 1 ) increasing security and ( 2 ) facilitating legitimate trade and travel . disruptions to the supply chain could have immediate and significant economic impacts . for example , in terms of containers , cbp data indicates that in 2003 about 90 percent of the world's cargo moved by container . in the united states , almost half of all incoming trade ( by value ) arrived by containers on board ships . additionally , containers arrive via truck and rail . both admitting dangerous cargo into the country and delaying the movement of cargo containers through ports of entry could negatively affect the national economy . therefore , cbp believes it is vital to try to strike a balance between its antiterrorism efforts and facilitating the flow of legitimate international trade and travel . the terrorist events of september 11 , 2001 , raised concerns about company supply chains , particularly oceangoing cargo containers , potentially being used to move wmd to the united states . an extensive body of work on this subject by the federal bureau of investigation and academic , think tank , and business organizations concluded that while the likelihood of such use of containers is considered low , the movement of oceangoing containerized cargo is vulnerable to some form of terrorist action . such action , including attempts to smuggle either fully assembled wmd or their individual components , could lead to widespread death and damage . the supply chain is particularly vulnerable to potential terrorists because of the number of individual companies handling and moving cargo through it . to move a container from production facilities overseas to distribution points in the united states , an importer has multiple options regarding the logistical process , such as routes and the selection of freight carriers . for example , some importers might own and operate key aspects of the overseas supply chain process , such as warehousing and trucking operations . alternatively , importers might contract with logistical service providers , including freight consolidators and nonvessel - operating common carriers .