( recommendation 1 ) . dhs delegated its sector responsibilities to tsa and coast guard . within the transportation systems sector , agencies and stakeholders charter councils for individual transportation modes as well as the sector as a whole . sector coordinating councils and government coordinating councils for each critical infrastructure sector provide forums for promoting efficient collaboration within the sectors . further , the sector - specific agencies are to develop , in close collaboration with sector coordinating councils and other sector partners , a sector - specific plan that tailors the national infrastructure protection plan to the specific characteristics and landscape of each critical infrastructures sector . under the transportation systems sector - specific plan , dot and dhs , through tsa , and coast guard , coordinate with infrastructure owners and operators , provide technical assistance , and carry out incident management responsibilities . cbp is also a permanent member of the aviation government coordinating council . the final report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( 9 / 11 commission report ) , released in july 2004 , identified concerns with aspects of transportation security planning , including the lack of an integrated strategic plan for the transportation sector . the commission found that the screening of passengers and their property at airports accounted for the majority of transportation security investments , leaving vulnerable other facets of transportation security , such as cargo , general aviation , and surface transportation . table 1 illustrates parallels among the commission's multi - part recommendation , the intelligence reform act , as amended , and the 2018 national strategy . figure 1 illustrates agencies' activities across transportation modes . federal policies and plans establish specific coordination mechanisms and activities for transportation security . specifically , in accordance with the homeland security act of 2002 , as amended , dhs created the national infrastructure protection plan to guide the national effort to manage risk to the nation's critical infrastructure , including through coordination of agencies and various critical infrastructure sectors , including transportation systems . the national strategy states that its risk - based priorities help to narrow capability gaps and raise the security baseline . the risk - based priorities in the national strategy are also intended to inform security decisions about the types of activities government and industry modal security officials should pursue to address terrorism risks . the national strategy includes modal security plans as appendixes — also consistent with its underlying statute — and other , separate , statutorily required national strategy documents as annexes tsa determined were appropriate to include . the 2018 national strategy for transportation security is generally consistent with desirable characteristics of an effective national strategy . in 2004 , we reported that national strategies are not required to address a single , consistent set of characteristics , and they contain varying degrees of detail based on their different scopes . we have previously identified a set of desirable characteristics that we believe would provide additional guidance to responsible parties for developing and implementing the strategies — and to enhance their usefulness as guidance for resource and policy decision - makers and to better ensure accountability .