this process was repeated for each employee . the process was then continued for those employees who were not estimated as having separated in fiscal year 2001 , but with each employee now being 1 year older and having 1 more year of service . as before , the employee's new age and new years of service were used as input into the model and a predicted rate of separation was contrasted with a new generated random number to determine whether the employee was considered as separated in fiscal year 2002 . a separation decision was made for each of the remaining employees , and each employee was either counted as having separated in fiscal year 2002 or 1 year was again added to both age and years of service . this process was repeated seven times for each year from fiscal years 2001 through 2007 . the total number of separations by grade level , agency type , race , ethnicity , and gender was calculated across all 7 years . to determine how many employees remained after the separations , we subtracted the number separated for each combination of grade level , race , ethnicity , and gender from the total number of staff in the agency at that grade level . to determine what percentage of this remaining workforce was in each of the race , ethnicity , and gender groups , we divided the number remaining for each race , ethnicity , and gender by the total number of staff remaining at each agency . to estimate the race and gender profile of expected appointments in fiscal years 2001 through 2007 , we analyzed by agency career appointment trends for the ses , gs - 15 , and gs - 14 grade levels by race and gender for fiscal years 1995 through 2000 . we included conversions , appointments ( new hires ) , and promotions into each grade level . we combined the data for each fiscal year into a single 6-year total for each grade level . we determined what percentage each equal employment opportunity ( eeo ) group ( race and ethnicity by gender ; for example , african - american females ) constituted of these past accessions for each level . we assumed that the number of separations estimated for fiscal years 2001 through 2007 would all be refilled through accessions . therefore , the number of estimated accessions equaled the number of estimated separations . to estimate how many accessions would occur for each eeo group during fiscal years 2001 through fiscal year 2007 , we multiplied an agency's predicted total separations times an eeo group's percentage of an agency's past accessions . for example , if the department of commerce was expected to have 100 separations for a particular grade level and african - american males were 6 percent of commerce's past accessions at that grade level , then we estimated that commerce's accessions to fill these 100 vacancies would include six african - american males ( 100 separations times 0.06 ) . these calculations were done for the period from fiscal years 2001 through 2007 as a whole , not year by year .