( see app . i for data on the number of usps pfp participants by employee type. ) according to usps , the foundation of the pfp program is a “balanced scorecard” of independently verifiable performance indicators in several areas — such as service , revenue generation , and efficiency — to align compensation with individual performance and organizational results . usps uses this approach to help balance the need to keep postal rates affordable , address increasing financial pressure , and maintain quality delivery service for different types of mail . specifically , according to usps , the pfp program is a mechanism to help manage the organization and its employees ; align organizational , unit , and individual objectives ; link individual contributions to organizational success ; compare individual performance with established targets ; recognize and reward individual successes ; and ensure accountability at all levels of the organization . you requested that we provide information about usps's pfp program . accordingly , this report ( 1 ) describes the key features of usps's pfp program , ( 2 ) provides information on the weight of the pfp program's performance indicators in determining participants' ratings , and ( 3 ) identifies opportunities for usps to incorporate new indicators of delivery performance into its pfp program . to address these objectives , we obtained usps documentation for the pfp program and interviewed officials responsible for the pfp program . we also obtained data and information on pfp indicators , including their weight . we primarily based our assessment of opportunities for usps to incorporate new delivery performance indicators into its pfp program on statutes related to timely mail delivery and interviews with senior usps officials . we conducted a data reliability assessment of usps's pfp information and determined that the information was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . usps then calculates the overall pfp rating for each participant based on the results of corporate and unit indicators and ratings for individual performance elements ; this rating is used to determine adjustments to the participant's salary and any lump sum award . the overall pfp rating is used to determine salary increases and any lump sum awards based on separate schedules that apply to eas and pces participants . first , for each participant , an overall rating is calculated based on the weighted outcomes for corporate and unit indicators and individual performance elements . since each indicator and individual performance element produces an outcome ranging from 1 to 15 , the overall rating also ranges from 1 to 15 . the rating is rounded to the nearest whole number for the purpose of determining the pfp award . for eas participants , all pfp awards are in the form of percentage increases to their salaries . for fiscal year 2008 , the pfp award can range from 0 to 12 percent of the eas participant's salary , as shown in figure 1 . for pces executives , pfp awards take the form of salary increases and lump sum awards . salary increases depend on the overall pfp rating , as well as each executive's current salary relative to the maximum of his or her salary range , as shown in table 1 .