section a . coordination with dod dcip stakeholders again , please enter the name of the asset for which this survey is being completed . what were the causes of each disruption ? what trends , if any , did you identify regarding causes of the disruptions ? how , if at all , did the disruption ( s ) affect the asset's mission ( s ) ? what actions , if any , did you take to mitigate the impact of the disruption ( s ) on the asset's mission ( s ) ? is this asset incorporated into its electricity provider's / utility's reconstitution or restoration planning ? ( mark only one response ) 34 . have any cyber or computer - based attacks or probes occurred that have negatively affected the delivery of electrical power to the asset or its supporting infrastructure ? ( mark only one response ) yes no skip to question #37 unknown skip to question #37 35 . how did you determine that such cyber or computer - based attacks or probes occurred ? ( mark only one response ) 36. who did you inform , if anyone , about the cyber or computer - based attacks or probes ? ( mark only one response ) 37 . were any assessments conducted between january 1 , 2006 , and december 31 , 2008 , that specifically examined ( 1 ) the vulnerabilities of this asset to electrical power disruptions and / or ( 2 ) the risks of electrical power disruptions to this asset ? ( mark only one response ) yes no skip to question #54 38 . what organization ( s ) conducted the assessment ( s ) ? what were the date ( s ) of the assessment ( s ) ? did the assessment ( s ) consider vulnerabilities or risks up to one node ( electrical power substation ) nearest to the installation or location of the critical asset ( i.e. , “one node beyond the fence” ) ? ( mark only one response ) 41 . did the assessment ( s ) consider vulnerabilities or risks beyond one node ( electrical power substation ) nearest to the installation or location of the critical asset ( i.e. , more than “one node beyond the fence” ) ? ( mark only one response ) 42 . which of the following vulnerabilities or risks listed below were identified from the assessments ? ( mark one response for each row ) a . the reliability and resiliency of a commercial or dod installation's power grid . b . the physical security of commercial and dod electrical power infrastructures . c. the cyber - security of commercial and dod electrical power infrastructures . d. the lack of back - up electrical generation capabilities ( maintenance , testing , fuel supplies , etc. ) e. single points of failure within commercial / dod electrical power infrastructures . f. the lack of contingency plans for addressing electrical power disruptions to critical assets . g. other vulnerability or risk please describe: 43 . what detail was provided about each vulnerability or risk identified in question #42 above ? were measures proposed or recommended to address or manage these vulnerabilities or risks ?