other activities . dcps spent the remaining payments on other activities in 2009 . for example , it provided $1.5 million to the capital gains program , which , in partnership with harvard university , provided financial literacy education and incentive payments for academic performance , behavior , and attendance to more than 3,000 students in grades six to eight . for the period between 2004 and 2008 , d.c. provided expenditure data showing that dcps used federal payments to fund a variety of programs for early childhood education , supplemental education , professional development activities , and supply purchases . while dcps worked to provide information on programs funded prior to 2009 , it could not locate detailed programmatic information on most expenditures to explain the goals , objectives , activities , and outcomes of these programs and we cannot , therefore , fully describe the use of federal payments for these years ( see figure 5 ) . according to dcps , prior administrations may not have consistently created or maintained documentation on some of the programs they implemented . for example , expenditure data indicate that between 2004 and 2007 , dcps used $37.4 million to fund a literacy improvement program ; however , dcps was unable to provide information to describe the program's goals , objectives , or outcomes . additionally , we were unable to characterize approximately 36 percent of the other activities because dcps could not provide information describing the expenditures beyond what was maintained for accounting purposes . in 2007 , for example , 27 schools received “high performance awards.” current dcps officials were not able to ascertain why those schools received the funds . the lack of detailed information to fully describe the programs for which funds were expended also precludes us from assessing whether dcps used funds as directed to do so by appropriations legislation . the 2005 district appropriation act states that dcps shall use not less than $2 million of that year's payments on a new incentive fund to reward improved schools and not less than $2 million on a transformation initiative directed to schools in need of improvement . while 20 expenditure data shows dcps spent $9.8 million on a literacy improvement program , we cannot determine whether these or the remaining funds appropriated in that year were used for the two initia outlined in legislation . expenditure data did not capture information linked to specific legislated initiatives , and according to agency officials , dcps does not have records of the plans that would describe the incentive fund or the transformation initiative . dcps program offices have employed a variety of methods to monitor contractor performance ; however , in practice we found evidence of weaknesses in carrying out some monitoring responsibilities possibly attributable to staff turnover and a lack of a formal process to reassign responsibilities when turnover occurs . specifically , in our revie and 2009 contract files , we found 7 of 14 files with incomplete documentation and evidence of review as well as missing files ( see appendix ii ) . dcps's office of contracts and acquisitions has policies that specify a program officer's responsibilities to monitor contractor pe program offices have flexibility on how to carry out these responsibilities .