increased pbgc premiums . mpra also increased the pbgc premiums for multiemployer plans from $12 to $26 ( per participant per plan year ) in 2015 and from $26 to $28 in plan year 2017 . the annual premium in subsequent years is indexed to changes in the national average wage index . creation of new framework of rules for partition . partition allows a multiemployer plan to split into two plans — the original and a successor . partitions are intended to relieve stress on the original plan by transferring the benefits of some participants to a successor plan funded by pbgc and to help retain participant benefits in the plans at levels higher than the pbgc - guaranteed levels . at the time the consent decree was established in 1982 , cspf had less than half the estimated funds needed to cover plan liabilities ( and to pay associated benefits over the lifetime of participants ) and it has not attained 100 percent of its estimated funding need since then , according to regulatory filings . cspf's 1982 form 5500 we reviewed shows that the plan was less than 40 percent funded prior to the consent decree becoming effective . over the next two decades , the plan generally made progress toward achieving its targeted level of funding but was never more than 75 percent funded , and funding has generally deteriorated since its 2002 filing ( see fig . overall , the plan's unfunded liability increased by approximately $11.2 billion ( in inflation - adjusted dollars ) between january 1983 and january 2016 . as a consequence , participant benefits were never fully secured by plan assets over this period , as measured by erisa's minimum funding standards , and the plan consistently needed to collect contributions in excess of those needed to fund new benefit accruals to try to make up for its underfunded status . cspf officials and other stakeholders identified several factors that contributed to cspf's critical financial condition and reflect the challenges faced by many multiemployer plans . for example , like cspf , many multiemployer plans have experienced financial difficulties due to a combination of investment losses and insufficient employer contributions . in addition to being underfunded prior to the consent decree going into effect , stakeholders identified other specific factors that contributed to cspf's critical financial condition , such as trends within the national trucking industry and its workforce , funding challenges and common investment practices of multiemployer plans , and the impact of market downturns on long - term investment performance . stakeholders also described the effects of the 2007 withdrawal of a key employer , united parcel service ( ups ) , on cspf's critical financial condition . ( see app . i for a timeline of key events affecting cspf. ) as previously mentioned , cspf was the subject of investigations in the 1970s by irs , dol , and doj .