geis . since 2005 , dod has monitored geis capacity - building activities through individual project reports that detail each activity completed , such as training for staff involved in surveillance studies and development of laboratory diagnostic capabilities . according to geis officials , dod does not plan to develop a framework to monitor and evaluate the impact of geis on countries' surveillance capacity , because capacity building in host countries is not geis's primary purpose . rather , geis's goal is to establish effective infectious disease surveillance and detection systems with the ultimate aim of ensuring the health of u.s. forces abroad . however , geis has reviewed some of its surveillance projects , and geis officials stated that the program's activities in the host nations have led to improved surveillance capacity for infectious diseases . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact david gootnick at ( 202 ) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . audrey solis , julie hirshen , reid lowe , diahanna post , elizabeth singer , and celia thomas made key contributions to this testimony and the report on which it was based . gdd . since 2006 , cdc has monitored the number of outbreaks that gdd has investigated , the numbers of participants in gdd long - term and short - term training , and examples of collaboration among gdd country programs . in addition , in 2006 , cdc developed a framework for evaluating progress toward gdd's five goals and collected data for 8 of 14 indicators . ( fig . 3 shows the gdd evaluation framework. ) however , as of july 2007 , the agency had not collected data on the two surveillance indicators to evaluate the program's contribution to improved surveillance . fetp . cdc has collected data such as the numbers of fetp trainees and graduates , the numbers of fetp graduates hired by public health ministries , the number of outbreak investigations conducted , and the number of surveillance evaluations conducted . in 2006 , cdc developed a framework for monitoring and evaluating fetps' impact on countries' health systems , with 13 indicators related to fetp activities ( see fig . 4 for the fetp indicators ) . cdc hopes to implement the framework fully by 2009 , but because fetps are collaborations between cdc and the host countries , the framework's implementation depends on country cooperation . idsr . since 2000 , cdc has collected data on activities completed under its idsr assistance program , including the number of job aids developed , the training materials adopted , and the number of training courses completed , and it reports on these activities annually to usaid . in 2003 , who / afro adopted 11 indicators , developed with input from cdc and usaid , to monitor and evaluate progress in implementing idsr in africa ( see fig . 5 for the idsr indicators ) .