pilot processes for this are expected to begin in 2019 . in summary , we recognize that the army is early in its modernization efforts but could make changes now that would be helpful . army futures command should implement not only the leading practices we describe as well as the lessons learned by its own cross - functional teams . the army should also increase the transparency of its efforts by clarifying how it evaluates its progress towards modernization goals and clearly stating the full costs of pursuing those goals . finally , the army can reduce the risk to the long - term modernization of its capabilities by ensuring that the technologies it uses in future weapon systems are fully mature . chairman norcross , ranking member hartzler , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact jon ludwigson , acting director , contracting and national security acquisitions at ( 202 ) 512-4841 , or ludwigsonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are j. kristopher keener ( assistant director ) , joe e. hunter ( analyst - in - charge ) , emily bond , matthew t. crosby , cale jones , kevin o'neill , john pendleton , and roxanna sun . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . these leading practices are listed in table 3 below . we found that the army futures command had implemented some of these practices , particularly leadership's dedication to the new command and the clear statement of its mission . however , we have previously reported that , according to federal internal controls standards , it is important to implement all of these practices in order to establish the organizational structure necessary to enable an entity to plan , execute , control , and assess the organization in achieving its objectives . establishment of this structure is particularly important for the army where leadership and its priorities can change frequently . for example , officials from the future vertical lift cross - functional team told us they will complete technology demonstrations on two competitive prototypes before choosing to develop a design for the future attack reconnaissance aircraft . however , we found that the army may continue its past practice of proceeding into system development with less mature technologies . in particular , we identified some plans to mature technologies in a relevant environment prior to authorizing the start of a new acquisition program , rather than the higher level of demonstrating them in an operational environment as recommended by our leading practices .