( see fig . if an alarm is triggered , the cargo container or vehicle is directed to a secondary inspection area for further inspection and clearance by a cbp officer using a handheld radiation detector that can identify the source of the radiation . dndo and pnnl officials we interviewed told us that , based on more recent studies and analysis , they believe the rpm fleet can last at least 20 years longer if it is properly maintained and spare parts remain available . specifically , a january 2015 study by cbp's data analysis center that examined 8 years of rpm performance data concluded that the fleet is in acceptable condition and will operate effectively for several years . the study also noted that the functionality of the plastic detector panels does not degrade significantly over time . a may 2015 dhs study — carried out expressly to determine the best alternatives for replacing rpms as they began to reach the end of their service lives — concluded that , assuming proper maintenance and parts availability continues , the concept of rpm life span is not useful , in part because there has been no measurable operational degradation of the rpm fleet . the study noted that cbp intends to continue to maintain rpms at nearly 100 percent operability , resulting in no loss of functionality as they age . the study found no reason to believe that parts would become obsolete or unavailable , and noted that , under rpm maintenance contracts , parts are replaced or repaired as soon as they are observed to have failed . the study concluded that the rpms could operate until 2030 at current levels of functionality , and stated that any decision to replace the systems should be predicated on the need for improved functionality rather than because of concerns over aging . underlying this conclusion was an assumption that maintenance costs would not increase appreciably over the period evaluated . dndo officials we interviewed explained that cbp has maintenance contracts with the rpm vendors that ensure the fleet can remain nearly 100 percent operational for many years . furthermore , cbp and pnnl track maintenance data for trends in component failure rates that might indicate problems with the fleet or any significant maintenance cost increases , and officials told us that no troubling trends exist . in march 2016 , leidos confirmed to cbp in writing that it is capable of and committed to supplying parts for its rpms until at least 2021 and expects to be able to do so through 2026 . in addition , officials told us that they have not faced any barriers to replacing rpm components to date . ( see fig . cbp officials that we interviewed indicated that they have no reason to believe that parts will not remain available as long as the rpms are still in use . based on the new conclusions about rpm service life , in 2016 dndo changed the focus of its strategy from replacing the rpm fleet because of aging to selective replacement of rpms at specific sites to gain operational efficiencies , as discussed later in this report .