autism . between fiscal years 2000 and 2010 , autism applications more than quadrupled from 5,430 to 23,203 , and medical allowances increased similarly from 5,050 to 20,319 ( see fig . as of december 2010 , about 95,000 ( 11 percent ) children with mental impairments were receiving ssi benefits due to autism . dds examiners have generally found the vast majority of those children applying for ssi on the basis of autism medically eligible for benefits . ssa officials attributed the increase in the number of autism applications and medical allowances over the years to greater incidence of autism among children and explained that some children who may have previously been diagnosed as intellectually disabled are instead being diagnosed as autistic . according to one study ssa cited , the prevalence of autism in children has increased from 0.6 per 1,000 live births in 1994 to 3.1 per 1,000 live births in 2003 , while the prevalence of intellectual disability decreased by 2.8 per 1,000 live births in 2003 . in our preliminary work , dds officials reported that they rely on a combination of key medical and nonmedical information — such as medical records , prescribed medications , school records , and teacher and parent assessments — in determining a child's medical eligibility . several dds officials said that when making a determination , they consider the totality of information related to the child's impairments , rather than one piece of information in isolation . with regard to the medical information used by examiners , ssa generally requires dds examiners to assist children and their parents or guardians in obtaining medical records in an effort to develop at least a 1-year - long medical history prior to applying for benefits . according to many of the dds officials we interviewed , examiners attempt to obtain medical evidence , such as psychological tests , physician's notes , and mental health records , for children with alleged mental impairments . if such evidence is not available or existing evidence is inconclusive , some dds officials we spoke with said that they will purchase a consultative examination for the child . this examination is intended to provide the additional medical evidence , such as results of a physical examination and laboratory findings , needed for a determination . however , many dds officials told us that such examinations are only a “snap - shot” in time and do not provide a longitudinal view of the child's functioning over time . for this reason , some dds officials said that information from a treating source with a long - standing relationship with the child , such as a physician , is more useful . in response to concerns among many about the role medication plays in the determination process , we asked ssa and dds officials how information about a child's use of prescribed medications is used , and they told us it is generally given no more weight than any other medical or nonmedical information in determining a child's medical eligibility .