treasury issues tips in electronic form . at auction , an investor can place competitive or noncompetitive bids for tips . however , noncompetitive bids are limited in a single auction to $5 million while competitive bids are limited to 35 percent of the initial offering amount . investors can hold tips until they mature or sell them in the secondary market before they mature . for a sufficiently lengthy time horizon the cost of treasury inflation protected securities ( tips ) relative to nominal treasury securities should be the same when calculated on both an ex - ante ( before the fact ) and ex - post ( after the fact ) basis , all else equal . two primary factors affect this difference . the first is the illiquidity premium associated with tips , which raises the interest rate on tips relative to nominal securities . we address the following questions: what are the debt management challenges associated with planning for future borrowing needs given the long - term fiscal outlook and treasury's increased borrowing due to economic and financial sector stress ? what role , if any , should tips play in treasury's borrowing program ? congress has assigned to treasury the responsibility of borrowing the funds necessary to finance the gap between cash - in and cash - out , subject to a statutory limit . treasury's primary debt management goal is to finance the government's borrowing needs at the lowest cost over time . issuing debt predictably through regularly scheduled auctions lowers borrowing costs because investors and dealers value liquidity and certainty of supply . treasury responds to increases in borrowing needs in a traditional manner , by first increasing the issuance size of existing securities ; then , increasing the frequency of issuances ; and finally , introducing new securities to its auction calendar as necessary . treasury normally auctions nominal marketable securities that range in maturity from 4 weeks to 30 years and sells them at auction on a pre - announced schedule . treasury also issues cash management bills that are not part of the regular schedule to meet immediate cash needs . treasury securities are widely viewed as the premium risk - free asset and are actively used by investors , traders , and foreign central banks for hedging , liquidity , and reserve purposes . the outstanding mix of u.s. treasury securities can have a significant influence on the federal government's interest payments . longer term securities typically carry higher interest rates ( which translate to increased cost to the government ) , primarily due to concerns about future inflation . however , these longer term securities offer the government the certainty of fixing the interest payments over a longer period and reduce the amount of debt that treasury needs to refinance in the short term . in contrast , shorter term securities generally carry lower interest rates but add volatility to the government's interest costs and require treasury to conduct more frequent auctions to refinance maturing debt . during the 1980s and 1990s , a number of countries introduced inflation - indexed securities to their debt offerings , including the united kingdom , france , and the united states .