we agree with this assessment . the letter further notes that double counting of payments on existing contracts could be a problem if gsa requires banks to include transactions over $2,500 . as we discuss on page 11 of this report , according to a dod official , this issue is not a concern ; however , the working group , led by gsa , may want to clarify this issue in subsequent meetings . bank of america's comments appear in appendix iv . austin - tetra provided written comments , concurring with our findings and providing additional recommendations to gsa for obtaining socioeconomic data , such as providing incentives for merchants to submit socioeconomic data to their banks . the letter notes that these steps would come at an additional cost to the government . austin - tetra's comments appear in appendix v. in oral comments , office of federal procurement policy officials concurred with our findings , stating that the report is balanced and accurately portrays the difficulties the government faces in collecting socioeconomic data on purchase card merchants . they suggested that we add more background information on the impetus for gsa's data collection effort . a visa official provided oral comments . he concurred with our report , stating that it was enlightening , "on the mark," and helped to clarify some misconceptions . the official noted that there is a tradeoff between the desired level of accuracy and the cost of obtaining socioeconomic information on purchase card merchants . he said that , because the purchase card makes up a relatively small proportion of total procurement dollars , the level of granularity the government is requesting might not be worth the dollars needed to obtain this information on each merchant . further , the official pointed out that there is little known about how the purchase card affects small businesses . therefore , visa's position is that care must be taken not to assume that the effects are negative . visa also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in e - mail comments , a us bank official generally concurred with our findings . however , he stated that our recommendations failed to account for the inherent challenges the government faces in its efforts to collect socioeconomic data on purchase card merchants . the official stated that the government contracted with the banks for a “commercially standard” purchase card program , but then sought to require a number of non - standard features from the contractors . he stressed that the issuing banks and payment card associations have very limited leverage to elicit this information from merchants . he suggested that gsa ask the banks to report only that information that is in their purview and expertise — namely , transaction data — and that gsa could then use government - owned or private sector services to match the transaction data against socioeconomic databases . technical comments were incorporated as appropriate . representatives from mastercard and citibank provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as requested by your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter .