sgr spending targets are cumulative . that is , the sum of all physician services spending since 1996 is compared to the sum of all annual targets since the same year to determine whether spending has fallen short of , equaled , or exceeded the sgr targets . the use of cumulative targets means , for example , that if actual spending has exceeded the sgr system targets , fee updates in future years must be lowered sufficiently both to offset the accumulated excess spending and to slow expected spending for the coming year . cms calculates changes in physician input prices based on the growth in the costs of providing physician services as measured by the medicare economic index , growth in the costs of providing laboratory tests as measured by the consumer price index for urban consumers , and growth in the cost of medicare part b prescription drugs included in sgr spending . under the sgr and mvps systems , the secretary of health and human services defined physician services to include “services and supplies incident to physicians' services,” such as laboratory tests and most part b prescription drugs . under sgr , spending per beneficiary adjusted for the estimated underlying cost of providing physician services is allowed to grow at the same rate that the national economy grows over time on a per - capita basis — currently projected to be slightly more than 2 percent annually . if volume and intensity grow faster , the annual increase in physician fees will be less than the estimated increase in the cost of providing services . conversely , if volume and intensity grow more slowly than 2 percent annually , the sgr system permits physicians to benefit from fee increases that exceed the increased cost of providing services . to reduce the effect of business cycles on physician fees , mma modified the sgr system to require that economic growth be measured as the 10-year moving average change in real per capita gdp . this measure is projected to range from 2.1 percent to 2.5 percent during the 2005 through 2014 period . ( see fig . over time , medicare's spending target system has been revised and renamed . the sgr system , medicare's current system for updating physician fees , was established in the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba ) and was first used to adjust fees in 1999 . following the implementation of the fee schedule and spending targets in 1992 , through 1999 , average annual growth in volume and intensity of service use per beneficiary fell to 1.1 percent . more recently volume and intensity growth has trended upward , rising at an average annual rate of about 5 percent from 2000 through 2003 . although this average annual rate of growth remains substantially below that experienced before spending targets were introduced , the recent increases in volume and intensity growth are a reminder that inflationary pressures continue to challenge efforts to moderate growth in physician expenditures . the sgr system establishes spending targets to moderate physician services spending increases caused by excess growth in volume and intensity . sgr's spending targets do not cap expenditures for physician services .