( see fig . in 2013 , two - thirds of the representatives associated with initial claims were attorneys and one - third were nonattorneys . in addition to states and counties , other third parties — such as hospitals and private insurance companies — also contract for ssi / di advocacy services . for example , hospitals contract with companies to obtain reimbursement for medical care provided to patients who do not have health insurance by helping patients establish eligibility for various federal , state , and county programs , such as ssi and medicaid . insurance companies may also contract with companies to help individuals receiving long - term disability benefits apply for federal disability benefits , in part because federal disability benefits can reduce the amount the insurance company must pay . states — and county and local governments , in some cases — administer a number of assistance programs for low - income individuals and families , some of whom have disabilities that may qualify them for federal disability programs . in many instances , these low - income individuals can qualify for ssi due to their income and assets , among other factors . some may also qualify for di benefits , if they have a sufficient work history . if an initial application is denied , the representative may schedule another appointment with the claimant to review the case and determine whether to file a reconsideration or , later , an appeal . approach to ssi / di advocacy in 2014 , minnesota contracted with 55 organizations across the state , ranging from small law firms to large for - profit and nonprofit organizations . some organizations served individuals statewide , while others served specific geographic areas or populations , such as tribal communities . minnesota's request for proposals for ssi / di advocacy services had two components: one for its general ssi / di advocacy program and another for its ssi / ssdi outreach , access , and recovery ( soar ) program . we used data from a 2014 report issued by ssa's oig to estimate the percentage of initial claims in 2010 with nonattorney representatives working under a government ssi / di advocacy contract , as well as the percentage that were potentially working under contract with another third party , such as a hospital or long - term disability insurance company . as part of its report , the oig selected a random sample of 275 ssi and di adjudicated claims from the population of 857,855 adjudicated claims with a representative in calendar year 2010 , 201 of which were for initial claim determinations . of these 201 initial claim determinations , 83 were represented by nonattorney representatives , while the remainder had attorney representatives . the oig used information in the claim files , as well as internet research , to determine the type of nonattorney representative associated with each sampled claim . the oig did not conduct similar work for claims with attorney representatives . we independently reviewed and verified the oig's work papers for the sampled claims with a nonattorney representative , including selected documents from the electronic claim files .