we agree with these statements . the purpose of this report was not to suggest that iraq be the standard for all future conflicts or to restrict commanders' planning prerogatives . instead , the report suggests that as dod incorporates oif lessons learned into joint doctrine , it includes what is a key oif lesson learned — an adversary's stockpile of conventional munitions can be an asymmetric threat to u.s. forces . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared remarks . iraqi resistance was unlikely . although the oif war plan laid out the probability of several courses of action that the regime might take in response to an invasion , the plan did not consider the possibility of protracted , organized iraqi resistance to u.s. and coalition forces after the conclusion of major combat operations . as a result , dod officials stated that the regime's conventional munitions storage sites were not considered a significant risk . postwar iraq would not be a u.s. military responsibility . the oif war planning , according to a joint forces command lessons learned report , was based on the assumption that the bulk of the iraqi government would remain in place after major combat operations and therefore civil functions , including rebuilding and humanitarian assistance , could be shifted from military forces to u.s. and international organizations and , ultimately , the iraqis , within about 18 months after the end of major combat operations . therefore , dod initially did not plan for an extended occupation of the country or the level of troops that would be needed to secure conventional munitions storage sites in particular or the country in general . joint assessments further showed that oif planning assumptions contributed to security challenges in iraq . according to a 2006 report by the joint center for operational analysis , oif planning did not examine the consequences of those assumptions proving wrong , further contributing to insufficient force levels to prevent the breakdown of civil order in iraq . the joint staff strategic - level lessons learned report also discussed the effect inaccurate planning assumptions had on force levels . according to this report , overemphasis on planning assumptions that could not be validated prior to critical decision points resulted in a force structure plan that did not consider several missions requiring troops , such as providing security for enemy conventional munitions storage sites . despite prewar intelligence assessments of large amounts of conventional munitions , knowledgeable dod officials stated that dod did not set up a central office until july 2003 or set up a program to centrally manage and destroy iraqi munitions until after august 2003 . these steps were taken well after major combat operations were completed in may 2003 , because the department did not perceive conventional munitions storage sites as a threat . the central office was initially set up to address operational problems found during an assessment of nine iraqi sites . this assessment found that dod lacked priorities for securing the sites and uniform procedures and practices for securing and disposing of munitions . it also uncovered serious safety problems in the handling , transportation , storage , and disposal of munitions .