other markets have developed this kind of management report . in response to concerns about the effectiveness of nasdaq's listing department , we recommended in 1998 that sec require nasd to develop management reports based on overall program statistics . the remaining markets had significantly fewer listings . for example , the fourth - largest market in terms of the number of companies listed was the boston stock exchange , with 84 listings , 46 of which were also listed on nasdaq . in 1998 , the national association of securities dealers ( nasd ) , which also owns and operates nasdaq , purchased amex . although amex retained its independence as an exchange , in july 1999 its equity listing program was moved from new york city to gaithersburg , maryland , and integrated with the nasdaq listing program . in june 2000 , nasd completed the first phase of its plan to restructure nasdaq as a stand - alone stock - based organization . according to amex officials , as a result of this restructuring , the amex equity listing department began moving back to new york in november 2000 , and the move was completed about 6 months later . under federal law and consistent with its responsibilities as an sro , each u.s. market establishes and implements the rules that govern equity listings in its market with the intent of maintaining the quality of the markets and public confidence in them . in general , a company applies to have its stock listed for trading in a specific market , subject to that market's rules . this process includes submitting an application for review , together with supporting information such as financial statements , a prospectus , a proxy statement , and relevant share distribution information . as part of making an initial listing decision , the market's equity listing department reviews these submissions for compliance with its listing requirements and conducts background checks of company officers and other insiders . ocie reported in april 2001 that the amex listing department was generally thorough in its financial and regulatory reviews of companies seeking to be listed on the exchange . however , ocie also reported that amex was using its discretionary authority more often than was appropriate to approve initial listings that did not meet the exchange's quantitative guidelines , and that it did so without providing sufficient disclosure to the investing public . ocie reported that the percentage of companies amex listed that did not meet the exchange's initial quantitative guidelines increased from approximately 9 percent for the 20 months between january 1 , 1998 , and august 31 , 1999 , to approximately 22 percent for the subsequent 14.5 months ending on november 13 , 2000 . ocie noted that although amex's listing guidelines are discretionary , investors rightfully presume that the companies listed on amex generally meet its quantitative and qualitative guidelines . in response to concerns that the investing public was not receiving sufficient information about the eligibility of companies to trade on amex , ocie recommended that amex amend its rules to provide mandatory initial quantitative listing requirements .