( app . ii provides a summary of the navy's decision to homeport a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier at naval station mayport , florida , and information on dod's quadrennial defense review of the navy's decision. ) we conducted our performance audit from july 2009 through may 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the possibility of homeporting a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier at naval station mayport was considered by congress as early as 1990 in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1991 , which required the secretary of defense to submit to congress a plan to upgrade naval station mayport capability to enable the station to service nuclear - powered aircraft carriers and otherwise to serve as a homeport for these carriers . since that time , provisions of other national defense authorization acts have required , among other things , that the secretary of the navy ( 1 ) submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the navy's plan for developing a second east coast homeport for nuclear - powered aircraft carriers and ( 2 ) begin design activities for such military construction projects as may be necessary to make mayport capable of serving as a homeport for a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier . in addition , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1993 included a congressional finding that naval station mayport ought to be the second east coast homeport for nuclear - powered aircraft carriers when an additional homeport was needed . the following are examples of how each of these services incorporated one of the key elements and the management control standards during its basing process: strategic and force structure planning element: according to army planning officials , they would ask about the strategic risk of performing a mission or not performing a mission and would complete tactical and strategic risk analyses using army's force structure . infrastructure analysis element: in implementing their guidance , the marine corps required that a list of location alternatives and associated implications be submitted to the marine requirements oversight council for approval . implementation considerations element: according to officials , the air force would rank the potential locations and determine which locations could best meet the air force's basing needs . management control standards: the army , marine corps , and air force guidance documents clearly defined which office is responsible for each step of the process and who had the authority to make decisions at various steps , allowed for oversight and review of decisions made at critical steps , and developed records associated with various steps that provided evidence that the process was being followed . we also found that the navy incorporated to a large extent three out of the four key elements in its basing process .