in response to your request , we are addressing this report to you . the reporting and record keeping requirements of the bsa regulations create a paper trail for law enforcement to investigate money laundering schemes and other illegal activities . as reported by treasury's oig in its 2004 fisma report , 100 percent of irs employees received security awareness training ; however , only 28 percent of irs government and contractor employees with significant security responsibilities received specialized training . security administration staff at the facility stated that they were largely self - taught in security software and that only one staff member in the past 2 years had received technical mainframe security training . consequently , the staff was not knowledgeable about some of the more recent technical advances relating to the mainframe operating system and security software . subsequent to the completion of our fieldwork , the chief of mass informed us that he formally assigned information system security officers for each of the irs campuses and computing centers , and the irs network and held specialized training for these officers . the final key element of an information security program is ongoing testing and evaluation to ensure that systems are in compliance with policies , and that policies and controls are both appropriate and effective . assignment of rights and permissions must be carefully considered to avoid giving users unnecessary access to sensitive files and directories . irs routinely permitted excessive access to the facility's computer systems — mainframes , unix , and windows — that support sensitive taxpayer and bank secrecy act data and to critical datasets and files . access controls over the mainframe computing environment did not logically separate irs's data from fincen's data . as a result , an unauthorized user could gain access to these network devices and gain control of the facility's network , placing irs and fincen data at risk . further , this unauthorized control could seriously disrupt computer operations . for example , irs granted all 7,460 mainframe users — irs employees , non - irs employees , contractors — regardless of their official duties , the ability to read and modify sensitive taxpayer and bank secrecy act data , including information about citizens , law enforcement personnel , and individuals subject to investigation . organizations accomplish this by implementing system or security software that provides an audit trail for determining the source of a transaction or attempted transaction and for monitoring users' activities . how organizations configure the system or security software determines the nature and extent of audit trail information that is provided . to be effective , organizations should ( 1 ) configure the software to collect and maintain sufficient audit trails for security - related events ; ( 2 ) generate reports that selectively identify unauthorized , unusual , and sensitive access activity ; and ( 3 ) regularly monitor and take action on these reports . without sufficient auditing and monitoring , organizations increase the risk that they may not detect unauthorized activities or policy violations . the risks created by the serious electronic access control weaknesses discussed above were heightened because irs did not effectively audit and monitor system activity on its servers .