iraq rejected the terms of this resolution . second attempt to create an oil for food program . iraq rejected the terms of this resolution . authorized transferring money produced by any iraqi oil transaction on or after august 6 , 1990 , which had been deposited into the escrow account , to the states or accounts concerned as long as the oil exports took place or until sanctions were lifted . allowed iraq to sell $1 billion worth of oil every 90 days . proceeds were to be used to procure foodstuffs , medicine , and material and supplies for essential civilian needs . resolution 986 was supplemented by several u.n. resolutions over the next 7 years that extended the oil for food program for different periods of time and increased the amount of exported oil and imported humanitarian goods . we are trying to obtain these audits . the sanctions committee was responsible for three key elements of the oil for food program: ( 1 ) monitoring implementation of the sanctions , ( 2 ) screening contracts to prevent the purchase of items that could have military uses , and ( 3 ) approving iraq's oil and commodity contracts . u.n. security council resolution 661 of 1990 directs all states to prevent iraq from exporting petroleum products into their territories . paragraph 6 of resolution 661 establishes a sanctions committee to report to the security council on states' compliance with the sanctions and recommend actions regarding effective implementation . as early as june 1996 , the maritime interception force , a naval force of coalition partners including the united states and great britain , informed the sanctions committee that oil was being smuggled out of iraq through iranian territorial waters . in december 1996 , iran acknowledged the smuggling and reported that it had taken action . in october 1997 , the sanctions committee was again informed about smuggling through iranian waters . according to multiple sources , oil smuggling also occurred through jordan , turkey , syria , and the gulf . smuggling was a major source of illicit revenue for the former iraqi regime through 2002 . it is unclear what recommended actions the sanctions committee made to the security council to address the continued smuggling . a primary function of the members of the sanctions committee was to review and approve contracts for items that could be used for military purposes . for example , the united states conducted the most thorough review ; about 60 u.s. government technical experts assessed each item in a contract to determine its potential military application . according to u.n. secretariat data in 2002 , the united states was responsible for about 90 percent of the holds placed on goods to be exported to iraq . as of april 2002 , about $5.1 billion of worth of goods were being held for shipment to iraq . under security council resolution 986 of 1995 , paragraphs 1 and 8 , the sanctions committee was responsible for approving iraq's oil contracts , particularly to ensure that the contract price is fair , and for approving most of iraq's commodity contracts .