this fee was instituted in 1994 . it is higher than dispensing fees paid by pharmacy benefit managers , which average around $2.00 , and is comparable to many state medicaid programs , which range from $2.00 to over $6.00 . such redistributions have occurred and some are significant . oncologists , who represent the majority of physicians billing for drugs , argue that medicare's payments for administering chemotherapy are inappropriately low and that the excess medicare drug payments are needed to offset their losses . yet oncology is one of the specialties to gain under the resource - based physician fee schedule . in our separate study on physicians' practice expenses under medicare's fee schedule , we will show that payments to oncologists were 8 percent higher than they would have been if the prior charge - based payment method had been maintained ; the study will also show that oncologists' payments relative to their estimated practice expenses , which include chemotherapy administration , were close to the average for all specialties . while oncologists do not appear disadvantaged overall under the fee schedule , adjustments hcfa made to the basic method of computing payments reduced fees for some oncologists' services . in those adjustments , hcfa modified the basic method in computing payments for services delivered without direct physician involvement , like much of chemotherapy administration . the modifications were intended to correct for perceived low payments for these services . while they increased payments for some of these services , they lowered them for many others . moreover , they increased payments on average for services involving physicians . oncology payments were particularly affected , as services without physician involvement constitute about one - third of oncologists' medicare - billed services , compared to about 5 percent of all physician - billed services . because of the modifications to the basic method , oncology practice expense payments for nonphysician chemotherapy administration were on average 15 percent lower , while payments for physician - administered services were 1 percent higher , than if hcfa had used the basic method . across all services , the modifications resulted in oncology practice expense payments that were 6 percent lower . using the basic method for all services would eliminate these reductions and add about $31 million to oncology payments . our study will recommend that cms revert to the use of the basic methodology to determine practice expense payments for all services . we will also recommend that cms address a data adjustment it made that affects oncology payments under the new fee schedule . the agency reduced oncology's reported supply expenses to keep from paying twice for drugs that are reimbursed separately by medicare . oncologists acknowledge that the supply expense estimate needed to be reduced , but argue that the reduction was too large . we have recommended that the agency develop the appropriate data to more accurately estimate oncology supply expenses . substituting a supply expense estimate based on a methodology developed by the american society of clinical oncology would raise practice expense payments an additional $20 million , if done in conjunction with our recommendation to use the basic method to calculate payments for all services .