gao - 05-778t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact linda koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or koontzl@gao.gov . in its report , gao recommended that omb and the agencies take steps to improve review processes and compliance with the act . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao also suggested that the congress may wish to consider mandating pilot projects to target some collections for rigorous analysis along the lines of the irs and epa approaches . omb and the agencies agreed with most of the recommendations , but disagreed with aspects of gao's characterization of agencies' compliance with the act's requirements . madam chairman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss the implementation of the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) . as you know , the primary goals of the act are to minimize the government paperwork burden on the public while maximizing the public benefit and utility of the information collections that the government undertakes . to achieve these goals , the pra includes a range of provisions that establish standards and procedures for effective implementation and oversight . among these provisions is the requirement for the office of management and budget ( omb ) to report annually to the congress on the estimated burden imposed on the public by government information collections ( forms , surveys , and questionnaires ) . another requirement is that agencies not establish information collections without having them approved by omb , and that before submitting them for approval , agencies' chief information officers ( cio ) certify that the collection meets 10 specified standards ( for example , that it avoids unnecessary duplication and minimizes burden ) . as you requested , i will begin by commenting briefly today on the estimates of government paperwork burden provided in the annual pra report ( known as the information collection budget ) that omb recently released , which presents federal agencies' estimates of federal paperwork burden as of the end of fiscal year 2004 . i will then discuss results from a report that we prepared on pra processes and compliance , which is being released today . i will concentrate on our findings regarding agencies' processes to certify that information collections meet pra standards and on alternative processes that two agencies have used to minimize burden . in preparing this testimony , we reviewed our testimonies on previous annual pra reports as well as examining the most recent one . for our discussion of the certification process , we drew on our report , for which we performed detailed reviews of paperwork clearance processes and collections at four agencies: the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , the department of labor , and the internal revenue service ( irs ) . together , these four agencies represent a broad range of paperwork burdens , and in 2003 , they accounted for about 83 percent of the 8.1 billion hours of estimated paperwork burden for all federal agencies . of this total , irs alone accounted for about 80 percent .