security cannot be guaranteed . nevertheless , it is important that we take steps to identify and mitigate risks to passenger rail systems . while domestic rail agencies have implemented a number of security practices that are generally consistent with those of foreign rail operators , they have not adopted some practices used in other countries , including covert testing , random screening , and information clearinghouses for new security technologies and best practices . despite the potential political , legal , fiscal , and cultural challenges that implementing these additional practices in the united states could pose , we continue to believe that the practices may warrant further examination , and we stand by our september 2005 recommendations that dhs , in collaboration with dot and the passenger rail industry , evaluate the feasibility of implementing them . as we move forward with efforts to enhance rail transit security , it is important that we do not examine rail transit security actions and funding in isolation . rail transit systems represent one of many modes of transportation competing for limited federal security resources . these practices are discussed below . covert testing: two of the 13 foreign rail systems we visited use covert testing to keep employees alert about their security responsibilities . covert testing involves security staff staging unannounced events to test the response of railroad staff to incidents such as suspicious packages or alarms . in one european system , security staff place suspicious items throughout their system to see how long it takes operating staff to respond to the items . similarly , one asian rail operator's security staff break security seals on fire extinguishers and open alarmed emergency doors randomly to see how long it takes staff to respond . officials of these operators stated that these tests are carried out daily and are beneficial because the staff know they could be tested at any moment and are therefore more likely to be vigilant about security . random screening: of the 13 foreign operators we interviewed , 2 conducts some form of random screening of passengers and their baggage . in the systems where this practice is used , security personnel can approach passengers either in stations or on the trains and ask them to submit their persons or their baggage to a search . passengers declining to cooperate must leave the system . also , fra and tsa officials told us that the details of how tsa rail inspectors will coordinate with the approximately 400 existing fra safety inspectors and 160 state employees enforcing fra passenger rail rules and regulations remain to be determined . both fra and tsa stated that they were committed to avoiding duplication of effort and would work to communicate their respective roles and responsibilities to transit agency officials . another area requiring continued coordination is the funding of rail transit security activities . specifically , the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ) included a provision mandating that dot and dhs collaborate on a joint rulemaking for the transit security grant program . several other operators said they were interested in exploring this technology .