professional development . ccdf administrators we interviewed recognize professional development as key to high - quality child care for all children , including nonsubsidized children . the ccdbg act requires states to describe the training and professional development requirements designed to enable ccdf providers to promote the social , emotional , physical , and cognitive development of children . according to hhs , states must also require ongoing training for ccdf providers that is accessible , appropriate to the age and setting of the children served , and aligned to a progression of professional development that includes a minimum number of annual hours of training for the child care workforce . as with certain other ccdbg act requirements , a majority of states we interviewed have established the same professional development requirements for all licensed child care providers , whether or not they care for subsidized children , according to state officials . one ccdf administrator said that the updated ccdf requirements for subsidized providers were an impetus for her state to raise the training requirements for providers that do not care for children receiving subsidies and that are unlicensed . she said the updated , more comprehensive training requirements help ensure that all children are in care with child care providers that parents can trust . ccdf administrators also highlighted characteristics of their states' professional development activities that serve to positively impact nonsubsidized children as well — namely , availability , accessibility , and affordability of professional development opportunities to child care providers . for example , state officials told us of making these opportunities available to all child care providers through online training courses , training and onsite consultation from child care resource and referral agencies , technical assistance and coaching , and resource lending libraries . nearly all states we interviewed use their states' quality set - aside funds to support such training , technical assistance , and / or coaching opportunities . where training may not be free , ccdf administrators told us of financial incentives that assist child care providers in their efforts to increase quality through professional development . for example , several states use their quality set - aside funds to offer scholarship grant programs available to child care providers to help increase their qualifications , whether or not they care for subsidized children . one state offers incentive payments based on a provider's level of attainment in the state's career ladder , for which all providers are eligible to apply , according to its ccdf administrator , and can result in provider development that benefits the nonsubsidized children in their care . in addition to spending on quality activities , states reported through our interviews that nonsubsidized children also indirectly benefit from state spending on subsidies . according to officials in many of the 15 states that we interviewed , states' spending on subsidies helps increase the economic stability of ccdf providers , which , in turn , also benefits nonsubsidized children in their care . officials said that subsidizing providers to help pay for the cost of care for eligible families can provide a consistent source of revenue for ccdf providers that allows them to continue stable operations , invest in professional development , and increase teacher pay , for example .