identify risks . assemble a comprehensive list of risks — both threats and opportunities — that could affect the agency's ability to achieve its goals and objectives . assess risks . examine risks , considering both the likelihood of the risk and the impact of the risk to help prioritize risk response . respond to the risks . select risk treatment response ( based on risk appetite ) , including acceptance , avoidance , reduction , sharing , or transfer . site assessment . epa , states , tribes , or other federal agencies evaluate site conditions to identify appropriate responses to releases of hazardous substances to the environment . during this process , epa or other entities , such as state or tribal agencies , collect data to identify , evaluate , and rank sites using agency criteria . site listing . epa considers whether to list a site on the npl based on a variety of factors , including the availability of alternative state or federal programs that may be used to clean up the site . sites that epa proposes to list on the npl are published in the federal register . after a period of public comment , epa reviews the comments and makes final decisions on whether to list the sites on the npl . remedial investigation and feasibility study . epa or the prp will generally begin the remedial cleanup process for an npl site by conducting a two - part study of the site . first , epa or the prp conducts a remedial investigation to characterize site conditions and assess the risks to human health and the environment , among other actions . second , epa or the prp conducts a feasibility study to assess various alternatives to address the problems identified through the remedial investigation . under the national contingency plan , epa considers nine criteria , including long - term effectiveness and permanence , in its assessment of alternative remedial actions . nonfederal npl sites may include a variety of contaminants , and epa may select different types of remedies to clean up the sites . epa had recorded more than 500 contaminants at nonfederal npl sites as of fiscal year 2014 , the most recently available data . according to the agency for toxic substances and disease registry , the highest - priority contaminants — based on a combination of their prevalence , toxicity , and potential for human exposure — are arsenic , lead , mercury , vinyl chloride , and polychlorinated biphenyls . for example , in 2016 , the agency for toxic substances and disease registry reported that exposure to arsenic in drinking water is associated with various health effects , such as pulmonary and cardiovascular disease , diabetes , and certain cancers . contaminants may be found in different media at nonfederal npl sites . in 2017 , epa reported that groundwater and soil were the most common contaminated media , including at the nonfederal npl sites it analyzed . to clean up a nonfederal npl site , epa may select various on - site or off - site remedies .