, tax credits in new zealand ) . unlike hong kong's twice a year payments for the salaries tax , the u.s. income tax on wages relies on periodic tax withholding in which tax is paid as income is earned . irs provides guidance ( eg , publication 15 ) on how and when employers should withhold income tax ( eg , every other week ) and deposit the withheld income taxes ( eg , monthly ) . further , the u.s. individual tax rates are higher and the system is more complex . these tax rates begin at 10 percent and progress to 35 percent . further , the u.s. taxes many forms of income beyond salary income on the individual tax return . irs officials learn about foreign tax practices by participating in international organizations of tax administrators . by doing so , irs officials say they regularly exchange ideas and learn about other practices . as the irs learns of these practices , it may adopt the practice based on the needs of the u.s. tax system . irs is actively involved in two international tax organizations and one jointly run program that addresses common tax administration issues . first , the irs participates with the center for inter - american tax administration ( ciat ) , a forum made up of 38 member countries and associate members , which exchange experiences with the aim of improving tax administration . ciat , formed in 1967 , is to promote integrity and transparency of tax administrators , promote compliance , and fight tax fraud . the irs participates with ciat in designing and developing tax administration products and with ciat's international tax planning control committee . second , the irs participates with the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) forum on tax administration ( fta ) , which is chaired by the irs commissioner during 2011 . the fta was created in july 2002 to promote dialogue between tax administrations and identify good tax administration practices . since 2002 , the forum has issued over 50 comparative analyses on tax administration issues to assist member and selected nonmember countries . irs and oecd officials exchange tax administration knowledge . for example , the irs is participating in the oecd's first peer review of information exchanged under tax treaties and tax information exchange agreements . under the peer - review process , senior tax officials from several oecd countries examine each selected member's legal and regulatory framework and evaluate members' implementation of oecd tax standards . the peer - review report on irs information exchange practices is expected to be published in mid 2011 . as for the jointly run program , the joint international tax shelter information centre ( jitsic ) attempts to supplement ongoing work in each country to identify and curb abusive tax schemes by exchanging information on these schemes . jitsic was formed in 2004 and now includes australia , canada , china , japan , south korea , united kingdom and the u.s. tax agencies .