any differences are then attributed to the effects of deregulation . some studies using this approach have used the standard industry fare level ( sifl ) to approximate the regulated fare and concluded that consumers as a whole have benefited from lower fares resulting from deregulation . for example , in 2005 rose and borenstein compared postderegulation fares to the sifl and estimated that 2004 fares were about 30 percent lower than what the comparative regulated fares would have been , resulting in a $5 billion savings to passengers that year . likewise , winston and morrison used the same proxy in 1995 and estimated that real fares declined about 33 percent from 1976 to 1993 . after adjusting the sifl data to account for presumed productivity gains and increased load factors , they estimated that , on average , deregulation led to fares 22 percent lower than they would have been in a regulated environment , resulting in an annual savings of about $12.4 billion in 1993 dollars over the same period . the experience of unregulated ( i.e. , state - regulated ) intrastate service in texas and california provided support for this expectation . moreover , prior to deregulation , industry analysts — on the basis of conventional economic reasoning — expected that opportunities for increased competition would increase the number of airlines operating in many markets , thereby lowering fares and expanding service . the airline deregulation act established specific goals of encouraging competition by attracting new entrant airlines and allowing existing airlines to expand . according to the act , competition was expected to lower fares and expand service , the chief aims of deregulation . at the same time , congress recognized that deregulation could lead to economic dislocations for some communities and workers as service patterns adjusted and airlines entered and exited markets and the industry overall . as a result , the eas program and the epp were established . the eas program was put into place to guarantee that small communities served by commercial airlines before deregulation would maintain a minimal level of scheduled air service . dot currently subsidizes commuter airlines to serve approximately 150 rural communities across the country that otherwise would not receive any scheduled air service . according to dot , eas subsidizes 39 communities in alaska and 115 more in the rest of the united states . the eas budget ranged from about $100 million early in the program down to about $25 million , before rising in recent years to $100 million . in fiscal year 2006 , eas was funded at $109 million . epp was created , first , to compensate airline workers who lost their jobs or received lower pay as a result of bankruptcies or major contractions whose major cause was airline deregulation and , second , to grant such workers first - hire rights . however , the department of labor delayed the establishment of regulations to administer these rights , congress did not appropriate funds to compensate displaced employees , and airlines fought the requirements in court . on august 7 , 1998 , the statute authorizing the epp was repealed .