figure 1 depicts a cap aircraft . the majority of cap's operating budget comes from funds included in the department of defense's appropriation and designated by congress for cap . cap is included in the air force's internal budgeting process and submits each year a financial plan to the air force for consideration . cap's financial plan is reviewed and adjusted by both the air education and training command and air force headquarters . according to an air force official involved with cap's budget submission , the air force attempts to ensure that cap receives at least the same amount of funding it had the previous year . however , cap is competing against other air force priorities in the normal air force budget development process . still , according to the air force official , cap often receives additional funding from congress above the air force's request . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact either carol cha at ( 202 ) 512-4456 or chac@gao.gov or brian lepore at ( 202 ) 512-4523 or leporeb@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . in addition to the contacts named above , key contributors to this report were chris currie , assistant director ; kimberly seay , assistant director ; chuck bausell ; ryan d'amore ; michele fejfar ; mike harmond ; tracey king ; and dan klabunde . although cap has in the past demonstrated its ability to temporarily transfer pilots to support surge missions — such as during the deepwater horizon incident — it could face challenges in increasing its support to sustained , long - term homeland security missions , particularly if those missions were to occur in areas with few mission pilots . officials from cap headquarters pointed towards their past successes in supporting surge missions , but they also recognized that there could be challenges associated with frequently moving pilots to meet mission demands since the pilots are volunteers . coast guard officials we spoke with questioned whether cap , because of its volunteer status , would consistently have pilots available to respond when needed and raised concerns that cap pilots have limited expertise in maritime situations and do not have water survival training — both of which could be important requirements for many coast guard missions . dhs has not assessed cap's capabilities and resources or determined the extent to which cap could be used to support future homeland security activities . the dhs concept of homeland security , as articulated in the qhsr , is that of a national enterprise , requiring the collective efforts and shared responsibilities of federal , state , local , nongovernmental , and private sector partners , among others . as we have reported in the past , ensuring that capabilities are available for such efforts requires effective planning and coordination in which capabilities are realistically tested in order to identify and subsequently address problems in partnership with relevant stakeholders .