gao - 18-64 . washington , d.c.: november 8 , 2017 . assessing data on workforce diversity . financial services firms and organizations we talked to generally agreed that assessing demographic data to understand a firm's diversity is a useful practice . all of the financial services firms we interviewed agreed on the importance of analyzing employee data . several firms stated that it is important for organizations to understand their progress on workforce diversity – and , if data trends indicate problems , such as retention issues , they then can take steps to address them . representatives of firms and organizations that advocate for diversity differed on the benefits of making demographic data public . representatives of one organization said requiring businesses to be transparent about their workforce data creates incentives to improve the diversity of their workforce . however , representatives of two financial firms expressed concerns that publicly disclosing firm - level employee characteristics would not be beneficial to businesses . data for 2015 were the most current available at the time of our review . we also summarized challenges that the financial services industry faced in increasing workforce diversity and practices for improving workforce diversity by reviewing relevant literature and interviewing representatives from financial services firms and advocacy organizations . more detailed information on our scope and methodology can be found in that report . the work on which this statement is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . most private employers subject to title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 with 100 or more employees , and all federal contractors who have 50 or more employees and meet certain other requirements , must submit data to the eeoc on the racial / ethnic and gender characteristics of employees by occupations for a range of industries , including financial services . under this system , the financial services industry includes the following five sectors: credit intermediation and related activities ( banks and other credit institutions ) , which include commercial banks , thrifts , and credit unions ; securities and other activities , which includes firms that bring together buyers and sellers of securities and commodities and offer financial advice ; insurance firms and agents that provide protection against financial risks to policyholders ; funds and trusts , which include investment trusts and holding monetary authorities , including central banks . beginning in 2007 , eeoc changed its requirements for reporting data on managers . employers are required to submit these data to eeoc every year using the eeo - 1 report . employers are required to review eeoc guidance describing the two management positions and determine how their firm's job positions fit into these classifications . in a january 2005 report , we identified a set of nine leading practices that should be considered when an organization is developing and implementing diversity management .