dod has been slow finalizing dcip guidance and policies . as of may 2007 , most of dod's dcip guidance and policies were either newly issued or still in draft , which has resulted in dod's components pursuing varying approaches to implement dcip . dod has taken steps to improve information sharing and coordination within and outside of dod . finally , through dod's budget process , dcip has received over $160 million from fiscal years 2004 to 2007 . of this amount , the components and sector lead agents have received $68.6 million , of which about 21 percent is from supplemental appropriations . our prior work has shown that supplemental funding is not an effective means for decision makers to effectively and efficiently plan for future years resource needs , weigh priorities , and assess budget trade - offs . until dod completes a comprehensive management plan to implement dcip , which includes issuing remaining dcip guidance and fully identifying funding requirements , its ability to implement dcip will be challenged . while our prior work has shown that issuing timely guidance is a key element of sound management , as of may 2007 , the majority of dcip guidance and policies were either newly issued or still in draft form , more than 3½ years after the deputy secretary of defense assigned dcip to asd ( hd&asa ) in september 2003 ( see table 1 ) . in the absence of finalized guidance and policies , dod components have been pursuing varying approaches to implement their critical infrastructure programs , a condition that has not changed markedly with the issuance of several guidance documents in the past year . according to officials responsible for the critical infrastructure programs from several of the dod components , they were either unaware that the guidance had been finalized or had decided to continue the approach they had previously adopted . although dod issued a dcip directive in august 2005 , asd ( hd&asa ) lacks a chartering directive that , among other things , clearly defines important roles , responsibilities , and relationships with other dod organizations and missions — including the relationship between asd ( hd&asa ) and the assistant secretary of defense for special operations and low - intensity conflict and interdependent capabilities . however , we believe dod cannot effectively target infrastructure vulnerability assessments without first identifying and prioritizing its mission - critical infrastructure . depending on the amount of infrastructure that dod deems critical , it may not be able to perform an on - site assessment of every dod asset . to address this limitation , asd ( hd&asa ) officials told us that they plan to implement a self - assessment program that the military services — the infrastructure owners — can conduct in lieu of or in between the scheduled vulnerability assessments . dod is in the process of developing a vulnerability self - assessment handbook that would provide guidance on how to conduct these assessments but , as of may 2007 , a release date had not been set . to reduce the burden of multiple assessments on installation personnel and asset owners , in 2005 , dod incorporated an all - hazards infrastructure assessment module into its existing antiterrorism vulnerability assessments .