benefit reductions can affect employers as well as plan participants . for example , representatives of one construction industry plan told us that the reduced benefits outlined in the rehabilitation plan had reduced their ability to recruit and train new apprentices . these representatives explained that the prospect of earning only $50 of monthly retirement benefit per year of work — which after a 30-year career would result in only $1,500 payment per month in retirement — is not very appealing to prospective employees . while this does present a barrier to recruitment , a plan representative told us it is mitigated by an attractive hourly wage of $31.40 , and the fact that many of the younger workers today are thankful for a paycheck in the current economic environment . the scope and severity of the challenges outlined by stakeholders suggest that a broad , comprehensive response is needed and congress faces difficult choices in responding to these challenges . 3 ) what options are available to address pbgc's impending funding crisis and enhance the program's future financial stability ? to answer these questions , we analyzed government and industry data ; reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and documentation from plans ; and interviewed a wide range of industry experts and stakeholders . in particular , to identify actions that multiemployer plans in the weakest financial condition have taken to improve their long - term financial position , we reviewed the survey methodology and analyzed multiemployer plan survey data from the segal company , a large actuarial firm with a client base representing about 25 percent of multiemployer plans . to supplement the survey data , we conducted structured interviews with 13 multiemployer plans across the country . we selected these plans in order to obtain a range of key characteristics , including industry , region , funded status , and number of participants . among the 13 plans included in our review , 8 plans were in critical status , 2 plans were in endangered or seriously endangered status , and 3 plans were in neither critical nor endangered status . to determine the extent to which plans have taken advantage of pbgc financial assistance and to assess the financial condition of pbgc's insurance program , we obtained pbgc data on various types of assistance to plans and data regarding plans that are insolvent or expected to become so in the next 20 years . to identify options available to address pbgc's impending funding crisis and enhance its future financial stability , we distinguished between options that would address the more immediate funding crisis facing plans headed toward insolvency and options that may enhance the long - term stability of the multiemployer system for plans that may not be headed for insolvency , but , nevertheless , face financial challenges . in addition , we assessed the tradeoffs of various options for current workers , retirees , and employers , as well as the federal government . to identify and assess available options , we interviewed government officials , pension experts — including academics , actuaries , attorneys , multiemployer plans' trustees and administrators , employers and trade associations , unions , advocacy organizations , and other relevant stakeholders .