iv. ) the three remaining reactors began operating between 1964 and 1968 , and u.s. and russian nuclear experts told us that these reactors are among the most dangerous in the world due to their age and poor design . in addition , the reactors lack safety features such as a containment structure , which is generally a steel - lined concrete , dome - like structure that serves as a barrier to the release of radioactive material during an accident . the lack of containment presents a greater risk for the two reactors at seversk because , unlike the reactor at zheleznogorsk , which is located inside a mountain , the seversk reactors are above ground . figure 1 shows the location of the russian reactors . according to russian officials in seversk , the two reactors currently provide about 70 percent of the heat and electricity for the city's residents . however , the reactors have the capacity to produce more heat and electricity than is needed to meet the demands of seversk's residents , and both heat and electricity have been sold to the nearby city of tomsk since 1973 . furthermore , in its comments , doe stated that it was disappointed in russia's rejection of the proposal to study ways to reduce the amount of plutonium produced by the reactors as an interim step before they are shut down . regardless of russia's basis for rejecting the proposal , it should be noted that the long - standing and ultimate u.s. goal of this program is to reduce and eliminate the production of weapons - grade plutonium in russia as quickly as possible . from the u.s. perspective , shutting down these reactors is a major nonproliferation objective , and the united states is committing significant resources to this effort . thus , it seems reasonable to us that russia should reciprocate and show its commitment to the fundamental nonproliferation tenets of this program . finally , although doe and state objected to our characterization of the implications of russia's decision to reject key doe initiatives , both agencies agreed with our recommendation that seeking summer outages as a way to reduce plutonium production should continue to be pursued . with regard to the reactors' safety , we noted in the report that they are among the most unsafe in the world and that doe was prepared to provide a substantial amount of assistance to improve their safety . russia's rejection of the assistance , regardless of the reasons , raises serious concerns about its commitment to ensuring the reactors' safe operation until they can be shut down . as we noted in the report , doe and national laboratory officials expressed doubt about whether russia would perform sufficient safety upgrades on its own . state also objected to what it believed to be our conclusion that final shutdown of the reactors is uncertain because the reactor shutdown and implementing agreements are insufficiently clear regarding the steps to permanently and irreversibly shut down the reactors . we believe that state in its written response to our draft report has mischaracterized our conclusion .