state concurred . since 2002 , state has spent over $100 million to construct temporary facilities on the embassy compound to accommodate evolving staffing needs and provide temporary office and housing space as permanent facilities are built . obo building guidance from 2009 states that “temporary facilities” are facilities that will be occupied for no more than 5 years or until a permanent building is constructed , whichever is sooner . the guidance also indicates that temporary facilities include , but are not limited to , containerized housing / office units , modular units , modified shipping containers , and trailers . on completing the project in 2017 , all temporary facilities on - compound will be nearly 5 years old or more , and a smaller subset will be more than 10 years old . based on numbers provided by state , those temporary facilities will likely consist of over a third of available desks and beds . state officials indicated that continued use of these temporary facilities is likely , as some may be used by contractors that will provide support services following the u.s. military's drawdown . for more information , see appendix 1 . the lack of security standards for temporary facilities contributed to insufficient and differing levels of protection , increased costs , and extended schedule . prior to building additional temporary facilities under the 2009 contract , state informed congress in its fiscal year 2008 supplemental appropriations justification of its concerns about threats posed from potential incoming weapons fire — amid increasing attacks around kabul — and indicated that overhead protection was required to protect staff in existing temporary facilities on compound . also , state security standards in 2009 indicated that housing constructed as an integral part of or adjoining the chancery ( i.e. , office building ) should be constructed to meet chancery physical security standards . state has physical security standards governing construction of offices and housing that state seeks to meet regardless of whether a facility is permanent or temporary . however , according to ds officials , state does not have security standards specifically tailored to temporary facility construction . for practical purposes , ds officials said that state's physical security standards governing new construction — regardless of whether a facility is permanent or temporary — are standards that only permanent construction can meet . where newly constructed temporary facilities — unlike newly constructed permanent facilities — cannot be constructed to meet all state's security standards , state has the discretion to grant exceptions from those standards and to specify mitigating alternative security measures that will be provided . in the absence of minimal security standards ( or guidance ) to guide planning for temporary facility construction , state inconsistently applied alternative security measures , resulting in insufficient and different levels of security between the temporary offices and housing . the risk assessment identified over 30 risks to the project . in particular , it identified the interface between the 2009 and 2010 contracts as a major source of risk . the study raised concerns about how state could best coordinate the 2010 contract with the 2009 contract without sufficient information about the first contractor's design plans , which were under development .