the resulting pmpm payment would be the same for both veterans and nonveterans . however , the amount may , on average , be too high for veterans and too low for nonveterans . as a result , individual ma plans that enroll a disproportionately high number of nonveterans may receive a pmpm payment that is too low . to address the possibility that pmpm payments for nonveterans are too low , cms is required to adjust payments to ma plans , as appropriate , to account for the effect of va's provision of medicare - covered services . in 2009 , cms used medicare ffs data to develop an estimate of the effect of va spending on ma plan payments . based on the results of its study , cms determined that no adjustment was necessary from 2010 through 2016 . in 2016 , cms updated its 2009 study using more recent data and determined that an adjustment would be necessary for 2017 . given the potential implications for ma plan payments , it is especially important that cms's estimate is based on reasonable data and sound methodology . you asked us to examine how va's provision of medicare - covered services affects payments to ma plans . in this report , we estimate the amount that va spends to provide medicare - covered services to veterans enrolled in ma plans and how va spending on these services affects cms payments to ma plans ; and evaluate the extent to which cms has the data it needs to determine an appropriate adjustment , if any , to ma payments to account for va's provision of medicare - covered services to ma - enrolled veterans . to estimate the amount that va spends to provide medicare - covered services to veterans enrolled in ma plans , we first identified all months in which individual veterans were enrolled in va health care and an ma plan during fiscal year 2010 using enrollment data from cms and va. we conducted our analysis for fiscal year 2010 because that was the most recent analysis year for which data were available at the time we began our study . if the plan's bid is lower than the benchmark , medicare pays the plan the amount of the bid and makes an additional payment to the plan called a rebate . plans may use this rebate to fund benefits not covered under medicare ffs . cms uses risk scores to adjust pmpm payments to ma plans to account for beneficiaries' health status and other factors , a process known as risk adjustment . for beneficiaries enrolled in ma , risk scores are generally determined on the basis of diagnosis codes submitted for each beneficiary , among other factors , and are adjusted annually to account for changes in diagnoses from the previous calendar year . in addition , risk scores for beneficiaries who experience long - term stays of more than 90 days are calculated differently to account for the differences in expected health expenditures . while risk scores are based on diagnoses from the previous year , changes to the risk score to account for long - term hospital stays of more than 90 days are reflected in the calendar year when the stay occurred .