however , this is not unique to medicaid . as we recently reported , the medicare program devotes little more than one - fourth of 1 percent of its program expenditures to safeguarding payments . as a result , we recommended that the congress increase funding for these important activities . for example , new jersey enacted the health care claims fraud act , which creates the specific crime of health care claims fraud and provides for 10-year prison sentences , fines of up to five times the amount gained through fraud , and professional license revocation . meanwhile , civil statutes — such as one enacted in north carolina and other states authorizing action against providers who “knowingly” submit false medicaid claims for payment — allow prosecutors to take advantage of less stringent evidentiary requirements than those required by criminal statutes . restructuring operations: some states are enhancing their program safeguard operations through restructuring . texas created an office of investigations and enforcement in 1997 within the state medicaid agency , giving it power to take administrative actions against providers . these actions cannot be appealed when the office has tangible evidence of potential fraud , abuse , or waste . it also can impose sanctions and recover improper payments . meanwhile , georgia established an mfcu in 1995 that differs from most in that it includes auditors from the state department of audits , investigators from the state bureau of investigation , and prosecutors from the state attorney general's office . they work together as a discreet entity under memoranda of understanding signed by the three agencies . hcfa and the oig — the agencies that are responsible for the medicaid program at the federal level — are taking steps to promote effective medicaid program integrity by providing technical help to the states to facilitate states' efforts . these federal agencies also conduct some information gathering on state activities in order to guide state efforts . many state agency and mfcu officials reported that their agencies had benefited greatly from federal technical assistance , guidance , and training , and would welcome more assistance . in 1997 , hcfa began a new approach as a facilitator , enabler , and catalyst of states' program integrity efforts . to do so , hcfa established the national medicaid fraud and abuse initiative , led by staff from hcfa's southern consortium and headquarters , with designated , part - time coordinators for the initiative in each of hcfa's 10 regional offices . the strategy for the initiative was to partner with the states and have state representatives work with hcfa staff to set the agenda and goals for the effort . the initiative provides networking , information sharing , and training opportunities for state agencies and their program integrity partners . participants in early initiative meetings identified 10 major focus areas — including payment accuracy measurement , managed care , and information technology . workgroups are developing recommendations in each area .