as a result , not all certified firms may have done so . based on data that sba provided , the agency visited about 10 percent of certified firms each year during fiscal years 2013 – 2015 . sba's reliance on site visits alone would not mitigate the recertification weaknesses that were the basis for our recommendation . in recognition of sba's resource constraints , we said in our 2015 report and reiterated in 2016 that sba could apply a risk - based approach to its recertification process to review and verify information from firms that appear to pose the most risk to the program . a lack of risk - based criteria and guidance for staff to request and verify firm information during the recertification process increases the risk that ineligible firms obtain hubzone contracts . and as we stated in 2015 and reiterated in 2016 , the characteristics of firms and the status of hubzone areas — the bases for program eligibility — often can change , and need to be monitored . sba officials told us that the agency intends to implement a technology - based solution similar to sba one to address some of the ongoing challenges with the recertification process by spring 2017 . the officials expect that the new solution will help them better assess firms and implement risk - based controls . as we reported in february 2015 , potential changes to hubzone designation criteria could be designed to provide additional economic benefits to some communities . however , changes that benefit some communities also could , through competitive market processes , reduce activity by hubzone firms in existing hubzones . likewise , if the potential changes significantly increased the number of hubzones , new areas could realize economic benefits . however , such changes also could result in diffusion — decreased targeting of areas of greatest economic distress — by lessening the competitive advantage on which small businesses may rely to thrive in economically distressed communities . an analysis we performed for our february 2015 report offers examples of the scope of the differences in economic conditions among hubzone areas ( qualified areas ) , redesignated areas , and non - hubzone areas ( nonqualified tracts or areas ) . we analyzed the economic conditions of such areas as of 2012 and found that indicators for redesignated areas on average fell between those of qualified and non - qualified areas . for example , as shown in figure 1 , qualified census tracts had poverty and unemployment rates of 32 percent and 14 percent , respectively ; redesignated tracts had rates of 24 percent and 12 percent , respectively ; and nonqualified tracts had rates of 11 and 8 percent , respectively . a similar pattern existed for nonmetropolitan counties . therefore , while allowing redesignated areas with certified firms to remain eligible can generate economic benefits for such areas , such inclusion could limit the benefits realized by qualified areas with more depressed economic conditions . in our 2015 report , we explored the potential impact of altering some of the criteria used to designate hubzones . we examined changes to thresholds for unemployment rate and for the number of census tracts that could qualify for the program in a given metropolitan area .