cost . for fiscal year 2008 , opm's standard billing rate is $3,711 for an investigation for an initial top secret clearance ; $2,509 for an investigation to renew a top secret clearance , and $202 for an investigation for a secret clearance . the cost of obtaining and maintaining a top secret clearance for 10 years is approximately 30 times greater than the cost of obtaining and maintaining a secret clearance for the same period . for example , an individual getting a top secret clearance for the first time and keeping the clearance for 10 years would cost the government a total of $6,220 in current year dollars ( $3,711 for the initial investigation and $2,509 for the reinvestigation after the first 5 years ) . in contrast , an individual receiving a secret clearance and maintaining it for 10 years would result in a total cost to the government of $202 ( $202 for the initial clearance that is good for 10 years ) . time / workload . the workload is also affected by the scope of coverage in the various types of investigations . much of the information for a secret clearance is gathered through electronic files . however , the investigation for a top secret clearance requires the information needed for the secret clearance as well as data gathered through time - consuming tasks such as interviews with the subject of the investigation request , references in the workplace , and neighbors . the investigative workload for a top secret clearance increases about 20-fold compared to the workload for a secret clearance , since ( 1 ) the average investigative report for a top secret clearance takes about 10 times as many investigative staff hours as the average investigative report for a secret clearance , and ( 2 ) the top secret clearance must be renewed twice as often as the secret . additionally , the adjudicative workload increases about 4-fold . in 2007 , dod officials estimated that it took about twice as long to review an investigative report for a top secret clearance , which would need to be done twice as often as for a secret clearance . we are not suggesting that the numbers and levels of clearances are or are not appropriate — only that any unnecessary requirements in this initial phase use government resources that can be utilized for other purposes , such as building additional quality into other clearance processes or decreasing delays in clearance processing . unless reforms ensure a strong requirements - determination process is present , workload and costs may be higher than necessary . we have emphasized — since the late 1990s — a need to build more quality and quality monitoring throughout the clearance process to promote positive outcomes such as greater clearance reciprocity . in our november 2005 testimony on the previous governmentwide strategic plan to improve the clearance process , we noted that the plan devoted little attention to monitoring and improving the quality of the personnel security clearance process , and that limited attention and reporting about quality continues .