maintenance . phmsa assumes maintenance on a purging system will cost $3 per year per truck , based on an assumption about the cost of inspecting the device every 5 years . stakeholders with experience using the technology said this cost is too low and told us the technology required occasional repairs or replacement . according to phmsa's analysis , it includes a low - cost maintenance estimate because it states that pneumatic technologies like the purging system require very little maintenance because they have few moving parts that can fail . we also found uncertainty in phmsa's data and assumptions related to benefits: fatalities . as previously discussed , we identified inaccuracies in phmsa's analysis regarding the number of fatalities that could be avoided by the proposed wetlines rule , and phmsa did not include a sensitivity analysis to account for its rule potentially preventing fewer deaths than assumed in its cost - benefit analysis . both the 2011 and 2012 cost - benefit analyses stated there were 4 incidents with hazmat - related fatalities during the incident study period ( resulting in 5 fatalities ) . after discussing the inaccuracies with phmsa officials , they agreed it would be more accurate for their analysis to reflect 4 fatalities occurring from 3 fatal wetline incidents . questions over phmsa's wetline fatality analysis have been raised before . in a 2001 letter critiquing a prior wetlines proposed rule , omb encouraged dot to more fully address the uncertainty in the cause of fatalities in its wetlines cost - benefit analysis , specifically to address uncertainty with whether fatalities might be caused by factors other than the release of hazardous materials and would therefore not be avoided by a rule addressing wetlines . because fatalities are a major contributor to the calculated value of the benefits of the regulation , a reduction of even one fatality in the analysis could have significant impact on the amount of calculated benefits for the proposed rule . for example , phmsa's 2012 analysis concluded that with 4 fatal incidents during the study period and an average of 1.67 people per vehicle , the proposed rule would avoid 6.7 fatalities for a benefit of about $3.4 million per year.the analysis recalculated with 3 fatal incidents , the annual benefit of avoided fatalities would be about $2.5 million per year , about $1 million less . this is significant , given that avoided fatalities comprise more than half of the almost $6.5 million total annual benefit of the proposed rule . in the 2012 draft cost - benefit analysis , phmsa's 20- year compliance scenario showed a total net benefit of about $2 million , which was the only scenario where benefits exceeded costs . thus , while phmsa has not issued a final rule on this subject and information in either the 2011 or draft 2012 analysis is subject to change , had the analysis been calculated with one less fatal incident , costs would have exceeded benefits in that scenario as well . effectiveness . phmsa's analysis assumes its proposed rule would prevent all wetline incidents , implying that the purging systems installed to prevent these incidents would be 100 percent effective .