static budget . in 2003 , the corps implemented a realignment , in part , in response to its relatively static budget . specifically , from 1994 to 2003 , the corps experienced a period of static administrative funding levels . in response to this situation , the corps launched an organizational initiative in 2003 — called usace 2012 — to realign the roles , functions , and processes of the three tiers with the goal of improving the efficiency of the civil works program . for example , usace 2012 created regional business centers at the division level to coordinate the activities of the districts within a region to ensure they shared resources and technical expertise , and improved project management and delivery . as part of their responsibilities , the regional business centers assign work to each of the districts according to each district's capabilities and available staff . usace 2012 also created regional integration teams at the headquarters level to resolve regional issues . regional integration teams provide a single point of contact for regional business centers to resolve concerns and issues that must be dealt with at the headquarters level . in the past , other attempts for organizational realignment of the corps have been considered but not implemented for a variety of reasons . for example , in 1949 , 1971 , 1978 , and the early 2000s , various members of the executive branch proposed to transfer the corps' civil works functions to other federal agencies , but these proposals did not result in any changes . in 1949 , the hoover commission recommended the transfer of all water resource functions of the federal government , including those of the corps , to the department of the interior . similarly , in 1971 , president nixon proposed a new department of natural resources to bring together natural resources responsibilities scattered throughout the federal government , and president carter made a similar proposal in 1978 . more recently , former corps officials we spoke with said that during his tenure , secretary of defense rumsfeld had considered whether the civil works program should be taken out of dod and given to another agency . the corps has also undertaken some past attempts to make its organizational structure more efficient by reducing the number of district offices . however , these attempts faced stiff resistance and were not implemented . for example , in 1989 , the senate committee on appropriations recognized the need for the corps to examine every available opportunity to increase its efficiency and effectiveness and directed the chief of engineers to initiate a conceptual study of potential field organization structures . as a result of this study , the corps proposed a reduction in the number of district offices in the contiguous united states from 35 to 22 and a reduction in the number of division offices from 10 to 6 , in response to the diminished workload and budget of the agency . in order to accomplish this realignment , the corps chose to submit the plan as part of the base realignment and closure ( brac ) process .