agreements . in some instances , officials from ustr meet with officials from fta partner countries several times within a year , according to ustr officials . for example , ustr officials told us that they have met — either through the council , or informally — with cabinet - level officials from cafta - dr countries to discuss implementation and environmental challenges , and to coordinate activities by country , or regionally . most ftas in our review also require that the councils host a public session , unless the united states and the fta partner agree otherwise . ustr officials stated that the public sessions provide an opportunity for citizens and groups to introduce environmental issues to ustr and the fta partner country , and raise implementation issues ; these issues can become part of ongoing discussions or future council meetings . ustr officials told us that they have focused much of their efforts to improve fta monitoring and enforcement since our 2009 report on peru because of the extensive environmental commitments contained in the peru fta and the forest sector annex , and associated work underway to enable peru's compliance . the officials stated that their efforts were in response to inputs from u.s. environmental stakeholders about what is important , as well as resource limitations . see fig.1 . chile , el salvador , guatemala , and peru also face a range of environmental challenges . chile — according to chilean officials , the country's environmental challenges ( described later in this report ) relate to natural resource and extractive industries , including mining , fishing , forestry , and agriculture . for example , chile's agriculture and mining sectors are water - intensive , placing strains on its water supply . chile is a top producer and exporter of fish , and mitigating the fishing sector's water pollution and impact on ecosystems is a challenge.states and chile have been working together under the framework of the fta as well as a june 2003 environmental cooperation agreement and related work program to assist chile in addressing its environmental challenges and fta commitments . el salvador and guatemala — countries under cafta - dr . according to salvadoran and guatemalan officials , environmental challenges facing one or both of these countries include preservation of biodiversity and threats to endangered species , water and air pollution , deforestation , and degradation of marine resources . to assist these countries in addressing their environmental challenges and fta commitments , the united states and these countries have been working together under the framework of the fta as well as a february 2005 environmental cooperation agreement and related work programs . peru — peru has about 13 percent of the world's tropical forests . these forestry resources include forestry concessions used for logging , natural protected areas , and reservations for indigenous communities . peru's myriad environmental challenges include deforestation and water contamination from small mining operations . because of concerns related to illegal logging , the fta included an annex on forest sector governance . to address peru's environmental challenges and fta commitments , the united states and peru have been working together under the framework of the fta as well as a july 2006 environmental cooperation agreement and related program .