all of the earlier audits resulted in some changes . nrp staff members then compared the classifiers' results with those of the other classifiers and with the results of the earlier audits . nrp officials reported that the test showed that about three - fourths of the time the trained nrp classifiers were able to identify issues where noncompliance was found through an audit . irs used preliminary results of these tests to identify and implement improvements to nrp . for example , nrp staff members noticed early in the course of the second test that nrp classifiers were failing to classify some line items in accordance with nrp guidelines . these returns will be classified as accepted with adjustments . nrp returns that have one or two items from a specified list requiring examination will be classified for correspondence audits . all other nrp returns for which the casebuilding material does not enable irs to independently verify the information reported on the returns will be classified for face - to - face audits . nrp audits will take place either through correspondence with the taxpayers or through face - to - face audits . when classifiers determine that an nrp return will be sent for a correspondence audit , irs will request that the taxpayer send documentation verifying the line items in question . to ensure accurate and consistent data collection , nrp audits will address all issues identified by classifiers and will not be focused only on substantial issues or cases for which there is a reasonable likelihood of collecting unpaid taxes , according to irs officials . nrp auditors also may expand the scope of the audits to cover items that were not classified initially . irs plans to conduct detailed , line - by - line audits on 1,683 of the approximately 47,000 returns in the nrp sample in order to assess the accuracy of nrp classification and , if necessary , to adjust nrp results — a process called calibration . one - third of the returns in the calibration sample will be returns that were classified accepted as filed ( either with or without adjustments ) , one - third from those classified for correspondence audits , and one - third from those classified for face - to - face audits . none of the taxpayers with returns in the calibration sample will have been audited or otherwise contacted by irs prior to the start of these line - by - line audits . to describe irs's implementation of nrp , we have conducted frequent meetings with officials in irs's nrp office and other irs officials as they have implemented the program . we reviewed nrp training materials and observed nrp classifier , correspondence examination , and field examination training sessions . we also observed nrp process tests and conducted site visits to irs area offices in baltimore , maryland ; brooklyn , new york ; oakland , california ; philadelphia , pennsylvania ; and st. paul , minnesota , in order to observe and review nrp classification in field offices . we considered whether nrp is being implemented in accordance with its design .