state statutes or policies . twelve tribes reported that state statutes or policies prevent them from submitting to ncic through the states' criminal justice information systems . according to fbi officials , cjis systems agencies determine which entities within their states , including tribes , can access these federal criminal databases through state systems . however , some states , such as new york , have statutes or policies prohibiting csas from granting tribal law enforcement entities access to their state switches and , therefore , to ncic through such switches . according to doj officials , the public safety benefit of including convicted sex offender information in nsor is that if a law enforcement officer comes into contact with an individual , such as through a traffic stop or an arrest , the officer can query ncic and learn that the individual is a convicted sex offender and potentially determine if the offender is in compliance with registration requirements . cost of ncic access . ten tribes that responded to our survey reported that they cannot cover the associated costs for ncic access . according to federal , state , and tribal officials , these costs can include purchasing servers or ncic terminals , the cost of the required high - speed internet connection , or the fees required to obtain ncic access . requirements for submitting information to ncic . thirteen tribes reported that they do not meet certain requirements for submitting information to ncic . cjis has established requirements that all law enforcement agencies seeking to submit information to federal criminal justice databases must meet in order to ensure the quality and the security of criminal justice data entered into these databases . to what extent are states incorporating ineligible and delegated tribes into their state sex offender registration and notification systems ? to address our first objective , we reviewed the smart office's data of eligible tribes' implementation status as of august 2014 to identify ( 1 ) tribes that have retained their authority to implement sorna , ( 2 ) tribes that have delegated their implementation authority to a state , and ( 3 ) tribes whose implementation authority the smart office delegated to a state . to address the reliability of the smart office's data on tribes' implementation status , among other steps , we obtained written responses to our questions on how smart office representatives who use and maintain the data ensure the data's reliability . for example , according to tribal officials , some tribal jurisdictions banish convicted sex offenders from their lands or prohibit offenders from living or working within proximity to schools or day care centers . federal and state , as well as local , law enforcement agencies have undertaken efforts to help address such barriers , although the efforts have some limitations , as discussed below . memorandums of agreement ( moa ) . federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies have entered into memorandums of agreement with tribes , whereby these law enforcement agencies generally agree to enter convicted sex offender information into nsor on behalf of the tribes .