hhs has implemented these recommendations . one aspect of our ongoing work on subtitle b is especially relevant to issues raised by the omb memorandum to labor . we are examining whether labor is involved in activities tasked to niosh , the advisory board , or the contractor assisting the board , and if so , whether these activities reflect an effort to constrain the cost of benefits . for example , in some cases niosh has shared drafts of its special exposure cohort petition evaluations as well as drafts of other niosh technical documents with labor before sending final versions to the advisory board , which is tasked to review them . labor has provided comments on some of these draft documents . labor officials told us that the basis of their involvement is labor's designation as primary administrator of the program . labor officials added that their reviews of these documents focus on changes needed to promote clarity and consistency in the adjudication of claims . we are currently examining the extent , nature , and outcome of labor's comments on various niosh documents . as our work proceeds , we plan to obtain additional information on key issues such as the timing , nature , and basis of labor's activities in light of the program's design and assignment of responsibilities . several different federal agencies are involved with the implementation of the subtitle b program , including labor , hhs , and energy . however , labor has primary responsibility for administering the program . labor receives the claims , determines whether the claimant meets the eligibility requirements , and adjudicates the claim . when considering the compensability of certain claims , labor relies on dose reconstructions developed by niosh , under hhs . to avoid gathering similar information for each claim associated with a particular facility , niosh compiles facility - specific information in “site profiles,” which assist niosh in completing the dose reconstructions . niosh contracted with oak ridge associated universities and the battelle corporation to develop site profiles and draft dose reconstructions . energy is responsible for providing labor and niosh with employment verification , estimated radiation dose , and facility - wide monitoring data . labor does not refer all claims to niosh for dose reconstruction . for example , reconstructions are not needed for workers in the special exposure cohort . for special exposure cohort claimants , labor verifies the employment and illness , and develops a recommended compensability decision that is issued to the claimant . the act specified that classes of workers from four designated locations would constitute the special exposure cohort and authorized the secretary of hhs to add additional classes of employees . classes of workers may petition hhs to be added to the cohort . a class of employees is generally defined by the facility at which they worked , the specific years they worked , and the type of work they did . niosh collects and evaluates the petitions and gives the results of its evaluations to the advisory board for review . the board , in turn , submits a recommendation to the secretary of hhs to accept or deny the petition .