calif . trains underserved youth and young adults in the crafts and technicians skills of the entertainment industry . youth offender initiative ( labor ) oh . teaches high school dropouts skills in one of four fields: construction technology , health care , manufacturing technology , and computer technology . national and community service ) youthbuild ( labor ) youth offender initiative ( labor ) families ( hhs ) ore. empowers youth who were previously homeless , pregnant , or parenting to support themselves and work on fulfilling educational and employment needs , integrating a “self - governance” model that incorporates resident participation in all program decision - making processes . which program directors attribute their success in reconnecting youth to education and employment ? ( 3 ) what challenges are involved in implementing and operating these programs and how are federal agencies helping to address these challenges ? to conduct this work , we asked federal agency officials and 11 experts on youth issues to identify local entities that are operating programs or initiatives with federal or other funding that have been successful in helping disconnected youth reach educational or employment goals . we asked the experts and agency officials , on the basis of their experience and expertise , to identify local programs that could serve as examples or models for expansion or replication ; rigorous program evaluations were generally not available . the experts were selected for their understanding of and range of perspectives on youth issues as well as their knowledge of efforts under way at the local level . we identified and interviewed officials from four primary federal agencies that support programs working with this population: the departments of labor , health and human services ( hhs ) , justice , and education . we selected these agencies based on their legislative mandate to administer relevant federal programs , our previous work , reports from the congressional research service and the white house task force for disadvantaged youth , and discussions with federal officials . we reviewed relevant appropriation and other laws , regulations , and documents pertaining to the key federal programs and coordinating bodies involved with assisting disconnected youth , and synthesized information from interviews with appropriate federal officials . out of 100 programs that were identified , we interviewed 39 directors of locally operated programs using a standard set of questions . we selected programs that were geographically diverse , and that represented both urban and rural locations . we also selected programs with a range of approaches to working with disconnected youth , such as employment skills training programs , alternative education programs , transitional living programs , and programs that targeted different subpopulations of disconnected youth in 16 states and the district of columbia . see appendix i for a complete list of the 39 programs . we conducted in - person interviews with directors and youth participants in 19 of these programs , and completed the remaining interviews with directors by phone . see appendix ii for more information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from may 2007 to february 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .