110th cong. , 2nd sess . fdic quarterly banking profile , second quarter 2009 . some consumers have benefited from competition in the credit card market , as those using credit cards enjoy lower fees and interest rates and greater rewards . benefits to cardholders vary depending on how they use their cards ; those with credit card debt accrue finance charges and may pay additional fees . however , consumers who do not use credit cards may be made worse off by paying higher prices for goods and services , as merchants pass on their increasing card acceptance costs to their customers . although most cards in the united states are issued by the largest issuers , consumers have a wide variety of issuers and cards to choose from . according to the federal reserve , over 6,000 depository institutions issue credit cards . these issuers range from some of the very largest financial institutions — such as bank of america and citigroup — to credit unions and community banks that range in size and can be small . while there are estimated to be thousands of credit unions and community banks that issue cards , the 10 largest issuers account for about 92 percent of all outstanding credit card debt . given the large number of issuers and widespread use of credit cards by consumers , issuers compete to obtain new customers and retain existing ones . according to the survey of consumer finances , in 2007 , 73 percent of u.s. families had a least one credit card . issuers typically use mail solicitations to market their card products — mailing 3.8 billion solicitations in 2008 — but representatives from one large issuer we spoke with told us that they can also advertise online and at their branch locations . issuers target their marketing efforts depending on cardholders' payment and use patterns . cardholders paying their balance in full each month ( convenience users ) and high - volume card users may be drawn to cards that offer rewards programs , while those cardholders carrying a balance may be more likely to choose a card that offers a low interest rate . as competition for cardholders has intensified , issuers increasingly have turned to rewards programs to attract and retain cardholders . as discussed earlier , these programs are funded in part by interchange fee revenues . according to an industry study , 71 percent of cardholders held a rewards card in 2008 . representatives of all of the large issuers with whom we spoke told us rewards cards represent a significant portion of the cards they offer and are designed with incentives to increase their use by cardholders . one issuer's staff told us that all of their bank's traditional credit cards that are in active status have a rewards component and they believe that rewards programs help them to build customer loyalty and to retain existing cardholders . a representative of another large issuer stated that about 51 percent of its cardholders have rewards cards , representing about 81 percent of total volume for the issuer , and a representative of another issuer reported that approximately 50 percent of its cards earn points that can be redeemed for rewards or other benefits .