cambridge , mass . no public schools have chosen to participate . participating private schools must be registered with the ohio state superintendent of public instruction . what is known about student academic achievement within these voucher programs ? most of the data we used to address these questions were collected from studies of the cleveland and milwaukee voucher programs . we selected studies for review that met two or more of the following criteria: ( 1 ) were performed under contract to ohio or wisconsin state departments of education ; ( 2 ) had been published in a peer - reviewed journal ; ( 3 ) had been issued by a research institution that reviews work prior to release ; or ( 4 ) employed quantitative analysis to examine student academic achievement . the studies we selected included assessments of the student and school characteristics , racial and ethnic composition of public school and voucher students , and evaluations of cleveland and milwaukee students' academic achievement . we examined the studies to determine if the data they contained met criteria for reliability and completeness and if analyses of the voucher programs' effects employed impact evaluation methods , such as the use of comparison groups and multivariate analysis procedures . we did not include data in our analyses from studies that did not meet our criteria . in addition to these studies , we reviewed state laws and regulations , school district and voucher program office records , state budget data , and a variety of school voucher - related reports and articles . we conducted site visits to ohio and wisconsin and interviewed officials from the state departments of education , the administering program offices , the public school districts , and several private schools . appendix i further describes our scope and methodology . a list of the studies we reviewed is provided in the bibliography to this report . we conducted our review between february and july 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the cleveland voucher program is officially called the cleveland scholarship and tutoring program and provides state funding to help primarily low - income children in kindergarten through the eighth grade attend private schools in cleveland or to attend public schools in districts adjacent to the cleveland school district . the voucher program was implemented in the 1996 – 97 school year , and only private schools have participated in it . students new to the program generally start in kindergarten through the third grade and may have previously attended a public or a private school or never attended school . in june 2000 , the cleveland program had about 3,400 voucher students enrolled in 52 private schools , which received about $5.2 million in publicly funded voucher payments for the 1999 – 2000 school year . by comparison , the cleveland school district in 1999 – 2000 had about 76,000 students enrolled in its 121 schools supported by $712 million in total revenues . in cleveland , actual voucher payments follow the student to the school attended , even when he or she changes schools . voucher checks are made out to the student's parent or guardian and require endorsement before the school can use the funds .