varied . authority to designate up to $8 billion in tax - exempt private activity bonds ( new york liberty bonds ) and $9 billion in advance refunding bonds . yes ; the governor of the state of new york and the mayor of new york city were allowed to issue tax - exempt new york liberty bonds , and use proceeds to finance reconstruction and renovation projects within the new york liberty zone . the governor and mayor were allowed to issue advance refunding bonds to pay principal , interest , or redemption price on certain prior issues of bonds issued for facilities located in new york city ( and certain water facilities located outside of new york city ) . volume cap or other allocation limits ? involves administration by a federal agency outside irs ? involves administration by nonfederal entity ? empowerment zones and renewal communities ( ez / rc ) varied . five ez and four rc tax incentives did not have any volume caps or allocation limits . yes ; hud oversaw ez programs in urban areas , and the usda oversaw ez programs in rural areas . hud is responsible for outreach efforts and serves as a promoter for ezs and rcs . hud and irs established a partnership regarding the ez / rc tax incentives , where both hud and irs provide representation at workshops and conferences . yes ; state and local governments nominate communities for ez and rc designation . nominated ez communities had to submit a strategic plan showing how they would meet key program principles , while nominated rcs had to submit a written “course of action” with commitments to carry out specific legislatively mandated activities . limit of up to an annual total of $12 million per rc . no ; irs has sole federal responsibility for the administration of the crd program . hud collected data from local administrators used for commercial projects in rcs . yes ; state governments allocate crd authority to eligible businesses engaged in commercial projects within rcs . limits on issuing ez facility bond volume were up to $60 million for each rural ez , up to $130 million for each urban ez with a population of less than 100,000 , and $230 million for each urban ez with a population greater than or equal to 100,000 . no ; irs has sole federal responsibility for the administration of ez facility bond program . hud collected information from local administrators of ezs on the use of facility bonds used for construction projects in ezs . yes ; state and local governments issue ez facility bonds to finance construction costs . tax expenditure new markets tax credit ( nmtc ) yes ; the maximum amount of annual investment eligible for nmtcs was $3.5 billion each year in calendar years 2010 and 2011 . volume cap or other allocation limits ? involves administration by a federal agency outside irs ? yes ; the treasury community development financial institutions ( cdfi ) fund certifies organizations as community development entities ( cde ) , cdfi fund also provides allocations of nmtcs to cdes through a competitive process .