stockpile . gao / nsiad - 95-67 . washington , d.c.: december 22 , 1994 . chemical weapons disposal: plans for nonstockpile chemical warfare materiel can be improved . gao / nsiad - 95-55 . washington , d.c.: december 20 , 1994 . chemical weapons: issues involving destruction technologies . ii. ) environmental permitting: the start of agent destruction operations at umatilla and anniston sites has been delayed because of several environmental permitting issues . delays at the umatilla site have resulted from several unanticipated engineering changes related to reprogramming software and design changes that required permit modifications . an additional delay occurred at the umatilla site when the facility was temporarily shut down in october 2002 by state regulators because furnaces were producing an unanticipated high amount of heavy metals during surrogate agent testing . the testing was suspended until a correction could be implemented . delays at the anniston site occurred because state environmental regulators did not accept test results for one of the furnaces because the subcontractor did not follow state permit - specified protocols . community protection: destruction operations at the anniston site have been delayed because of concerns about emergency preparedness for the surrounding communities . these concerns included the inadequacy of protection plans for area schools and for special needs residents . although we reported on this issue in july 1996 and again in august 2001 and a senior dod official identified it as a key concern in september 2001 , the army was unable to come to a satisfactory resolution with key state stakeholders prior to the planned january 2003 start date . as of june 2003 , negotiations were still ongoing between the army and key public officials to determine when destruction operations could begin . funding: systemization and closure activities were delayed at pine bluff and johnston atoll sites , respectively , because program funds planned for demilitarization were redirected in fiscal year 2002 by dod to pay for $40.5 million for additional community protection equipment for anniston . this was an unfunded budget expense , and the army reduced funds for the pine bluff site by $14.9 million , contributing to construction and systemization milestones slipping 1 year . the pine bluff site was selected because the loss of funding would not delay the projected start of operations during that fiscal year . program officials told us that the total program cost of this schedule slip would ultimately be $90 million . additionally , funds were reduced for the johnston atoll site by $25.1 million because it was in closure . according to an army official , delays increase program costs by approximately $250,000 to $300,000 a day or about $10 million per month . since 2001 , delays have caused cost increases of $256 million at the incineration sites shown in table 7 . due to the delays , the army is in the process of developing new milestones that would extend beyond those adopted in 2001 . according to an army official , the program will use events that have occurred since 2001 to present new cost estimates to dod in preparation for the fiscal year 2005 budget submission . program officials told us that they estimate costs have already increased $1.2 billion .