, normal ) during those months . the advanced weather interactive processing system is used to ingest , analyze , forecast , and disseminate operational weather data . additionally , gsa's system for tracking and administering real property / realty services investment's cost performance was rated “yellow” from october 2010 through december 2010 , while our analysis showed its performance was “green” for those months . the selected agencies generally concurred with our recommendation . omb disagreed with the recommendation to change how it reflects current investment performance in its ratings because dashboard data are updated on a monthly basis . however , we maintained that current investment performance may not always be as apparent as it should be ; while data are updated monthly , the ratings include historical data , which can mask more recent performance . most of the cost and schedule ratings on the dashboard were accurate , but did not provide sufficient emphasis on recent performance to inform oversight and decision making . performance rating discrepancies were largely due to missing or incomplete data submissions from the agencies . however , we generally found fewer such discrepancies than in previous reviews , and in all cases the selected agencies found and corrected these inaccuracies in subsequent submissions . in the case of gsa , officials did not disclose that performance data on the dashboard were unreliable for one investment because of an ongoing baseline change . without proper disclosure of pending baseline changes , the dashboard will not provide the appropriate insight into investment performance needed for near - term decision making . additionally , because of the dashboard's ratings calculations , the current performance for certain investments was not as apparent as it should be for near - real - time reporting purposes . if fully implemented , omb's recent and ongoing changes to the dashboard , including new cost and schedule rating calculations and updated investment baseline reporting , should address this issue . these dashboard changes could be important steps toward improving insight into current performance and the utility of the dashboard for effective executive oversight . in general , the number of discrepancies we found in our reviews of selected investments has decreased since july 2010 . according to our assessment of the eight selected investments , half had accurate cost ratings and nearly all had accurate schedule ratings on the dashboard . table 1 shows our assessment of the selected investments during a 6- month period from october 2010 through march 2011 . as shown above , the dashboard's cost ratings for four of the eight selected investments were accurate , and four did not match the results of our analyses during the period from october 2010 through march 2011 . the 10 final investments were commerce's geostationary operational environmental satellite — series r ground segment project and advanced weather interactive processing system , education's integrated partner management system and national student loan data system , interior's financial and business management system and land satellites data system , state's global foreign affairs compensation system and integrated logistics management system , and gsa's regional business application and system for tracking and administering real property / realty services .