penmanship . among the 91 ( 76 percent ) survey respondents that reported penmanship as challenging , several respondents noted that it is difficult for staff to read illegible handwritten medical notes . this , in turn , results in difficulty determining the accurate diagnosis , the required prescription , or a referral . tracking medications . according to 89 ( 76 percent ) of the respondents , it is challenging to track medications without an ehr . for example , one administrator stated that staff members rely heavily on patients to remember what medications they are taking — potentially causing harm if patients cannot remember what medications they are taking and the medications have dangerous interactions . amount of time to manage records . according to 86 ( 72 percent ) of the respondents , managing paper health records is challenging and requires more time for staff to complete and file paperwork . several respondents stated that the size of the paper health records has increased , resulting in additional time required to review and file records . the responding clinic and sickbay administrators described a range of alternative work - around processes that they have developed to help alleviate several of the challenges . specifically , they reported having developed additional forms , tracking methods , and alternative processes , as well as having notified coast guard hswl management of the challenges they face . however , these alternative processes may not provide sustained solutions to overcoming these challenges . until coast guard implements a new ehr solution , the challenges inherent in a predominantly paper process will likely remain . the coast guard has begun taking steps to acquire a new ehr system referred to as the electronic health record acquisition ( ehra ) . the coast guard plans to manage and oversee the acquisition of ehra through its non - major acquisition process ( nmap ) , as described in its non - major acquisition process ( nmap ) manual . nmap requires formal approval reviews at three discrete knowledge points called acquisition decision events ( ade ) and includes three phases to assess the readiness and maturity of the acquisition . the coast guard formally identified the need for a new ehr system on february 1 , 2016 , and obtained approval for the first of three ade's on february 13 , 2016 . it subsequently initiated market research activities by collecting cost , schedule , and capabilities information from commercial and government solution providers , including dod and the department of veterans affairs . the coast guard used the providers' responses to develop an alternatives analysis report that was completed in october 2017 . the report recommended a solution based on performance , risk , cost , and schedule advantages . the report indicated that the coast guard plans to use the results of the alternatives analysis to refine the acquisition strategy , and to support the development of artifacts which are required to successfully achieve the ade - 2 milestone .