the dependent variable . the dependent variable for the two models is a dummy variable — that is a variable that takes a value of one or zero depending on the presence or absence of some characteristic . for the tarmac - cancellation model this variable takes a value of one if a flight that left the gate returned to the gate after going onto the tarmac and then was canceled , and otherwise takes a value of zero . for the gate - cancellation model , the variable is set to one if the flight was canceled before taxiing out from the gate and is otherwise set to zero . variable of interest: implementation of tarmac delay rule . ( 2 ) how has dot's tarmac delay rule affected passengers and airlines ? ( 3 ) how have the requirements and practices for protecting passengers from flight delays , cancellations , and denied boardings in the united states , canada , and the eu affected passengers and airlines ? to identify and compare the trends in and reasons for flight delays and cancellations in different - sized u.s. communities , we analyzed data from dot and flightstats , a private data source from conducive technology that records flight performance information . specifically , we compared the delay , cancellation , and diversion rates for all scheduled flights at different - sized airports and communities from 2005 to 2010 . to better understand the reason for different trends , we reviewed a dot office of inspector general report and interviewed aviation industry experts ; representatives of industry associations and consumer groups ; and representatives of the three biggest u.s. legacy airlines and three biggest low - cost airlines , based on passenger enplanements . to assess the extent to which the implementation of dot's tarmac delay rule was associated with an increase in cancellations , we examined dot data on tarmac delay trends and also constructed two multivariate logistic regression models . incorporating data from dot , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , the regression models controlled for factors that can lead to flight cancellations , including weather , to assess how the rule's implementation affected the likelihood of flight cancellations . two aviation industry experts assessed our models' structure and provided feedback that we incorporated into our approach as appropriate . we also spoke with representatives of u.s. airlines , industry associations , consumer groups , and dot about the rule's impact on passengers and airlines . to assess the reliability of dot and flightstats data , we reviewed existing documentation related to the data sources and interviewed knowledgeable officials at dot and flightstats about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to determine how the requirements and practices for protecting passengers from flight delays , cancellations , and denied boardings in the united states , canada , and the eu have affected passengers and airlines , we examined the laws , regulations , international agreements , and voluntary commitments governing passenger protections in the three regions .