( see fig . of the four first - line regimens , who recommends d4t + 3tc + nvp as the first - choice regimen for rapid implementation of large - scale treatment programs in resource - limited settings because , for example , it is expected that most people will be able to tolerate it without developing side effects that would require switching to another regimen . each of the focus countries highlighted in the emergency plan has selected one or more of these first - line regimens for its national treatment strategy , and most have selected d4t + 3tc + nvp as their first - choice regimen . for people who have developed strains of hiv that are resistant to their initial treatment regimen , who recommends one of four second - line regimens . the second - line regimens use a different set of five arvs . second - line regimens can have disadvantages , which may be magnified in resource - limited settings . the disadvantages include the need to take more pills , the potential for additional side effects , the need for refrigeration during transportation and storage , and prices that are generally higher than those for first - line regimens . who emphasizes that promoting better adherence to a first - line regimen , thereby reducing the occurrence of resistance and delaying the need to shift to a second - line regimen , is particularly important in resource - limited settings because of these disadvantages . the coordinator's office , fda , and the institute of medicine , as well as the global fund , the world bank , unaids , and who , have endorsed the use of fdcs , which combine two or more arvs into one pill , as an important strategy to promote adherence to arv regimens . these organizations have determined that the benefits of fdcs include promoting adherence , by reducing the number of pills a person has to take at one time , reducing the time and costs associated with procurement and distribution of arvs , and simplifying the selection and prescribing of arvs . both national initiatives — such as the emergency plan — and multinational initiatives provide funding for hiv / aids treatment in the focus countries . in general , these initiatives provide their funding through grants , cooperative agreements , and contracts with governments and ngos . the ngos provide technical assistance and support the implementation of treatment programs by , for example , purchasing medications . in recognition of the fact that several initiatives may be active in any one country , the u.s. government and the multinational initiatives have agreed to promote coordination across their initiatives in order to use resources efficiently and effectively and to ensure rapid expansion of treatment programs . the emergency plan is the largest national initiative to combat the global hiv / aids epidemic . through the emergency plan , the u.s. government both provides direct technical assistance through field offices and funds ngos that support hiv / aids treatment programs in the focus countries .