ii. ) however , loan monitoring policies for evaluating and mitigating program - wide risk remain incomplete or outdated , and several dates doe set for completing or updating these policies passed during the course of our work . evaluating and mitigating program - wide risk is generally the responsibility of the risk management division within doe's loan programs office . this division was established in february 2012 and has been operating since its inception under incomplete or outdated policies . for example , the policies do not address how the new structure of the risk management division fits into existing policies , thus not providing clear guidance on the organizational roles of the division . doe officials told us that policy revisions were delayed in part because the loan programs office did not have a director of risk management until november 2012 and that a planned revision was put on hold to await the arrival of a new executive director in may 2013 . additionally , the risk management division had not staffed 11 of its 16 planned positions until late 2013 , when it staffed 6 of 11 vacancies . as highlighted by an independent white house review of doe's loan programs , as well as our discussions with private lenders , a risk management division is essential for mitigating risk . similarly , office of management and budget ( omb ) guidance specifies that credit programs should have robust management and oversight frameworks for monitoring the programs' progress toward achieving policy goals within acceptable risk thresholds , and taking action where appropriate to increase efficiency and effectiveness . it is difficult to determine whether doe is adequately managing risk if policies against which to compare its actions are outdated or incomplete . also , without fully staffing key monitoring positions , the risk management division is limited in its ability to revise and complete policies , as well as perform its other monitoring responsibilities . in some cases we examined , doe generally adhered to its loan monitoring policies but , in other cases , doe adhered to its monitoring policies inconsistently or not at all because doe was still developing the loan programs office's organizational structure , including staffing , management and reporting software , and implementing procedures for policies . as a consequence , doe was making loans and disbursing funds from 2009 through 2013 without a fully developed loan monitoring function . doe generally adhered to its monitoring policies for activities such as disbursing funds and reviewing borrower requests for changes to loan agreement provisions . for example , for the 10 loans in our sample , we found that , in disbursing funds , doe generally documented its analysis of the financial health of the project and recorded supervisory approvals , as required in its policy . similarly , we found that in nearly all of the 30 requests for amendments and waivers to loan agreements for the 10 loans in our sample , doe officials properly recorded their review of the requested changes . in some other cases , doe inconsistently adhered to its monitoring policies .