construction . ( a ) nothing in this order shall be construed as subjecting any function vested by law in , or assigned pursuant to law to , any agency or head thereof to the authority of any other agency or officer or as abrogating or restricting any such function in any manner . eligibility ? final eligibility ? issue dar certification / notification of certification get project into the milcon budget again ? milcon budget ? congress ? section 1 . function of the secretary of defense . the secretary of defense shall , through the economic adjustment committee , design and establish a defense economic adjustment program . sec . the defense economic adjustment program shall ( 1 ) assist substantially and seriously affected communities , businesses , and workers from the effects of major defense base closures , realignments , and defense contract - related adjustments , and ( 2 ) assist state and local governments in preventing the encroachment of civilian communities from impairing the operational utility of military installations . ( k ) assist in the diversification of local economies to lessen dependence on defense activities ; ( a ) identify problems of states , regions , metropolitan areas , or communities that result from major defense base closures , realignments , and defense contract - related adjustments , and the encroachment of the civilian community on the mission of military installations and that require federal assistance ; ( l ) encourage and facilitate private sector interim use of lands and buildings to generate jobs as military activities diminish ; ( m ) develop ways to streamline property disposal procedures to enable defense - impacted communities to acquire base property to generate jobs as military activities diminish ; and ( b ) use and maintain a uniform socioeconomic impact analysis justify to the use of federal economic adjustment resources prior to particular realignments ; ( n ) encourage resolution of regulatory issues that impede encroachment prevention and local economic adjustment efforts . sec . economic adjustment committee . sec . responsibilities of executive agencies . ( a ) the head of each agency represented on the committee shall designate an agency representative to: ( 1 ) serve as a liaison with the secretary of defense's economic adjustment staff ; ( 2 ) coordinate agency support and participation in economic adjustment assistance projects ; and ( 3 ) assist in resolving defense - related impacts on defense - affected communities . ( 19 ) administrator of the environmental protection agency ; ( 20 ) administrator of general services ; ( 21 ) administrator of the small business administration ; and ( b ) all executive agencies shall: ( 1 ) support , to the extent permitted by law , the economic adjustment assistance activities of the secretary of defense . such support may include the use and application of personnel , legal authorities , and available financial resources .