state has expedited interviews for students . in addition , the length of time that some visa clearances are valid has been extended . in february 2007 , state issued guidance to posts that applicants should receive an appointment for a student visa interview within 15 days or less . we are continuing to study aspect of these issues , including visa delays and visas mantis security checks , which we will be reporting on in the coming months . the united states must maintain an appropriate balance between protecting national security interests and ensuring our long - term competitiveness . the united states has relied on undergraduate and graduate students from other countries to support both economic and foreign policy interests . changes designed to protect national security in the wake of september 11 may have contributed to real and perceived barriers for international students , and the subsequent decline in international enrollments raises concerns about the long - term competitiveness of u.s. colleges and universities . rising u.s. tuition costs and growing higher education options worldwide further demonstrate that the united states cannot take its position as the top destination for international students for granted . while federal efforts to reduce barriers for international students have helped , monitoring current trends and federal policies is essential to ensuring that the united states continues to obtain talented international students in the face of greater global competition . since 2002 , state and other agencies have implemented many of our recommendations aimed at strengthening the visa process as an antiterrorism tool while improving processes to facilitate legitimate travel . in particular , state has issued standard operating procedures , in consultation with homeland security , to inform consular officers on issues such as special security checks and student visa requirements . in 2005 , we reported a significant decline in both visas mantis processing times and cases pending more than 60 days . recent visa data show an increase in the number of student visas issued in the last few years . according to state department data , the combined student visa issuance levels for fiscal year 2006 increased by about 20 percent from fiscal year 2002 . my testimony today touches on several of the key issues that may affect the united states' ability to continue attracting the world's most talented international students to our universities and colleges . my remarks today are drawn primarily from previous gao reports , and the framework for discussing the issues is based on the perspectives and insights from the comptroller general's forum held in september 2006 to discuss american global competitiveness in higher education that included leaders from government , universities , research institutions , higher education organizations , and industry . the forum participants' suggestions and views reported here are not intended to reflect the views of gao . all of the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the global landscape of higher education is changing and providing more alternatives for students , particularly as other countries expand their educational capacity and technology - based distance learning opportunities increase .