gao - 03-809 . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2003 . we provided a draft of this report to hhs for comment . the department's administration for children and families provided comments . ( 3 ) what does the research say about the effectiveness of services unique to subpart 1 ? to answer these questions , we sent two surveys to child welfare directors to obtain information on how they use title iv - b funds . to obtain a breakdown of state spending for subparts 1 and 2 , we sent the first survey to all 50 states and the district of columbia and received responses from 47 states . we sent the second survey to the 30 states that provided sufficient data on their first survey within the timeframe that allowed us to conduct the second survey . we received responses from 17 states , providing detailed information on the 3 services they reported as receiving the most subpart 1 funding and the 3 services they reported as receiving the most subpart 2 funding . because the data from these states may not be representative of all states , we have used data from the second survey to provide examples of the types of children and families served by title iv - b . we also conducted site visits in california , new jersey , ohio , and washington , where we interviewed state and local officials and service providers to obtain more in - depth information on the services provided and the types of children and families served . these states represent both geographic diversity and diversity in how states used subpart 1 funds . in addition , these states were identified as using innovative cps tools or processes . further , we reviewed applicable laws and regulations ; interviewed hhs central and regional office officials about their oversight activities with regard to title iv - b ; reviewed results from hhs's assessments of state child welfare agencies , known as child and family services reviews ( cfsr ) ; reviewed the literature assessing the effectiveness of child welfare services ; and interviewed child welfare experts . title iv - b of the social security act , established in 1935 , authorizes funds to states to provide a wide array of services to prevent the occurrence of abuse , neglect , and foster care placements . in 1993 , the congress created a new program as subpart 2 of title iv - b ( now known as promoting safe and stable families ) , which funds similar types of services but is more prescriptive in how states can spend the funds . no federal eligibility criteria apply to the children and families receiving services funded by title iv - b . the amount of subpart 1 funds a state receives is based on its population under the age of 21 and the state per capita income , while subpart 2 funding is determined by the percentage of children in a state who receive food stamps . in fiscal year 2003 , the congress appropriated $292 million for subpart 1 and $405 million for subpart 2 .