these recommendations have not been implemented . preparing youth to successfully transition to independence is a daunting task that requires coordinated and continuous services across many social service systems including child welfare , health , education , and housing . the chafee program has provided a single funding stream that can be used to meet service needs across these social systems . however , this funding alone is not sufficient to overcome state challenges in meeting the varied service needs of emancipating youth . the child welfare system must work with housing agencies to remove barriers faced by youth with no employment history or cosigner , and with health agencies , to ensure a smooth transition between the youth and adult mental health systems . in addition , states continue to have difficulty building adequate service capacity for housing and mental health in all locales , and child welfare staff still struggle to identify the myriad of public and private sector programs that exist to assist youth . our november 2004 report and our may 2007 testimony present recommendations we made to hhs to make information available to states and local areas about other federal programs that may assist youth in their transition to self - sufficiency . hhs did not comment on our 2004 recommendation , but disagreed with our recent recommendation to improve awareness of and access to various social services funded by the federal government . hhs stated that the recommendation was insufficient to address the need for additional services , and incorrectly implied that local child welfare agencies were not already aware of and using such resources . we acknowledged that increasing awareness of existing federal resources is not the only action needed , but in the course of our work across the years , continue to find that caseworkers are sometimes unaware of the full array of federal resources , such as health and housing , available in their locale , or had not coordinated with other agencies to use them . we continue to support the view that federal action , such as modifying the cfda , would allow caseworkers and others to more easily identify services and service providers funded by federal agencies in closest proximity to the youth and families they serve . how well the chafee program has worked to improve outcomes for emancipated youth among states is still unknown 8 years after the passage of fcia , and hhs has not yet implemented its information system that is intended to meet fcia requirements for collecting and monitoring a state's performance . given the significant variation in the number of youth served and services provided across states , an interim system for measuring state progress would seem to be warranted . however , while hhs has an oversight process to measure outcomes of state child welfare systems as a whole , this process no longer includes measures required by fcia . similarly , while acf's regional offices conduct much of the federal oversight for the chafee program , the oversight tools currently in place do not provide standard information needed to measure and compare performance across states . we analyzed federal financial and foster care data .