stc . the stc reports on its results through annual , weekly , and after - action reports . specifically , the stc reports on its results through an annual accountability report provided to cbp headquarters . these annual accountability reports provide information on the stc's progress toward meeting operational and administrative milestones , accomplishments related to each of the stc's five objectives , and best practices across the south texas region . reported accomplishments in the fiscal year 2013 accomplishment report include intelligence sharing among interagency partners to identify targets and the completion of several joint operations . the report also includes performance measures for several operations , such as the number of arrests and seizures of drugs and currency . this report addresses the following two questions: how does dhs use collaborative mechanisms in arizona and south texas to coordinate border security efforts ? to what extent has dhs established performance measures and reporting processes and how , if at all , does dhs assess and monitor the effectiveness of the collaborative mechanisms in arizona and south texas ? to address these objectives , we visited the jfc and the actt in arizona and the stc in south texas and conducted interviews with officials in cbp headquarters . in arizona , we visited jfc and actt headquarters in tucson and observed the jfc's joint intelligence and operations center and an actt leadership meeting . we also conducted interviews with jfc and actt headquarters officials . in south texas , we visited stc headquarters in laredo , where we observed operations at border patrol checkpoints and poes as well as the south texas border intelligence center , and conducted interviews with stc headquarters officials . during our site visits to arizona and south texas , we also met with officials from ofo , border patrol , and oam . additionally , we conducted semistructured interviews via telephone with officials from 5 cbp component offices from the 21 cbp component locations in arizona and 5 cbp component offices from the 43 cbp component locations in the south texas region . we also conducted semistructured interviews via telephone with officials from 6 actt partner agencies from the 66 actt partner agencies in arizona and 6 stc unified command partner agencies from the 33 stc unified command partner agencies in south texas.component offices to interview based on type of component , the level of threat as defined by the number of cbp apprehensions of illegal entrants , and geographic location . we selected interagency partners to interview based on type of governmental unit and level of participation in the mechanisms . while we cannot generalize information obtained from these interviews to all cbp component offices and interagency partners in we selected arizona and south texas , information from these interviews provided us with insights into how cbp has coordinated border security efforts . to describe how dhs uses collaborative mechanisms in arizona and south texas to coordinate border security efforts , we reviewed documents from 2009 through 2014 obtained from jfc , actt , and stc officials , such as charter documents , establishment memos , and organizational charts , to identify the structure and roles and responsibilities for each mechanism .