the drc has had a turbulent history . in 1965 , fewer than 5 years after the nation achieved its independence from belgium , a military regime seized control of the drc and ruled , often brutally , for more than three decades . it was toppled in 1997 by a coalition of internal groups and neighboring countries to the east , including rwanda and uganda , after dissident rwandan groups began operating in the drc . subsequent efforts by a new drc government to secure the withdrawal of rwandan and ugandan troops prompted a second war in 1998 that eventually drew the armies of three more african nations into the drc . according to the international rescue committee , this second war resulted in an estimated 3.9 million deaths . based on all of these responses , we compared and contrasted the challenges identified to determine common themes and focused on challenges that were internal to the drc . beginning in 1999 , a united nations ( un ) peacekeeping force was deployed to the drc . abuses and the need for internal reforms . it has also helped fund refugees' food needs and supported mental health assistance and market access programs in areas of high refugee return . in fiscal year 2007 , state supported refugee assistance activities in the drc , which were implemented primarily by the un high commissioner on refugees , other international organizations , and ngos . in addition , state contributed to overall africa assistance programs implemented by the un high commissioner on refugees and the international committee of the red cross , which help support refugees and conflict victims in central africa . usaid , hhs , and dol allocated funds to support the act's social development and rehabilitation objectives . to discuss key challenges to addressing the act's policy objectives , we conducted a round - table session with a nonprobability sample of 11 nongovernmental organizations that offer a broad range of experience and expertise implementing programs and projects in the drc . following the drc elections , on december 22 , 2006 , congress enacted the drc relief , security , and democracy promotion act of 2006 ( the act ) . the act established 15 policy objectives aimed at addressing a range of concerns regarding humanitarian , social development , economic and natural resource , governance , and security issues in the drc . also , it stated the secretary of state should withhold certain assistance to the drc if the secretary determined that the drc was not making sufficient progress toward accomplishing these policy objectives . the act mandated that gao review actions taken by u.s. agencies to achieve the act's policy objectives . in this report , we identify ( 1 ) u.s. programs and activities that support the act's objectives , ( 2 ) major impediments hindering accomplishment of these objectives , and ( 3 ) u.s. efforts to assess progress toward accomplishing the objectives . hhs's centers for disease control and prevention has also sought to strengthen the capacity of public health personnel , promote infrastructure development and improve the quality of clinical laboratories through grants and cooperative agreements .