congress conceived of the u.s . postal service ( usps ) as a financially self - sufficient entity that was expected to cover its expenses almost entirely through postal revenues , yet at the end of fiscal year 2011 , it had incurred a $5.1 billion loss for the year , had $2 billion remaining on its $15 billion borrowing limit , and had not yet made its $5.5 billion scheduled retiree health benefits payment to the federal government . approximately 80 percent of its retail facilities do not generate sufficient revenue to cover their costs . moreover , the number of usps - operated retail facilities,about 32,000 , has remained largely unchanged over the past 5 years even as visits to , and transactions at , postal retail facilities have decreased by about 16 percent and 18 percent , respectively . also during this period , mail volume has declined by about 21 percent , and usps's financial condition continued to deteriorate as net losses accumulated to more than $25 billion . usps projects a $14.1 billion net loss for fiscal year 2012 and faces a continuing decline in the demand for its products and services . figure 1 compares the decline in transactions and visits to usps - operated facilities with the percentage decline in usps - operated facilities over the past 5 years . to address its financial crisis , the postmaster general told congress last september that usps plans to reduce annual costs organization - wide by $20 billion — or 27 percent of its projected $73 billion total operating expenses — by fiscal year 2015 . one of the cost - savings initiatives he discussed was optimizing the retail network by reducing the number of usps - operated facilities and increasing the number of lower - cost , alternative retail options , such as self - service kiosks and partnerships with retailers , that would preserve service close to where customers live , work and shop . currently , in addition to usps - operated facilities , customers can purchase postal products or services at over 70,000 locations , including non - usps - operated facilities consisting of 3,700 contract postal units and community post offices , retailers that have partnered with usps to sell postal products and services , and on its website . customers can also order supplies by phone and have packages picked up at their door . the scale of the actions that usps plans to take over the next 3 years is greater than anything it has previously undertaken . it plans to review approximately half of its retail facilities for possible closure , reduction in hours , and alternative access , including transfer of services to a contract unit or rural delivery service . in addition , usps is exploring expansion of alterative access through such things as franchising opportunities and use of kiosks to create additional channels to access retail services . some members of congress have raised concerns about these plans and the potential negative impact that closing post offices could have on affected communities .