we welcome any questions you have at this time . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact michael brostek at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or brostekm@gao.gov or george scott at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or scottg@gao.gov . individuals making contributions to this testimony include david lewis , assistant director ; sarah farkas , sheila r. mccoy , john mingus , danielle novak , daniel novillo , carlo salerno , andrew j. stephens , and jessica thomsen . the federal government helps students and families save , pay for , and repay the costs of postsecondary education through grant and loan programs authorized under title iv of the higher education act of 1965 , as amended , and through tax preferences — reductions in federal tax liabilities that result from preferential provisions in the tax code , such as exemptions and exclusions from taxation , deductions , credits , deferrals , and preferential tax rates . can tax preferences and title iv programs be better coordinated to maximize their effectiveness ? mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes our statement . assistance provided under title iv programs include pell grants for low - income students , the academic competitiveness and national science and mathematics access to retain talent grants , plus loans , which parents as well as graduate and professional students may apply for , and stafford loans . while each of the three grants reduces the price paid by the student , student loans help to finance the remaining costs and are to be repaid according to varying terms . stafford loans may be either subsidized or unsubsidized . the federal government pays the interest cost on subsidized loans while the student is in school , and during a 6-month period known as the grace period , after the student leaves school . for unsubsidized loans , students are responsible for all interest costs . how can congress best evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of postsecondary education aid provided through the tax code ? stafford and plus loans are provided to students through both the federal family education loan program ( ffel ) and the william d. ford direct loan program ( fdlp ) . the federal government's role in financing and administering these two loan programs differs significantly . under fdlp , the federal government makes loans to students using federal funds . to receive title iv aid , students ( along with parents , in the case of dependent students ) must complete a free application for federal student aid form . information from the fafsa , particularly income and asset information , is used to determine the amount of money — called the expected family contribution — that the student and / or family is expected to contribute to the student's education . federal law establishes the criteria that students must meet to be considered independent of their parents for the purpose of financial aid and the share of family and student income and assets that are expected to be available for the student's education . once the efc is established , it is compared with the cost of attendance at the institution chosen by the student .