liquidity . our indicator of liquidity is short - term debt ( excluding deposit liabilities ) as a percentage of total assets , except separate accounts . we calculated each indicator , for each quarter , for each of the currently designated nonbanks from the second quarter of 2012 to the second quarter of 2016 . we also calculated the medians of each indicator for publicly traded banks and insurance companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more to provide a frame of reference . like our indicators for bank sifis , our indicators for designated nonbanks have some limitations . for example , the indicators do not identify causal links between changes in designated nonbanks' characteristics and the dodd - frank act . interconnectedness . our indicators of interconnectedness are gross notional amounts of credit default swaps outstanding for which the designated nonbank is the reference entity and total debt outstanding ( excluding deposit liabilities ) . leverage . our indicator of leverage is total equity as a percentage of total assets , except separate accounts . rather , the indicators track changes in the size , interconnectedness , leverage , and liquidity of designated nonbanks since the passage of the act to examine if the changes have been consistent with the goals of the act . however , other factors , such as capital standards for large , internationally active insurance companies , may also affect designated nonbanks and , thus , the indicators . furthermore , to the extent that a number of rules implementing provisions related to designated nonbanks have not yet been finalized , our indicators include the effects of these rules only insofar as designated nonbanks have changed their behavior in anticipation of expected rules . in this regard , our indicators provide baselines against which to compare future trends . figure 1 shows the indicators from the second quarter of 2012 through the second quarter 2016 . in november 2011 and october 2012 , the federal reserve issued specific rules requiring designated nonbank financial companies to conduct resolution planning and stress testing , respectively , and in june 2016 proposed rules that would establish corporate governance , risk - management , and liquidity risk - management standards for these firms . thus , the current values of our indicators are baselines against which to compare future trends as more rules for designated nonbanks are implemented . our indicators allow for the following observations: based on their total assets , both designated nonbanks are relatively large . they are all larger than the median publicly traded bank or insurance company with assets of $50 billion or more . gross notional amounts of credit default swaps outstanding ( for which designated nonbanks are the reference entities ) have decreased since the second quarter of 2012 , suggesting that the designated nonbanks are relatively less interconnected and thus have smaller potential spillover effects than in prior years by this measure , all else being equal . total debt outstanding ( excluding deposits ) for the two designated nonbanks has decreased since the second quarter of 2012 .