unknown . the final interagency - approved draft of the report was completed in may , 2000 . secretary summers and attorney general reno signed the transmittal to congress in june and august , 2000 respectively . department of defense , department of justice , department of state , department of transportation , coast guard , dea , fbi , national security council , omb , ondcp , cia , hhs foreign governments narcotics certification , including the money laundering component , involves over - arching government policy - making in an interagency context . oe is the best place to coordinate all of the bureaus' input into that decision - making process . collect data on narcotics seizures , money laundering , and foreign governments' financial systems and cooperation with treasury bureaus . preparation for interagency certification meetings including information described above . prepare updates for secretary and deputy secretary on certification process ; prepare decision memorandum for final certification recommendations . review demarches to foreign governments . participate in interagency certification strategic decisions , recommend departmental concurrence in these decisions . participate in drafting of annual incsr . review incsr drafts , review certification demarche drafts . participate in interagency certification decision process using treasury bureaus' input . advocate treasury's position as to specific countries' certification in interagency process . some years , treasury has been required to testify before congress as to certification recommendations . law enforcement mission: reduce the trafficking , smuggling , and use of illicit drugs das ( law enforcement ) oversight the purpose of the project is to implement the 73 action items in the general counterdrug intelligence plan ( gcip ) . the gcip is designed to enhance the nation's critical counterdrug intelligence structure to ensure counterdrug activities of the law enforcement and intelligence communities are prepared for the new century . the gcip is intended to ensure that departmental policymakers , intelligence systems , and law enforcement professionals are able to act in a coordinated and efficient manner to curtail the activities of criminal drug organizations . presidential initiative: the gcip has been an administration initiative that builds on the national drug control strategy . department of defense , department of justice , department of state , department of transportation , coast guard , dea , fbi , national security council , omb , ondcp , intelligence community state and / or local governments , foreign governments the gcip is an administration initiative . the goal of the gcip is extremely broad , establishing an interagency architecture that supports agents and intelligence analysts , in the field ; improves federal , state , and local relationships ; promotes international cooperation ; and responds to the needs of departmental policymakers as they formulate counterdrug policies and resource decisions . gather data from bureaus on existing and proposed efforts to implement gcip action item , including data on personnel , recruitment , training , information technology , etc . prepare background materials and briefing papers on the objectives of the gcip , and on funding for the counterdrug intelligence secretariat ( cdx ) . the cdx is the staff arm of the counterdrug intelligence coordinating group ( cdicg ) , the interagency coordinating body overseeing the overall federal implementation of the gcip .