irs agreed with this recommendation . in closing , irs has a massive challenge in ensuring compliance with the tax laws . looking forward , with budget constraints a reality and burden on taxpayers a concern , doing more compliance checks before refunds are issued has great appeal for both taxpayers and irs . through oversight efforts like today's hearing , congress can encourage and authorize the use of appropriately designed prerefund compliance checks that are critical to stopping erroneous refunds and ensuring that federal dollars are protected . chairman boustany , ranking member lewis , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact michael brostek , director , strategic issues , on ( 202 ) 512-9110 or brostekm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include joanna stamatiades , assistant director ; steven j. berke ; amy r. bowser ; david fox ; tom gilbert ; lawrence m. korb ; inna livits ; and sabrina streagle . table 2 summarizes the internal revenue service's ( irs ) 13 areas of existing math error authority ( mea ) . as early as the first codification of the internal revenue law in 1926 , congress granted irs mea so that irs does not have to provide taxpayers with a statutory notice of deficiency for math errors . the process differs slightly for electronically and paper filed returns . for electronic returns , irs checks for possible mismatches among taxpayers' identity information , such as their names , social security numbers , and addresses . when mismatches occur , irs rejects the tax return back to the taxpayer or paid preparer for possible correction . for paper returns , irs staff review each return to ensure that all forms and data needed to process the return are present and may correspond with the taxpayer for missing information . those performance audits were conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . prerefund compliance checks enable irs to help confirm taxpayers' identities and ensure that returns have required information , quickly and efficiently correct certain errors with a virtual certainty of being right , identify and audit some returns even before refunds are completed , and help detect possible fraud . figure 1 shows irs's prerefund process . when tax returns are first received by irs , the initial process helps correct taxpayer identification errors and ensure taxpayers have filled in all fields that are required for irs to process the return . irs staff then transcribe data from the paper return into irs computer systems and programming matches taxpayers' identity information if possible .