meeting this authorization requirement is a function of recruiting and retention . the term recruiting refers to the military components' ability to bring new members into the military to carry out mission - essential tasks in the near term and to begin creating a sufficient pool of entry - level servicemembers to develop into future midlevel and upper - level military leaders . to accomplish this task , active , reserve , and national guard components set goals for accessions , or new recruits , who will enter basic training each year , and strive to meet their annual goals through their recruiting programs ; advertising ; and , where needed , financial incentives . the term retention refers to the military services' ability to retain servicemembers with the necessary skills and experience . again , the components rely on financial incentives , where needed , to meet their retention goals . at the same time , dod was not able to fill over 112,000 positions in consistently underfilled occupational specialties . the percentage of consistently over - and underfilled occupational specialties varies across the components . for example , from fiscal years 2000 through 2005 , the percentage of consistently overfilled occupational specialties ranged from 1 percent in the active navy to 44 percent in the navy reserve . similarly , from fiscal years 2000 through 2005 , the percentage of consistently underfilled occupational specialties ranged from 16 percent in the active army to 65 percent in the active navy . table 5 provides information on consistently over - and underfilled occupational specialties for each component . appendix iv provides more detailed information on the occupational specialties that were consistently over - and underfilled for each component . our analysis further shows the number of servicemembers that exceeded the authorizations assigned to occupational specialties ranged from just 1 servicemember to almost 6,000 servicemembers . for example , the active army reserve technical engineer occupational specialty was overfilled by 1 servicemember in fiscal year 2000 , and the active navy seaman occupational specialty was overfilled by almost 6,000 servicemembers in that same year . similarly , we found shortages in the number of servicemembers assigned to occupational specialties ranged from just 1 servicemember to over 8,200 servicemembers . for example , the marine corps reserve parachute rigger occupational specialty was underfilled by 1 servicemember in fiscal year 2000 and the active navy hospital corpsman occupational specialty was underfilled by over 8,200 servicemembers in that same year . table 6 presents several reasons provided by component officials to explain why certain occupational specialties have been consistently overfilled . for example , an air force reserve official told us that this component recruited more tactical aircraft avionics systems personnel than authorized because it is a high - demand , technical occupational specialty that is critical to one of the air force reserve's missions . as a result , this occupational specialty has been consistently overfilled by about 160 to 240 individuals each year for the past 6 years . we also reviewed recruiting and retention reports and briefings issued by gao , dod , the military services , the congressional research service , the congressional budget office , and research organizations such as rand .