individual components have also implemented changes . the army , for instance , increased the amount of cash bonuses it offers to new recruits in hard - to - fill military occupations up to $20,000 . in december 2004 , the national guard announced that it is increasing its initial enlistment bonuses from $8,000 to $10,000 for individuals without prior service who sign up for one of the national guard's top - priority military occupations such as infantry , military police , and transportation . dod officials also said the army and the national guard are increasing the amount of their college scholarship funds for new enlistees . the army increased the maximum college scholarship from $50,000 to $70,000 , while the army national guard doubled the amount it will provide to repay a recruit's student loan to $20,000 . finally , the army and marine corps components are increasing their recruiting forces to meet their additional recruiting challenges . the army plans to add 965 recruiters to its recruiter force in fiscal year 2005 , for a total force of 6,030 recruiters , and the marine corps plans to add 425 recruiters to its recruiter force by fiscal year 2007 , bringing its total recruiter force to 3,025 recruiters . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for questions about this statement , please contact derek b. stewart at ( 202 ) 512-5559 ( e - mail address: stewartd@gao.gov ) or david e. moser at ( 202 ) 512-7611 ( e - mail address: moserd@gao.gov ) . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included alissa h. czyz , joseph j. faley , brian d. pegram , and john s. townes . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . servicemembers have the opportunity to either leave the military or reenlist when their contracts expire . a common retention concern is that too few people with the needed skills and experience will stay in the military , thereby creating a shortage of experienced personnel , decreased military efficiency , and lower job satisfaction . although the services have each created their own unique means of tracking retention , they all measure retention in a career path at key points that are delineated by various combinations of years of service and number of enlistments . thank you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss our preliminary observations on recruitment and retention issues within the active and reserve components . to meet its human capital needs , the department of defense ( dod ) must convince several hundred thousand people to join the military each year , the majority of whom are recent high school graduates .