tsa concurred with this recommendation . in its comments to our report , tsa stated that it will monitor , update , and report the results of its efforts to capture operational data and evaluate its associated impacts to operational costs . in january 2012 , we found that tsa did not fully follow dhs acquisition policies when acquiring a different version of advanced imaging technology , which resulted in dhs approving nationwide deployment without full knowledge of tsa's revised specifications . among other things , we found that tsa had changed key performance parameters during the acquisition process without formally informing dhs acquisition officials , in violation of dhs policy . we recommended that tsa develop a road map describing when vendors will meet milestones for further developing advanced imaging technology and that tsa brief congress as part of the budget process . following operational testing , tsa prepares a system evaluation report , which provides effectiveness and suitability determinations along with potential system improvement recommendations . the dhs director of operational test and evaluation reviews the report and prepares a letter of assessment . at the time of our engagement , the third explosives detection system's scheduled full rate production decision had not yet occurred , but it had already been delayed by more than 60 months , resulting in an additional $1.2 million in testing costs . tsa began qualification testing of the system in fall 2010 , and , after operational testing in fall 2011 , tsa found the system to be effective with major limitations and suitable with minor limitations . tsa encountered issues with bag tracking and reliability , among other things . as of summer 2015 , after five rounds of retests , the vendor was pursuing a third party test of the system . according to tsa and dhs testing officials , the actual single rounds of qualification and operational testing timeframes are not long , but it takes vendors a significant amount of time to correct issues identified during testing , which results in a delay to the start of tsa's next round of testing . we found in june 2014 that the difficulties in getting vendors systems to meet the higher level detection for advanced imaging technology required the vendors to go back and conduct remedial developmental testing activities . we also found that the qualification testing environment is not conducive to remediating deficiencies that require extensive additional development work because feedback to vendors during this phase is limited . tsa testing officials stated they believe that vendors submit immature technologies and use the testing process to inform further system development , but tsa expects systems to be fully mature at the start of testing . tsa has acknowledged the need to better ensure technology maturity at the start of testing to improve the efficiency of its test and evaluation process . in addition to other efforts , a key action tsa is taking to achieve this goal is developing a third party testing strategy — through which a third party tester will help ensure systems are mature prior to entering tsa's test and evaluation process .