president approved brac recommendations . after receiving the recommendations , the president was to review the recommendations of the secretary of defense and the commission and prepare a report by september 23 , 2005 , containing his approval or disapproval of the commission's recommendations as a whole . had the president disapproved of the commissions' recommendations , the commission would have had until october 20 , 2005 , to submit a revised list of recommendations to the president for further consideration . if the president had not submitted a report to congress of his approval of the commissions recommendations by november 7 , 2005 , the brac process would have been terminated . the president submitted his report and approval of the 2005 commission's recommendations on september 15 , 2005 . congress allowed the recommendations to become binding . after the president transmitted his approval of the commission's recommendations to congress , the secretary of defense would have been prohibited from implementing the recommendations if congress had passed a joint resolution of disapproval within 45 days of the date of the president's submission or the adjournment of congress for the session , whichever was sooner . since congress did not pass such a resolution , the recommendations became binding in november 2005 . congress established clear time frames for implementation . the brac legislation required dod to complete recommendations for closing or realigning bases made in the brac 2005 round within the 6-year time frame ending on september 15 , 2011 , 6 years from the date the president submitted his approval of the recommendations to congress . in july 2010 , in our most recent report on the implementation of the 2005 brac recommendations , we reported that many dod locations are scheduled to complete actions to implement the recommendations within months of the deadline , leaving little or no margin for slippage to finish constructing buildings and to move or hire the needed personnel . there are a number of important similarities and differences between brac and a civilian process as proposed in cpra . as a similarity , both brac and cpra employ the all - or - nothing approach to disposals and consolidations , meaning that once the final list is approved , it must be approved or rejected as a whole . this approach can help overcome stakeholders' interests . another similarity may be the need for a phased approach . through the five prior brac rounds , dod has reduced its domestic infrastructure , transferred hundreds of thousands of acres of unneeded property to other federal and nonfederal entities , and saved funds for application to higher priority defense needs . similarly , it may take several brac - like rounds to complete the disposals and consolidations of civilian real property owned and leased by many disparate agencies including gsa , va , interior , and the department of energy . on the other hand , an important difference in the two processes may be the role of the independent board . dod has participated in the brac process by generating lists of bases to close and realign that the last four brac commissions have then reviewed .