we also interviewed irs officials . we assessed the reliability of the fbar database and e - trak to use limited data from these databases for our own analysis . some whistleblowers have challenged these exclusions in the courts . also , in 2015 , the irs taxpayer advocate service included a legislative recommendation in its annual report that congress amend the tax whistleblower law to specifically include fbar penalties in proceeds . on february 9 , 2018 , congress passed legislation that replaced the term “collected proceeds” with the word “proceeds” and defined proceeds as “penalties , interest , additions to tax , and additional amounts provided under the internal revenue laws and any proceeds arising from laws for which the internal revenue service is authorized to administer , enforce , or investigate , including criminal fines and civil forfeitures , and violations of reporting requirements.” prior to the statutory change in the definition of proceeds , you asked us to review how often and to what extent whistleblower claims involve cases where fbar penalties were also assessed . this report ( 1 ) describes the extent to which the whistleblower office included fbar penalties in whistleblower awards prior to the change in the definition of proceeds ; ( 2 ) examines how irs used whistleblower information on fbar noncompliance and how irs responded to the statutory change in the definition of proceeds ; ( 3 ) describes the purposes for which irs collects and uses data from the fbar database and assesses the controls for ensuring data reliability ; and ( 4 ) summarizes what is known about the potential effect that exclusions from whistleblower awards , including fbar penalties , may have had on whistleblowers bringing claims to irs . this report is a public version of a sensitive report that we issued in august 2018 . irs deemed some of the information in our august report to be sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information about the information security safeguards of irs's fbar database as well as an associated recommendation . this includes checking the valid syntax of inputs to ensure they match the specified definitions for format and content . nist guidance also recommends controls to help ensure the information system behaves predictably , even if invalid data are entered . while fbar team employees transcribe data manually into the database from emails or faxed or mailed paper forms , there are no procedures for data testing or validation . for example , there is no secondary check by another individual to ensure data were entered correctly and completely . the fbar database procedures also lack sufficient validity checks to ensure that the data entered are accurate . there are some basic data entry checks in the database , such as limiting input to alphanumeric entries and a warning if a date is more than a year from the current date . however , these checks serve only as a reminder for the employees entering the data to verify its accuracy ; these checks do not prevent erroneous data from being entered and retained . without additional controls for accuracy and validity , irs risks relying upon inaccurate information for some of its reporting and decision making .