mitigate risks . key aspects of processes established by dhs and the trio components related to the two best practices associated with mitigating risks: develop risk mitigation plans . risk mitigation plans are developed in accordance with the risk management strategy and include a recommended course of action for each critical risk . the risk mitigation plan for a given risk includes techniques and methods used to avoid , reduce , and control the probability of risk occurrence ; the extent of damage incurred should the risk occur ; or both . elements of this practice include determining the levels and thresholds that define when a risk becomes unacceptable and triggers the execution of a risk mitigation plan or contingency plan , identifying the person or group responsible for addressing each risk , determining the costs and benefits of implementing the risk mitigation plan for each risk , developing an overall risk mitigation plan for the work to orchestrate the implementation of individual risk mitigation plans , and developing contingency plans for selected critical risks in the event impacts associated with the risks are realized . dhs partially met this best practice . dhs's risk management program documentation reflected the development of risk response plans for most risks , including all those determined to be of medium and high exposure level . dhs identified those responsible for addressing each risk . however , dhs and ibc did not always develop sufficiently detailed risk mitigation plans including specific risk - handling action items , determination of the costs and benefits of implementing the risk mitigation plan for each risk , and developing contingency plans for selected critical risks in the event that their impacts are realized . for example , a risk associated with ibc's capacity and experience for migrating large agencies the size of coast guard and tsa was identified in july 2014 . although dhs developed plans to help mitigate this risk , a contingency plan was not developed prior to realizing the adverse impact of not implementing coast guard and tsa on ibc's modernized solution . rather , a contingency plan working group ( cpwg ) to address this and other concerns was established in january 2017 , over 2 years after the risk was initially identified . further , thresholds were not used within the risk management program to define when a risk becomes unacceptable , triggering the execution of a risk mitigation plan or contingency plan . implement risk mitigation plans . risk mitigation plans are implemented to facilitate a proactive program to regularly monitor risks and the status and results of risk - handling actions to effectively control and manage risks during the work effort . best practice elements include revisiting and reevaluating risk status at regular intervals to support the discovery of new risks or new risk - handling options that can require reassessment of risks and re - planning of risk mitigation efforts . elements also include providing a method for tracking open risk - handling action items to closure , establishing a schedule or period of performance for each risk - handling activity , invoking selected risk - handling options when monitored risks exceed defined thresholds , and providing a continued commitment of resources for each risk mitigation plan .