categorized projects . usaid and state officials categorized projects in the agencies' respective qrf program databases by thematic goal . the agency officials categorized projects in support of minority groups as “minority directive” upon initiation , which allowed them to track these projects for reporting purposes . for the 14 projects that we spot - checked , the agencies were able to provide supporting documents from their databases that included information about the projects and showed that projects were categorized as “minority directive.” further , as a result of categorizing projects , the agencies were able to produce lists that reported the amount of assistance approved in support of minority groups for each directive . these lists also showed that numerous minority groups were beneficiaries . conducted outreach to identify potential beneficiaries . to inform potential beneficiaries of the availability of assistance through the qrf program , prts and the special coordinator for minority issues in baghdad conducted informal outreach to community members , religious leaders , elected officials , and civil society groups . for example , the special coordinator met with minority group leaders to discuss funding needs for projects , such as promoting private investment opportunities . in addition , the agencies identified potential beneficiaries through existing u.s. military and usaid relationships with iraqi officials and organizations . this report is a publicly releasable version of a prior gao report , issued in may 2012 , that state and usaid had designated sensitive but unclassified . according to usaid and state officials , prts or the qrf program implementing partner conducted final site visits and prepared project close - out reports . we found that the implementing partner prepared close - out reports for all 14 projects that we spot - checked . conducted third - party assessments . state officials said that site visits by u.s. government personnel could compromise the security of project sites and iraqi recipients . completed in 2010 , the usaid evaluation concluded that the information reported by the implementing partner was valid and recipients received the equipment that was agreed upon in the grant agreement . as of february 2012 , state had not finalized its third party's qrf program evaluation . during our fieldwork in iraq , iraqi recipients told us that assistance reached their communities . the qrf program — which served , among other things , as usaid's and state's primary mechanism to provide , categorize , track , monitor , and report on assistance to minority groups in iraq from 2008 to 2011 — ended in december 2011 . further , prts — which helped identify and monitor qrf projects — ceased operations during the drawdown of u.s. forces from iraq during 2011 . u.s. forces completely withdrew from iraq in december 2011 . according to usaid and state officials , the two agencies have continued to assist iraq's minority groups through the obligation of an additional $28 million in reprogrammed esf funds from prior fiscal years . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of state , and the administrator of usaid . the report is also available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .