however , this has not been completed . the pay was first authorized in fiscal year 1981 , and dod defines it as a financial incentive to retain qualified , experienced officer aviators who have completed — or are within 1 year of completing — any active duty service commitment incurred for undergraduate aviator service . according to dod officials , in practice , pilots generally qualify for acp at approximately 10 years of aviation service — the end of their initial active duty service obligation . from fiscal year 2010 through 2015 the level of pay was set by each service and was capped at $25,000 per year for pilots operating traditionally piloted aircraft . during this time , most of the services offered contracts up to 5 or 6 years long , but in fiscal year 2013 , the air force began offering 9- year contracts to fighter pilots for a total contract amount of $225,000 . starting in fiscal year 2015 , the air force offered 9-year contracts to all pilots for a total contract amount of up to $225,000 . the services may target acp to specific groups of aviators , adjust the pay amounts on an annual basis , or choose not to offer the pay at all . table 6 shows that the services implemented acp differently for pilots of different types of aircraft , and that their implementation approaches generally varied from year to year . the reserve components also provided acp to pilots . specifically , the marine corps reserve , the air force reserve , the air national guard , and the navy reserve all offered acp to pilots for at least a portion of fiscal years 2010 through 2015 . similarly to the active component , the reserve components used acp to retain pilots to help personnel inventories meet requirements . for fiscal years 2010 through 2015 , obligations for acp decreased by 53 percent across dod . figure 13 shows how the extent of this decrease varied for each of the services , largely due to different policy decisions at the service level about how to implement the pay . these implementation approaches are discussed in further detail below . we found that each of the services took a different approach to implementing acp . specifically , there are differences in how the services identified the target population and established the contract amounts offered . these approaches resulted in different amounts of acp offered ( see table 6 ) . some of the primary differences we identified are that the air force offered acp to broad categories of pilots ( for example , fighter pilots , rpa pilots ) , while the navy and marine corps offered acp by specific platform ( that is , the model of aircraft a pilot operates ) . the army offered acp to a small group of elite special operations rotary - wing pilots . also , the marine corps suspended acp offerings in fiscal year 2012 , and is the only service to have done so .