we are not making recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . dod did not provide written comments on this report but did provide technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and the secretary of defense . the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or dinapolit@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . committee reports from the senate and house armed services committees and the joint explanatory statement accompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 mandated gao to report on the department of defense's ( dod ) use of best value processes . we determined 1 ) the extent to which dod used best value processes in fiscal year 2013 ; ( 2 ) the factors dod considers when choosing a source selection process ; and ( 3 ) training dod provides to its acquisition personnel on source selection processes . in addition , in response to a matter identified in a 2013 report from the house armed services committee , appendix ii includes information on the military departments' acquisitions of body armor vests in fiscal year 2013 . to determine the extent dod used the best value processes in fiscal year 2013 , we used data from the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) as of october 2013 to identify a population of contracts based on the following criteria: ( 1 ) newly awarded by dod in fiscal year 2013 , ( 2 ) competitively awarded , and ( 3 ) had obligations of over $1 million in fiscal year 2013 . this analysis identified a population of 2,851 contracts , and from this population we selected a stratified random sample of 227 contracts , with the strata defined by whether the contract had obligations of $25 million or more , or whether its obligations totaled over $1 million and less than $25 million . we divided the data into two groups including contracts with higher obligations of $25 million or more and contracts with lower obligations over $1 million and less than $25 million . we used the $25 million threshold to divide our data set based on a defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) requirement that contracts for products or services with $25 million or more in estimated total costs for any fiscal year have written acquisition plans , which contain information on the anticipated source selection process . more , we compared the percentage of contracts solicited using best value processes to fiscal year 2009 data we reported in october 2010.prior report did not include contracts with lower obligations of less than $25 million . dfars ยง 207.103 ( d ) ( i ) ( b ) .