gao - 02-927t . washington , d.c.: july 9 , 2002 . is it the primary mission of the agency or program ? similar goals and objectives: does the agency or program being considered for the new department share primary goals and objectives with the other agencies or programs being consolidated ? leverage effectiveness: does the agency or program being considered for the new department promote synergy and help to leverage the effectiveness of other agencies and programs or the new department as a whole ? in other words , is the whole greater than the sum of the parts ? gains through consolidation: does the agency or program being considered for the new department improve the efficiency and effectiveness of homeland security missions through eliminating duplications and overlaps , closing gaps , and aligning or merging common roles and responsibilities ? integrated information sharing / coordination: does the agency or program being considered for the new department contribute to or leverage the ability of the new department to enhance the sharing of critical information or otherwise improve the coordination of missions and activities related to homeland security ? compatible cultures: can the organizational culture of the agency or program being considered for the new department effectively meld with the other entities that will be consolidated ? field structures and approaches to achieving missions vary considerably between agencies . impact on excluded agencies: what is the impact on departments losing components to the new department ? what is the impact on agencies with homeland security missions left out of the new department ? federal , state , and local government agencies have differing roles with regard to public health emergency preparedness and response . the federal government conducts a variety of activities , including developing interagency response plans , increasing state and local response capabilities , developing and deploying federal response teams , increasing the availability of medical treatments , participating in and sponsoring exercises , planning for victim aid , and providing support in times of disaster and during special events such as the olympic games . one of its main functions is to provide support for the primary responders at the state and local level , including emergency medical service personnel , public health officials , doctors , and nurses . this support is critical because the burden of response falls initially on state and local emergency response agencies . the president's proposal would transfer the laboratory registration / select agent transfer program — which controls biological agents with the potential for use in bioterrorism — from hhs to the new department . currently administered by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , the program's mission is the security of those biologic agents that have the potential for use by terrorists . the proposal provides for the new department to consult with appropriate agencies , which would include hhs , in maintaining the select agent list . in addition , the president's proposal transfers control over many of the programs that provide preparedness and response support for the state and local governments to a new department of homeland security . among other changes , the proposed legislation transfers hhs's office of the assistant secretary for public health emergency preparedness to the new department .