i am pleased to be here today to discuss our recent report on recovery homes . substance abuse and illicit drug use , including the use of heroin and the misuse of alcohol and prescription opioids , is a growing problem in the united states . individuals recovering from substance use disorder ( sud ) face challenges remaining alcohol or drug free . recovery homes can offer safe , supportive , stable living environments to help individuals recovering from sud maintain an alcohol - and drug - free lifestyle . the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is responsible for promoting sud prevention , treatment , and recovery services to reduce the impact of sud on communities , which includes some activities to support recovery homes . we have a growing body of work examining policies and oversight of sud - related services , including recovery homes . we reported in march 2018 that some states have conducted criminal investigations into recovery home operators and associated sud treatment providers within their states who have engaged in potential health insurance fraud and exploited residents for the purpose of profit . these investigations included potential fraud that involved medicaid — which is one of the largest payers of sud treatment in the united states . for example , while all three state programs require recovery home operators or staff to complete training , the number of hours and training topics differ . in addition , for recovery homes to be considered certified in florida , they must have a certified recovery home administrator . similar to florida's certification program for the homes , individuals seeking administrator certification must meet certain program requirements , such as receiving training on recovery home operations and administration , as well as training on their legal , professional , and ethical responsibilities . residents may be referred to recovery homes by treatment providers , the criminal justice system , or may voluntarily seek out such living environments . in our march 2018 report , we found that the prevalence of recovery homes nationwide was unknown , because complete data were not available . we found these data are not collected at the federal level to provide a nationwide picture , in part , because there was no federal agency responsible for overseeing them . recovery homes generally are not considered to be residential treatment centers , are not eligible to be licensed providers for the purposes of billing private insurance or public programs — such as medicaid — and residents typically have to pay rent and other home expenses themselves . recovery home residents may separately undergo outpatient clinical sud treatment , which is typically covered by health insurance . in addition , recovery homes may encourage residents to participate in mutual aid or self - help groups ( eg , 12-step programs such as alcoholics anonymous ) and may require residents to submit to drug screening to verify their sobriety .