cms agreed with this recommendation . in march 2010 , we reported that cms had completed desk audits of selected sponsors' programs and was beginning to implement an expanded oversight strategy , including on - site audits to assess the effectiveness of these programs more thoroughly . in november 2010 , cms officials reported that the agency had conducted on - site audits of 33 of the 290 sponsors in 2010 covering 62 percent of the enrolled beneficiaries in 2010 , which addresses our recommendation . as a result of the on - site audits , cms had taken formal enforcement actions against several sponsors . in addition , cms published a final rule in april 2010 to increase its oversight efforts and ensure that sponsors have effective programs in place . ppaca included provisions for cms to evaluate contractors receiving medicare integrity program and medicaid integrity program funding every 3 years . in addition , ppaca requires these contractors to provide performance statistics to hhs and its oig upon request . in february 2011 , cms officials told us that they were taking action to implement these requirements for medicare . at that time , officials told us that cms was tracking performance statistics and adding to and refining these statistics and was also developing the specific performance statistics for its part d integrity contractors and expected to finalize these statistics this year . developing a robust process for addressing identified vulnerabilities . having mechanisms in place to resolve vulnerabilities that lead to improper payments is key to effective program management . but our work has shown that cms has not developed a robust process to specifically address identified vulnerabilities that lead to improper payments in medicare . we have reported that an agency should have policies and procedures to ensure that ( 1 ) the findings of all audits and reviews are promptly evaluated , ( 2 ) decisions are made about the appropriate response to these findings , and ( 3 ) actions are taken to correct or resolve the issues promptly . we have also stressed the importance of holding individuals accountable for achieving agency objectives . however , as we reported in march 2010 , cms had not established an adequate process during its recovery audit contracting demonstration or in planning for the subsequent recovery audit national program to ensure prompt resolution of identified improper payment vulnerabilities in medicare . during the demonstration , cms did not assign responsibility to agency officials or contractors for taking corrective action . according to cms officials , the agency took corrective action only for vulnerabilities with national implications , and let the contractors that processed and paid claims decide whether to take action for vulnerabilities that might occur only in certain geographic areas . additionally , we reported that during the demonstration cms did not specify in a plan what type of corrective action was required or establish a time frame for corrective action . we also found that the lack of documented responsibility assignments impeded cms's efforts to promptly resolve the vulnerabilities identified during the demonstration .