omb did not provide comments . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time we will provide copies of the report to senator joseph lieberman , ranking member , senate committee on governmental affairs ; representative dan burton , chairman , and representative henry a. waxman , ranking minority member , house committee on government reform ; the honorable mitchell e. daniels , jr. , director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . memorandum 00-13 had two major objectives . first , it reminded agencies that they are required by law and policy to establish clear privacy policies for their web activities and to comply with those policies . to this end , the memorandum reiterated the requirement of memorandum 99-18 for agencies to post privacy policies on their principal web sites , major entry points , and other web pages where substantial amounts of personal information are posted . second , memorandum 00-13 established a new federal policy regarding cookies by stating that “particular privacy concerns may be raised when uses of web technology can track the activities of users over time and across web sites.” this guidance established a presumption that cookies would not be used on federal web sites . further , it provided that cookies could be used only when agencies ( 1 ) provide clear and conspicuous notice of their use , ( 2 ) have a compelling need to gather the data on the web site , ( 3 ) have appropriate and publicly disclosed privacy safeguards for handling information derived from cookies , and ( 4 ) have personal approval by the head of the agency . the memorandum also directed agencies to provide a description of their privacy practices and the steps they have taken to ensure compliance with this memorandum as part of their information technology budget submission package . concerned about the impact of memorandum 00-13 on federal web sites , the chairman of the cio council's subcommittee on privacy subsequently sent a letter to the administrator of omb's oira recommending that session cookies be exempt from the requirements of the memorandum . the chairman noted that the term “cookie” covers a number of techniques used to track information about web site use , and that there is an important distinction between session and persistent cookies . although supporting the application of the new policy to persistent cookies , the chairman recommended that session cookies , which are discarded on completion of a session or expire within a short time frame and are not used to track personal information , not be subject to the requirements of the memorandum . he added that the use of these cookies should , however , continue to be disclosed in the web sites' privacy statements .