stormwater infrastructure . the resources and tools developed under the climate ready water utilities initiative are designed for decision makers with different levels of adaptation experience , according to epa officials . decision makers with little experience can learn about adaptation options using epa's adaptation strategies guide for water utilities , while more advanced decision makers can use epa planning tools to conduct a workshop or use epa's climate resilience evaluation and awareness tool , a risk assessment software tool that uses climate information from usgcrp's 2009 national climate assessment to enable utilities to evaluate a range of climate change scenarios from 2010 through 2090 . this tool allows decision makers to analyze how various adaptation strategies may help reduce climate risks , enabling them to prioritize the implementation of adaptation measures . in the future , according to epa officials , the climate ready water utilities initiative will focus on developing tools for smaller utilities that have limited resources to engage technical experts for assistance . according to epa officials , the agency has other projects under way focused on providing additional information and alternative approaches for communities . these projects include work on a decision - making framework to help decision makers select among different adaptation approaches , development of case studies to promote peer - to - peer learning on preparing for impacts , and development of a tool for users to evaluate options in a range of potential future water quality scenarios . the department of transportation supports a range of technical assistance efforts focused on helping road and bridge infrastructure decision makers incorporate climate change information into planning processes . accordingly , in the report , nrc recommended the development of a national education and accreditation program for “climate model interpreters” who can take technical findings and output from climate models , including quantified uncertainties , and use them in a diverse range of private - and public - sector applications . it is not clear what role the federal government could or should play in the development of such a program . whatever the federal role in the future of climate data translation , research and experience show that such activities are more effective when well - established organizations build trust among information users over time , and that , in many instances , formal institutionalization will be the critical to longevity , recognition , and success , according to nrc.interagency climate change adaptation task force recognizes this need and stated , in its 2010 progress report , that to effectively integrate and implement adaptation responses , the federal government should recruit , develop , and retain technically capable staff that have the proper expertise to understand decision maker needs , and to communicate effectively the range of possible climate change impacts . usgcrp is also aware of this issue , noting in its april 2012 strategic plan , that usgcrp agencies will use their relationships with academia to promote the interdisciplinary education at undergraduate and graduate levels needed for a professional and technical workforce in areas related to climate change .