( see fig . although still providing defined benefit plans as their primary plans for general state employees , some states also offer defined contribution plans ( or hybrid defined benefit / defined contribution plans ) as optional alternatives to their primary plans . these states include colorado , florida , montana , ohio , south carolina , and washington . in states that have adopted defined contribution plans as their primary plans , most employees continue to participate in defined benefit plans because employees are allowed to continue their participation in their previous plans ( which is rare in the private sector ) . according to officials from the general retirement system , this is thought to protect pension plan assets from being used for purposes other than providing benefits to members of the retirement system . regarding responsibilities , the board administers the general retirement system and , as specified in local city ordinances , is responsible for the system's proper operation and investment strategy . pension boards of trustees typically serve as pension plan fiduciaries , and as fiduciaries , they usually have significant independence in terms of how they manage the funds . boards make policy decisions within the framework of the plan's enabling statutes , which may include adopting actuarial assumptions , establishing procedures for financial control and reporting , and setting investment policy . in the course of managing pension trusts , boards generally obtain the services of independent advisors , actuaries , or investment professionals . also , some states' pension plans have investment boards in addition to , or instead of , general oversight boards . for example , three of the four states without general oversight boards have investment boards responsible for setting investment policy . while public employees may have a broad mandate to serve all citizens , board members generally have a fiduciary duty to act solely in the interests of plan participants and beneficiaries . one study of approximately 250 pension plans at the state and local level found that plans with boards overseeing them were associated with greater funding than those without boards . when state pension plans do not have a general oversight board , these responsibilities tend to be handled directly by legislators and / or senior executive officials . for example , in the state of washington , the pension plan for general state employees is overseen by the pension funding council — a six - member body whose membership , by statute , includes four state legislators . the council adopts changes to economic assumptions and contribution rates for state retirement systems by majority vote . in florida , the florida retirement system is not overseen by a separate independent board ; instead , the pension plan is the responsibility of the state board of administration , composed of the governor , the chief financial officer of the state , and the state attorney general . in new york , the state comptroller , an elected official , serves as sole trustee and administrative head of the new york state and local employees' retirement system .