it has become even more difficult because there are few manufacturers . problems at one or more manufacturers can significantly upset the traditional fall delivery of influenza vaccine . these problems , in turn , can create variability in who has ready access to the vaccine . matching flu vaccine supply and demand is a challenge because the available supply and demand for vaccine can vary from month to month and year to year . for example , in 2000-01 , when a substantial proportion of flu vaccine was distributed much later than usual due to manufacturing difficulties , temporary shortages in the prime period for vaccinations were followed by decreased demand as additional vaccine became available later in the year . despite efforts by cdc and others to encourage people to seek flu vaccinations later in the season , providers still reported a drop in demand in december . the light flu season in 2000-01 , which had relatively low influenza mortality , probably also contributed to the lack of interest . as a result of the waning demand that year , manufacturers and distributors reported having more vaccine than they could sell . in addition , some physicians' offices , employee health clinics , and other organizations that administered flu shots reported having unused doses in december and later . for the 2003-04 flu season , shortages of vaccine have been attributed to an earlier than expected and more severe flu season and to higher than normal demand , likely resulting from media coverage of pediatric deaths associated with influenza . according to cdc officials , this increased demand occurred in a year in which manufacturers had produced about the same number of doses as in the previous season and that supply was not adequate to meet the demand . if production problems delay the availability of vaccine in a given year , the timing for an individual provider to obtain flu vaccine may depend on which manufacturer's vaccine it ordered . this happened in the 2000-01 season , and it could happen again . this year , one of the two major manufacturers recently announced a delay in its shipments of vaccine . on august 26 , 2004 , one manufacturer announced that release of its flu vaccine would be delayed because of production problems related to sterility of a small number of doses at its manufacturing facility . the company stated that it expected to deliver between 46 million and 48 million doses to the u.s. market beginning in october , and cdc issued a notice on september 24 , 2004 , stating that some delays might occur for customers receiving this manufacturer's vaccine . those customers may receive their vaccine later than those who ordered from the other manufacturer , which reported sending its vaccine on schedule beginning in august and september . as a result , one provider could hold vaccination clinics in early october that would be available to anyone who wants a flu shot , while another provider would not yet have any vaccine for its high - risk patients . shortages of flu vaccine can result in temporary spikes in the price of vaccine .