unfortunately , dod does not meet any of these conditions . business transformation has been a priority of secretary rumsfeld . for example , dod has been granted additional human capital flexibilities and is in the process of developing a new personnel management system for its civilian employees . in addition , through its business management modernization program ( bmmp ) , dod is continuing its efforts to develop and implement a business enterprise architecture and establish effective management and control over its business system modernization investments . to date , however , the underlying operational conditions remain fundamentally unchanged and tangible evidence of improvements in dod business operations remains limited to specific business process areas , such as dod's purchase card program , where improvements have generally resulted from increased management focus and better internal control rather than from major modifications to automated systems . it is important to note that some of the key elements we highlight in this testimony as necessary for successful business transformation were critical to the success of several of the interim initiatives that we will discuss today . because dod is one of the largest and most complex organizations in the world , overhauling its business operations represents a huge management challenge . in fiscal year 2003 , dod reported that its operations involved over $1 trillion in assets , nearly $1.6 trillion in liabilities , approximately 3.3 million military and civilian personnel , and disbursements of over $416 billion . at the departmentwide level , certain financial metrics will be selected , consolidated , and reported to the top levels of dod management for evaluation and comparison . another important initiative underway at the department pertains to financial reporting . during 2001 , 2002 , and 2003 , seven separate congressional hearings were held on the army and navy purchase and individually billed travel card programs . numerous legislative initiatives aimed at improving dod's management and oversight of these programs also had a positive impact . under the leadership of dod comptroller , the department is working to instill discipline into its financial reporting processes to improve the reliability of the department's financial data . resolution of serious financial management and related business management weaknesses is essential to achieving any opinion on the dod consolidated financial statements . pursuant to the requirements in section 1008 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2002 , dod has reported for the past 3 years on the reliability of the department's financial statements , concluding that the department is not able to provide adequate evidence supporting material amounts in its financial statements . specifically , dod stated that it was unable to comply with applicable financial reporting requirements for ( 1 ) property , plant , and equipment , ( 2 ) inventory and operating materials and supplies , ( 3 ) environmental liabilities , ( 4 ) intragovernmental eliminations and related accounting entries , ( 5 ) disbursement activity , and ( 6 ) cost accounting by responsibility segment .