fda has not , however , been meeting this requirement . under this program , organizations accredited by fda may inspect establishments and submit reports to fda , which makes the final determination of compliance with applicable laws and regulations . in addition , some applicants were denied accreditation because mdufma limited the number of organizations that could be accredited to 15 during the first year after fda issued criteria for accreditation . representatives of the accredited organizations with whom we spoke stated that they expect to be able to address multiple inspection requirements in a single inspection , and the one inspection of a domestic establishment that an accredited organization completed independently before october 31 , 2006 , was a single inspection designed to meet the requirements of fda , the european union , and canada . according to fda and many representatives of affected entities , another potential incentive to requesting an inspection by an accredited organization is that manufacturers can work with accredited organizations to schedule inspections and can schedule them months in advance . fda granted accreditation to 17 of 23 organizations that applied to conduct inspections of establishments through the accredited persons inspection program . fda's routine postmarket quality system inspections include both comprehensive and abbreviated inspections , which differ in the scope of inspectional activity . a comprehensive postmarket inspection of an establishment assesses multiple aspects of the manufacturer's quality system , including management activities to establish , implement , and review the quality system ; procedures to control the design and the production or processing of the device to ensure that it conforms to specifications and user requirements ; and procedures for preventing , identifying , and correcting quality problems . based upon its findings during inspection , fda classifies completed inspections into one of three categories based on the extent to which the establishment deviates from applicable requirements of the quality system regulation: no action indicated ( which indicates no deviations or only minor deviations ) , voluntary action indicated ( which indicates minor to significant deviations ) , or official action indicated ( which indicates significant deviations and warnings ) . mdufma required fda to accredit third persons — which are organizations — to conduct inspections of certain establishments . manufacturers that meet eligibility requirements may request a postmarket inspection by an fda - accredited organization . based on our review of fda documents and discussions with fda officials , we determined that the data fda provided were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . fda reported that from march 11 , 2004 , through october 31 , 2006 , it conducted 2,814 postmarket quality system inspections of domestic establishments where a class ii or iii medical device was manufactured as of october 31 , 2006 . these establishments included medical device manufacturers and remanufacturers , packers and repackers , labelers and relabelers , contract sterilizers , software manufacturers , and reprocessors .