excess . formally identified as having no further program use of the property by the landholding agency . disposed . required for assets that have exited the federal portfolio of assets during the current reporting period . each asset owned or leased by the federal government ( and those otherwise managed by museum trusts ) has one of the following historical status attributes: national historic landmark national register listed national register eligible noncontributing element of a national historic landmark or national register listed district evaluated , not historic reporting agency refers to the federal government agency reporting the property to the frpc inventory database . using organization refers to the predominant federal government agency or other nonfederal government entity occupying the property . size refers to the size of the real property asset according to appropriate units of measure . the unit of measure used for the three real property types is as follows: for land , the unit of measure is acreage and is designated as either rural acres or urban acres . for buildings , the unit of measure is area in square feet and is designated as gross square feet . for structures , the unit of measure includes the size ( or quantity ) and unit of measure , and can include square yards , linear feet , miles , and the numbers of specific types of structures . data element definition utilization is defined as the state of having been made use of , that is , the rate of utilization . the utilization rate for each of the five building predominant use categories is defined as follows: office: ratio of occupancy to current design capacity , hospital: ratio of occupancy to current design capacity , warehouse: ratio of gross square feet occupied to current design capacity , laboratory: ratio of active units to current design capacity , and housing: percent of individual units that are occupied . value is defined as the cost of replacing the existing constructed asset at today's standards and is also known as plant replacement value ( prv ) or functional replacement value . condition index is a general measure of the constructed asset's condition at a specific point in time . the condition index is calculated as the ratio of repair needs to prv . repair needs are the amount necessary to ensure that a constructed asset is restored to a condition substantially equivalent to the originally intended and designed capacity , efficiency , or capability . agencies will initially determine repair needs based on existing processes , with a future goal to further refine and standardize the definition . the condition index will be reported as a “percent condition” on a scale of zero to 100 percent . mission dependency is the value an asset brings to the performance of the mission as determined by the governing agency: mission critical: without constructed asset or parcel of land , mission is compromised ; mission dependent , not critical: does not fit into mission critical or not mission dependent categories ; and not mission dependent: mission unaffected .