regulations can be flexible . an academic said that by targeting behaviors and not specific technologies , regulations can be written in such a way that they do not become obsolete . an academic also said that regulations based on broad performance - standards principles can avoid being overly prescriptive . financial and other harms . fcc officials said that in some cases , rulemakings can take a long time , especially when the issues are complex and there is no statutory deadline . our previous work on rulemaking found that length of time required for the development and issuance of final rules varied both within and among agencies . additionally , while some stakeholders suggested that regulations can clarify acceptable practices , other stakeholders , including from industry and academia , said that enforcement actions can send a similar message . according to both a representative from a content provider and an academic , enforcement actions such as settlement agreements , for example , establish precedents that companies can follow , similar to the way that case law developed by courts provides guidance for companies . although some industry representatives we interviewed said that ftc's use of settlement agreements provides companies with guidance , certain trade associations took a different position in a recent case brought before the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit , ftc v. wyndham worldwide corp. 799 f.3d 236 ( 3d cir . however , the court did not agree with the associations' arguments . the case involved an enforcement action against wyndham worldwide corporation where ftc alleged that data security failures led to three data breaches at the company in less than 2 years . the court considered whether ftc could bring an enforcement case involving cybersecurity using ftc's section 5 “unfair practices” authority and , if so , whether wyndham had “fair notice” that its specific cybersecurity practices could be deemed “unfair.” a group of companies and the u.s. chamber of commerce wrote a friend - of - the - court brief supporting wyndham , criticizing ftc's “regulation - through - settlements” approach . the companies argued this approach subjects businesses to “vague , unknowable , and constantly changing data - security standards” and businesses often are unaware of the standards to which they are held until after they receive a notice of investigation from ftc , at which point they must settle or expend considerable resources fighting the agency . potential limits on federal trade commission ( ftc ) remedies a recently decided federal appeals court case illustrates potential limits on the remedies that ftc can order in an “unfair practices” enforcement proceeding . in this 2018 case , labmd , inc. v. ftc , 891 f.3d 1286 ( 11th cir . 2018 ) , the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit found that ftc could not direct a medical laboratory to create and implement wholesale data - security protective measures as a remedy to the laboratory's alleged unfair practices . ftc had filed a complaint against labmd under section 5 of the ftc act for allegedly committing an unfair act or practice by failing to provide reasonable and appropriate security for personal information on its computer networks .