these incidents had also been reported to the tsoc . similarly , in response to a specific request from freight rail stakeholders , tsa's office of intelligence and analysis , which is responsible for analyzing threat information , used webeoc incident information to identify the frequency and timing of shootings at freight trains . however , other products developed by the office of intelligence and analysis and other dhs components that address domestic rail security incidents do not contain trend analysis of reported rail security incidents and are instead generally limited to descriptions of specific incidents . for example , tsa produces a series of periodic reports called the global and regional intelligence digest that provides descriptive reports of select transportation security incidents ( for all transportation modes ) , with minimal accompanying analysis . similarly , other products may contain intelligence information designed to inform rail stakeholders , but are based on sources other than the rail security incident data reported by rail agencies to the tsoc . to what extent has tsa analyzed passenger rail security incident information to identify security trends and potential threats against passenger rail systems ? appendix i of this report also includes information on how selected rail agencies applied lessons learned from foreign rail attacks to enhance their rail security measures . appendix ii includes information on key mechanisms rail agencies use to obtain rail security - related information . to address these questions , we examined tsa's rail security incident reporting process . we reviewed the notice of proposed rulemaking and final rule that describe the purpose and justification of the incident reporting requirement , as well as relevant tsa policy documents , manuals , and guidance . to obtain rail industry perspectives on the rail security incident reporting process , we conducted visits at , or teleconferences with , 19 of the top 50 passenger rail systems across the nation , by passenger rail ridership . see appendix iii for a list of the 19 rail agencies we interviewed through our visits and teleconferences . we selected these 19 passenger rail systems to reflect varied levels of ridership and geographic dispersion . because we selected a nonprobability sample of passenger rail agencies , the information obtained from these visits and interviews cannot be generalized to all rail agencies nationwide , but provided illustrative examples of the perspectives of passenger rail stakeholders about the rail security incident reporting process , and corroborated information we gathered through other means . further , we interviewed rail industry representatives from the american public transportation association and the association of american railroads to obtain their perspectives on rail security issues . we selected these associations because they represent the majority of the passenger and freight rail systems in the united states . to assess the extent to which tsa has overseen and enforced the rail security reporting requirement , we interviewed officials from the selected rail systems discussed earlier on how they have implemented this requirement , including the guidance they have received from tsa .