ii. ) to answer objectives 1 and 3 , and to determine how agencies maintained and controlled weapons other than firearms and weapons components , we selected for review 18 out of 33 federal civilian law enforcement agencies in the executive branch identified by the department of justice's bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) , as of june 2000 , as having personnel with the authority to carry firearms and make arrests . we systematically selected the agencies for our review . first , we stratified the 33 agencies according to size , based on whether the agency had ( 1 ) 1,000 or more , ( 2 ) 500 — 999 , ( 3 ) 100 — 499 , or ( 4 ) less than 100 law enforcement personnel . we then selected all agencies with 1,000 or more law enforcement personnel ( 11 agencies ) and the 2 agencies with the largest number of law enforcement personnel in each of the remaining 3 strata ( 6 agencies in total ) . to account for all department of justice and treasury law enforcement agencies , we also included bep , which fell into the 100 — 499 strata ( 1 agency ) . these 18 agencies employed about 96 percent ( 76,510 ) of the total personnel employed by the federal civilian law enforcement agencies ( 79,910 ) that are authorized to carry firearms and make arrests , as reported in the bjs . table 4 identifies the 18 agencies selected for review , along with the strata from which they were selected . we surveyed the 18 agencies using a detailed questionnaire . we pretested the questionnaire with 2 of the 18 agencies and a third federal law enforcement agency , not included in the final survey , and made relevant changes to the questions based on these pretests . we also surveyed the 18 agencies using a follow - up questionnaire to obtain additional related information . see appendixes iv and v for the initial and follow - up questionnaire , respectively . in the questionnaire , we asked agencies about their firearms inventories and the policies , procedures , and practices currently in place to control their firearms . we also asked agencies to provide the results of their most recently completed 100-percent inventory since september 30 , 1998 , and the date of the inventory . we asked the 18 agencies to identify their policies and procedures related to recording firearms inventory data , controlling firearms inventories , ensuring personal and supervisory accountability for agency firearms , and investigating missing firearms and administering associated employee discipline . we also asked agencies to identify the number of firearms reported missing since september 30 , 1998 , the number of those missing firearms recovered up to the time of our survey , and the sources of the missing firearms information . to determine how federal law enforcement agencies maintained control and accountability over weapons other than firearms and weapons components , specifically ammunition , explosives , and gas and chemical agents , we surveyed the 18 agencies regarding their policies , procedures , and practices for tracking and controlling these items . because this was not a sample survey , there are no sampling errors .