budgets . funding agencies implement uniform guidance requirements for budget preparation and management by designing forms and processes to review applicants' requests for funding , and grantees' use of funding , to determine , among other things , whether costs are allowable . these requirements allow for identification of questionable requests for funding in applications or unallowable post - award charges to grants . personnel expenses . to document personnel expenses , grantees must maintain a system of internal controls over their records used to justify the costs of salaries and wages so these records accurately reflect the work performed . salary and wage costs generally represent the largest portion of expenditures on research grants according to agency officials , and nsf and hhs offices of inspector general have reported on the need for oversight to prevent improper or fraudulent salary charges . for example , the nsf office of inspector general has documented instances of researchers charging their full - time salaries to federal grants at one university while simultaneously working full - time at another university or for - profit company . universities frequently collaborate with and provide federal research funds to other institutions , domestic and foreign , through subawards . awarding agencies rely on grantees to monitor subrecipients to ensure that they use research funds for authorized purposes and stay on track to meet performance goals . in addition , requirements for grantees to report on their subawards provide agencies , congress , and the public more information on subrecipients' use of taxpayer dollars . funding agencies have established administrative requirements — in some cases , in response to directives from congress and ostp — to promote the selection and development of qualified researchers , protect against bias in the conduct of research , and improve access to research results . agencies implement these requirements through their grants guidance documents and the terms and conditions of their awards . see appendix ii for additional information on selected agency - specific requirements . promoting the selection and development of qualified researchers . funding agencies require applicants to submit biographical sketches so the agencies have information they need to select well - qualified researchers . all four funding agencies in our review have agency - specific requirements for biographical sketches in their grants guidance , including requirements for applicants to list information about past publications and current and prior academic or professional positions . also , to promote the professional development of researchers , two of the four agencies have requirements related to researcher development or mentoring plans . first , as directed in the america creating opportunities to meaningfully promote excellence in technology , education , and science act of 2007 , nsf requires that all proposals with postdoctoral researchers include a plan describing the mentoring to be provided to these researchers . second , nih encourages institutions to use individual development plans to identify and promote the career goals of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers associated with nih awards , and requires grantees using individual development plans to describe their use of these plans in annual progress reports . protect against bias in the conduct of research .