borrowers are not contacted for verification of the information itself . officials from education and three of the four loan servicers we spoke with acknowledged that idr plans are at risk for fraud or error because verification is generally not performed on borrower reports of zero income and borrower reports of family size . our results are not generalizable to all idr plans and borrowers . we assessed the reliability of education's and hhs's data by reviewing related documents , interviewing knowledgeable officials responsible for each dataset , and performing electronic tests on specific data elements used in our analyses . borrowers must pay all interest on these loans . consolidation loans: available to eligible borrowers wanting to combine multiple federal student loans ( including those listed above ) into one loan . repayment periods are extended up to a maximum of 30 years , thereby lowering monthly payments . interest rates for these loans are tied to the department of the treasury's 10-year note rate and can vary by loan type . education officials also said that the risk of borrowers providing inaccurate information on idr applications must be balanced against the impact of adding verification procedures . education can minimize the costs associated with idr plans by ensuring payment amounts are based on accurate income and family size information . education has not fully leveraged available approaches to help detect and prevent fraud or error in idr plans . federal internal control standards call for agency management officials to identify , analyze , and respond to risks related to achieving program objectives , such as the risk of using potentially fraudulent or erroneous information about borrowers to calculate monthly payment amounts for student loans . approaches , such as using data analytic practices and follow - up procedures , can help identify and address these risks . two data analytic practices that can help identify such risks with respect to idr plans are ( 1 ) anomaly detection to identify atypical or unusual information about borrowers and ( 2 ) data matching with outside data sources to verify information that borrowers provide . these practices , which can be used on their own or together , can help prevent fraud from occurring and detect potential fraud or error that may have occurred . because data analytics alone may not be sufficient to determine whether fraud or error has occurred , follow - up procedures can then be used in the investigation and verification to make such determinations . in addition , education described plans to formalize procedures to make referrals to education's office of inspector general or the department of justice for suspected cases of idr fraud . we encourage education to combine its follow - up procedures with data analytic practices to satisfy the recommendation . education agreed with our third recommendation to implement data analytic practices and follow - up procedures to verify family size , noting that this information could be subject to misrepresentation or erroneous reporting by borrowers . education stated that it would review various data points that can be used to select idr applications and certifications for additional review prior to approval , such as providing more scrutiny when borrowers report unusual increases in family size from one year to the next .