pub . 107-347 , title iii , 116 stat . agency officials at omb , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , nist , and 6 selected agencies . for the 6 agencies , we collected data from inspectors general and agency officials to ensure the reliability of agency data submissions . based on this assessment , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our work . we conducted this performance audit from february 2013 to september 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for more details on our objective , scope , and methodology , see appendix i . to help protect against threats to federal systems , fisma sets forth a comprehensive framework for ensuring the effectiveness of information security controls over information resources that support federal operations and assets . this framework creates a cycle of risk management activities necessary for an effective security program . it is also intended to provide a mechanism for improved oversight of federal agency information security programs . to ensure the implementation of this framework , fisma assigns specific responsibilities to agencies , their inspectors general , omb , and nist . fisma requires each agency to develop , document , and implement an information security program that includes the following components: periodic assessments of the risk and magnitude of harm that could result from the unauthorized access , use , disclosure , disruption , modification , or destruction of information or information systems ; policies and procedures that ( 1 ) are based on risk assessments , ( 2 ) cost - effectively reduce information security risks to an acceptable level , ( 3 ) ensure that information security is addressed throughout the life cycle of each system , and ( 4 ) ensure compliance with applicable requirements ; subordinate plans for providing adequate information security for networks , facilities , and systems or group of information systems , as appropriate ; security awareness training to inform personnel of information security risks and of their responsibilities in complying with agency policies and procedures , as well as training personnel with significant security responsibilities for information security ; periodic testing and evaluation of the effectiveness of information security policies , procedures , and practices , to be performed with a frequency depending on risk , but no less than annually , and that includes testing of management , operational , and technical controls for every system identified in the agency's required inventory of major information systems ; a process for planning , implementing , evaluating , and documenting remedial action to address any deficiencies in the information security policies , procedures , and practices of the agency ; procedures for detecting , reporting , and responding to security plans and procedures to ensure continuity of operations for information systems that support the operations and assets of the agency .