deficiencies . to examine deficiencies , we used oscar data . oscar includes data about deficiencies that were cited during standard surveys of nursing homes ( which are to be conducted , on average , every 12 months ) and during complaint investigations , along with the dates of those surveys and investigations , allowing comparison of data from different points in time . deficiencies identified during either type of survey are placed into 1 of 12 categories , identified by letter , according to the number of residents potentially or actually affected and the degree of relative harm involved . ( see table 1. ) throughout this report , we refer to deficiencies at the actual harm and immediate jeopardy levels as serious deficiencies . to examine deficiencies , we sought oscar data from a single standard survey of each home from both 2003 and 2009 , but used data from alternate years in a small proportion of the nursing homes in our analyses . specifically , if no state standard survey was available from 2003 or 2009 , we substituted data from 1 year later , if available ; otherwise , we used data from 1 year before — with the constraint that the data for pi - acquired homes had to be from before the acquisition and at least 1 year after acquisition . for example , if 2009 data were not available for a particular home , we sought 2010 data , if available ; otherwise , we used 2008 data with the constraint that the data must be from 1 year after acquisition for pi - acquired homes . we also collected oscar data on deficiencies cited during complaint investigations in calendar years 2003 and 2009 . to avoid double counting , we excluded any complaint deficiencies that matched a deficiency cited in a standard survey that was conducted within 15 days of the complaint investigation . we refer to all data used in our analyses of deficiencies as having been from 2003 or 2009 . we included data from 12,956 nursing homes in our analyses of deficiencies , of which 1,270 were pi - owned in 2009 and had been acquired from 2004 through 2007 . because we used data from 2003 and 2009 for homes acquired anytime from 2004 through 2007 , the amount of time between the surveys that identified any deficiencies and pi acquisition varied . in most cases , the surveys were within 3 years of acquisition . nurse staffing . we calculated four different staffing ratios , that is , nursing hours per resident per day: registered nurse ( rn ) ratios , licensed practical nurse ( lpn ) ratios , certified nurse aid ( cna ) ratios , and total nurse staffing ratios ( i.e. , the total number of nursing hours , whether by rns , lpns , or cnas , per resident per day ) . in each case , we included full - time , part - time , and contract hours , but we excluded hours reported for performing administrative duties or as directors of nursing . when calculating cna staffing , we also included two other types of nursing staff — nurse aides in training and medication aides .