of processing payments . further , some depository institutions have automated the process used to approve overdrafts and have increasingly marketed the availability of overdraft protection programs to their customers . historically , depository institutions have used their discretion to pay overdrafts for consumers , usually imposing a fee . over the years , to reduce the costs of reviewing individual items , some institutions have established policies and automated the process for deciding whether to honor overdrafts , but generally institutions are not required to inform customers about internal policies for determining whether an item will be honored or denied . in addition , third - party vendors have developed and sold automated programs to institutions , particularly to smaller institutions , to handle overdrafts . according to the federal reserve , what distinguishes the vendor programs from in - house automated processes is the addition of marketing plans that appear designed to ( 1 ) promote the generation of fee income by disclosing to account holders the dollar amount that the consumer typically will be allowed to overdraw their account and ( 2 ) encourage consumers to use the service to meet short - term borrowing needs . an fdic official noted that some vendor contracts tied the vendor's compensation to an increase in the depository institution's fee revenues . we were unable to identify information on the extent to which institutions were using automated overdraft programs developed and sold by third - party vendors or the criteria that these programs used . representatives from a few large depository institutions told us that they are using software programs developed in - house to determine which account holders would have overdrafts approved . according to consumer groups and federal banking regulators , software vendors appear to be primarily marketing automated overdraft programs to small and midsized institutions . the 2005 interagency guidance on overdraft protection programs encouraged depository institutions to disclose to consumers how transactions would be processed and how fees would be assessed . an fdic official noted that , while no empirical data are available , institutions' advertising of overdraft protection programs appears to have diminished since publication of the interagency guidance . because fees for overdrafts and instances of insufficient funds may be more likely to occur in accounts with lower balances , there is some concern that they may be more likely among consumers who traditionally have the least financial means , such as young adults and low - and moderate - income households . we were not able to analyze the demographic characteristics of customers that incur bank fees because doing so would require transaction - level data for all account holders — data that are not publicly available . we identified only two studies — one by an academic researcher and one by a consumer group — that discussed the characteristics of consumers who pay bank fees . neither study obtained a sample of customers who overdraw that was representative of the u.s. population . according to the academic researcher's study , which used transaction level account data for one small midwest bank , overdrafts were not significantly correlated with consumers' income levels , although younger consumers were more likely to have overdrafts than consumers of other ages .