this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . i am pleased to be here today to discuss telecommuting and our recent work in this area . telecommuting refers to work that is performed at an employee's home or at a work location other than a traditional business office or facility . over the past decade , telecommuting has gained widespread attention as a business approach that may offer a variety of potential benefits to employers , employees , and society . for example , site - specific positions involving manufacturing , warehousing , or face - to - face interaction with customers are usually not suitable for telecommuting . the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) requires , among other things , that employers maintain sufficient records to document all hours worked , including overtime . concerns voiced by telecommuting experts in this area centered on the increased documentation burden this may pose , as well as the uncertainties regarding an employer's ability to sufficiently monitor hours worked and control labor costs . realizing the full potential of telecommuting also requires looking beyond internal management concerns to the laws that govern an organization's operating environment . the most frequently cited obstacle to increased use of telecommuting related to management concerns . interviews with agency and union officials disclosed that managers and supervisors were hesitant to pursue telecommuting arrangements because of fears that employee productivity would diminish if they worked at home . other related concerns cited in our report included management views that agencies did not have sufficient numbers of suitable employees and positions for telecommuting arrangements ; concerns regarding the treatment of sensitive data , especially the additional cost of ensuring the security of data accessed from remote locations ; and lack of resources necessary to provide additional computers , modems , and phone lines for the homes of telecommuters . conversely , positions involving information handling and professional knowledge - related tasks , such as administrative activities and report writing , can often be performed from a remote location . opm reported that its survey of 97 federal agencies showed that management reluctance was the most frequently cited barrier to increased telecommuting among federal employees . basic concerns centered on the ability to manage workers at remote sites and the associated loss of control over telecommuters . beyond having jobs suitable for telecommuting , an organization must also have employees that are able to perform in a telecommuting environment . while management concerns are often cited as a potential barrier to private and federal telecommuting programs , our work identified a number of laws and regulations that could also impact these arrangements . these laws and regulations include those covering taxes , workplace safety , recordkeeping , and liability for injuries . the current literature showed that telecommuting is best suited for high - performing and self - motivated employees with a proven record of working independently and with limited supervision . if an organization determines that it lacks the positions or employees that are suitable for telecommuting , it may choose not to establish or expand such arrangements .