this is considered the second candling . for manually opened envelopes , envelopes that are slit on three sides and flattened sufficiently meet candling requirements without further light source viewing . envelopes that are manually slit on only one side are reviewed twice on the candling table . during our visits to lockbox locations , we found that at four locations , envelopes were not sufficiently candled to prevent the accidental destruction of tax data and receipts because of malfunctioning machines , careless candling practices , and ineffective candling guidelines . at one location , we found two mail extraction machines that malfunctioned and failed to detect checks remaining in the envelopes . additionally , some envelopes were only candled once because employees often used the mail extraction machines as desks . employees manually opened the envelopes , completely bypassing the first candling step to be performed by the machines . these envelopes were then candled only once on the candling table . we also observed that employees were inattentive when candling envelopes on the candling table , allowing envelopes to overlap and making it difficult to fully illuminate each envelope or all parts of an envelope . at a second location , envelopes that were manually opened were not slit on three sides or candled twice . two other locations did not properly candle all envelopes because the candling requirements in the lpgs do not specify procedures to be used with more advanced extraction machines that slit the envelopes on three sides and extract the contents . management at these locations believed that because the envelopes were opened on three sides , they met the candling guidelines for manually opened envelopes . therefore , they concluded that no further candling was required . however , an irs official subsequently explained that envelopes opened by these types of machines should be subject to a second candling until irs performs a study to determine their effectiveness . the fact that we found a $3,300 check that had not been detected by one of these advanced machines , located in another site , indicates that they can also malfunction and result in the destruction of taxpayer data and receipts . as a result , candling procedures did not effectively reduce the risk of accidental destruction of tax receipts and data . accounting for items found during candling was insufficient lockbox guidelines require lockbox employees to account for each item found during candling . some lockbox locations use two forms to record items found - - an internal candling log and a form 9535 or equivalent , which is required to be submitted to the lockbox coordinator each month for irs review . employees prepare the internal log while candling and later transfer the data onto the form 9535 . since all items found during candling must be reported to irs , the form 9535 should record the same number and amounts of checks found as noted on the internal log being maintained as processing is occurring . however , the lockbox guidelines do not require a reconciliation of one set of records to the other , nor do they require a reconciliation of items found during candling to their candling records .