( see fig . as a result of their control over the collection of ead , express consignment operators are able to provide ead to cbp at two different stages: ( 1 ) prior to loading items on aircraft at foreign airports under the currently voluntary air cargo advance screening ( acas ) pilot and ( 2 ) prior to items' scheduled arrival in the united states: 1 . cbp and tsa have established the air cargo advance screening ( acas ) pilot project to receive ead from participating air carriers on cargo bound for the united states as a means to identify cargo that may have a catastrophic impact on the aircraft prior to being loaded onto that aircraft . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix iv , usps agreed with our findings and provided updates on the expansion of pilots 1 and 2 and plans for coordinating with cbp to address our recommendations . usps stated that it has expanded these pilots to the los angeles , california , isc beginning on june 19 , 2017 ( after our audit work was completed ) . in light of this expansion , we believe it will be even more important for usps and cbp to establish measureable performance goals for these pilots to aid in assessing their performance . additionally , usps reiterated the distinctions between usps and express consignment operators related to usps's lack of control over the collection of ead by foreign postal operators . nonetheless , usps affirmed its commitment to increasing the percentage of inbound mail for which ead is available . usps and the departments of homeland security and state also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report's date . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees and the secretary of homeland security , the postmaster general of the united states , and the secretary of state . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at 202-512-2834 or rectanusl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff making key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . in this report , we address ( 1 ) types of items cbp has seized from mail and express cargo sent to the united states ; ( 2 ) how inbound international items are inspected as they arrive in the united states ; and ( 3 ) options to collect electronic advance data for mail and the costs and benefits of using electronic advance data for targeting mail for inspection . specific details related to the screening process and foreign postal operators that cbp and usps considered sensitive are not included in this report .