army regulation no . 600-8-104 , military personnel information management / records , establishes requirements for the army's official military personnel file . the army deployed iperms in 2007 and designated it as the army's official military personnel file . however , when we attempted to find supporting documents in iperms , we found that this system had not been consistently populated with the required service member documents , resulting in incomplete personnel records . for example , when testing our sampled transactions , we discovered that documents , such as orders to support a special duty assignment , permanent change of station orders , and release or discharge from active duty , that should have been in iperms were not . the army has designated the human resources command as the owner of iperms ; however , local installation personnel offices across the country are responsible for entering most documents into individual service member iperms accounts . we found that documents needed to support pay transactions are not in iperms because ( 1 ) army regulation 600-8-104 does not require the specific personnel forms to be included and ( 2 ) some pay - supporting documents are finance documents and are not considered personnel documents.documents should also be maintained in the army's central repository of pay - supporting documentation . in addition , the army's efforts to achieve auditability are compounded by payroll system limitations . djms - ac , used to process army active duty military pay , is an aging , common business oriented language ( cobol ) mainframe - based system that has had minimum system maintenance because dod planned to transition to the forward capability pay system and then to the defense integrated military human resources system.pay active duty army service members . to address these functionality limitations , dfas has developed approximately 70 workaround procedures that are currently being used to compensate for the lack of functionality in djms - ac . an audit of army military pay would necessitate an evaluation of these procedures and related controls . djms - ac lacks key payroll computation abilities to another factor in the army's inability to provide support for military payroll is that the army has not adequately documented its personnel processes and controls related to military pay . during our audit , we spent considerable time attempting to identify the range of personnel and finance documents that would be needed to support basic military pay and allowances reported on service members' leave and earnings statements and the appropriate office responsible for providing the documentation . according to internal control standards , written documentation should exist covering the agency's internal control and all significant transactions and events.control includes identification of the agency's activity - level functions and related objectives and control activities and should appear in management directives , administrative policies , accounting manuals , and other such guidance . dod's november 2011 fiar status report includes dod's goal of achieving audit readiness for its statement of budgetary resources by the end of fiscal year 2014 . data older than this are archived and need to be retrieved from the archived database .