munitions list items . this list , which is maintained by the state department , identifies defense - related items that require government approval prior to export or temporary import . there are 20 categories of items on the u.s . munitions list , including firearms and ammunition ; aircraft and associated components ; protective personnel equipment ( such as body armor ) ; nuclear weapons and related items ; and directed energy weapons . some of these items are also defined as significant military equipment , which are items for which special export controls are warranted because of their capacity for substantial military utility or capability . any person or company in the united states that engages in either manufacturing or exporting u.s . munitions list items must register with the state department . prior to exporting these items , a state department - issued license is generally required . the table below defines the dod demil codes , their associated designation as u.s . munitions list items or significant military equipment , and dod's approach to disposing of the item under each code . we continue to believe this matter requires investigation and have made an additional referral to army cid for criminal investigation . military surplus store owner . this ebay seller owns a military surplus store in abilene , texas . our investigators visited the physical store location associated with the ebay store and observed a number of new acus with ir tabs affixed to them . as discussed above , ir tabs are an iff element that can be detected at night by both ground troops and airborne combat pilots equipped with night vision equipment and represent one part of the military's night - fighting system . although the nbc suit was removed from packaging and therefore not usable to protect against an attack , according to a dod product specialist with whom we spoke , the nbc suit is susceptible to reverse engineering and should not be sold to the public . the craigslist advertisement stated that the seller was a former member of the military and that he was selling the gear because he needed money . when we interviewed the seller , he claimed that , despite what he wrote in the craigslist advertisement , the gear was not his . he said that he left the marines in 2002 and that the suit was given to him by an acquaintance who was also a marine . upon further questioning about the origin of the gear , the seller stated that ( 1 ) he did not remember his acquaintance's first name ; ( 2 ) his acquaintance had not been issued the gear either , obtaining it at what he called a “swap meet” and ; ( 3 ) his acquaintance had recently died in a motorcycle accident . this property was likely stolen from dod . we referred this matter to dcis for criminal investigation . see figure 5 for a picture of the nbc gear ( worn by a gao investigator ) . our may 2005 and july 2006 work identified two types of body armor that dod's excess property system did not manage adequately — body armor vests and sapis .