( app . vi contains details on the portion of the populations charged premiums in each state. ) generally , states are not permitted to require certain individuals to pay premiums , including elderly persons , individuals with disabilities , and pregnant women . however , certain exceptions exist , for example: four states ( hawaii , minnesota , rhode island , and vermont ) reported charging premiums to pregnant women through their states' 1115 waiver programs . vermont had a waiver of the specific medicaid provision regarding premium requirements , while the other three states charged pregnant women in their 1115 waiver programs . hawaii , rhode island , and vermont charged premiums only to pregnant women with incomes exceeding 185 percent of the fpl . in the fourth state , minnesota , pregnant women with incomes at or below 275 percent of the fpl could choose whether to enroll in the state's regular medicaid program or the state's 1115 waiver program . only those enrolled in the 1115 waiver program were charged premiums , and failure to pay the required premiums did not result in the women's disenrollment from the program . maryland's schip program did not charge copayments , but schip beneficiaries receiving coverage through maryland's employer - sponsored insurance program may be charged copayments by their health plan . as allowed under federal law , states may charge premiums in medicaid to certain individuals with disabilities , primarily those who are employed . for example , connecticut reported charging premiums to working individuals with disabilities with incomes above 200 percent of the fpl . these individuals were required to pay a monthly premium equivalent to 10 percent of their income that exceeded 200 percent of the fpl , minus the amount the individuals or their spouses paid for any other health insurance . premium amounts and requirements varied significantly across the 25 states . for example , in massachusetts , monthly premiums ranged from $15 for families with incomes at the poverty level to over $928 for families with incomes over 1,000 percent of the fpl . maine charged premiums equal to 3 percent of families' net incomes for eligible parents with incomes above 150 percent of the fpl . ( see app . vii for the income thresholds and ranges in amounts for premiums charged to adults in each state. ) twelve states capped the amount of premiums that beneficiaries could be subject to in a given year . for example , premiums for working individuals with disabilities in mississippi were capped at 5 percent of annual income , and in maine , premiums for some adults were capped at 3 percent of annual income . ( see table 11. ) forty - three states reported requiring adult populations to share in the cost of their care by charging copayments , coinsurance , or deductibles . ( see fig . all 43 states charged copayments for selected services to some portion of adults . nine of these states also charged coinsurance to some portion of adults . two of the 43 states — south carolina and wisconsin — required a deductible for elderly individuals who received pharmacy — but no other — benefits from the states' medicaid program .