hud agreed with the recommendation . as of november 2019 , hud officials told us the agency had taken steps to implement the recommendation , including requiring phas to submit appropriate documentation regarding public housing units' compliance with lead paint regulations and updating an internal checklist for on - site compliance reviews that hud staff conduct . we will continue to monitor hud's progress in response to our recommendation . our 2018 report also found that hud did not have detailed procedures to address pha noncompliance with lead paint regulations or to determine when enforcement decisions might be needed . hud staff stated that they address pha noncompliance through ongoing communication and technical assistance . however , hud has not documented specific actions staff should perform when deficiencies are identified . furthermore , in response to our requests for information on enforcement actions taken , hud was able to provide information on only one enforcement action , which dated from 2013 . as a result , we recommended that hud develop and document procedures to ensure staff take consistent and timely steps to address issues of pha noncompliance with lead paint regulations . hud generally agreed with the recommendation . develop continuing education requirements for contract and quality assurance inspectors . the results for the sample are then used to estimate a score that represents the condition of the entire property . hud takes enforcement action for multifamily properties with a score below 60 . however , sampling introduces a degree of uncertainty , called sampling error , which statisticians commonly express as a range associated with numerical results . for example , for a property that scored 62 on its physical inspection , due to sampling error , the range associated with this score could be between 56 on the lower bound and 68 on the upper bound . in this model , hud plans to put the first level of responsibility on the contractor to do its own due diligence on inspector candidates , and the contractor would be required to review 25 verifiable prior inspections completed by each inspector candidate . a reac official then would be expected to select a sample of the candidate's inspections to review . in response to our recommendation about revising training for quality assurance inspectors , reac said that it recently began requiring a minimum of 8 hours of continuing education annually for all quality assurance staff . as of november 2019 , reac had not yet provided us with information about the subject matter of that training . since our report was issued , reac also developed continuing education requirements for contract and quality assurance inspectors , which it said will be required beginning in january 2020 . in addition , reac has developed updated performance standards for quality assurance inspectors , which reac officials said were under review . reac considers the new standards to be more aligned with the job responsibilities of quality assurance inspectors . we also found that reac did not always meet its schedule for inspecting multifamily properties or track progress toward meeting scheduling requirements . reac did not meet its schedule for about 20 percent of multifamily property inspections from calendar years 2013 through 2017 .