iraq refused these conditions . by the mid - 1990s , the humanitarian conditions had worsened . the un reported that the average iraqi's food intake was about 1,275 calories per day , compared with the standard requirement of 2,100 calories . in april 1995 , the security council passed resolution 986 to permit iraq to use its oil sales to finance humanitarian assistance . against a backdrop of pressure to maintain sanctions while addressing emergency humanitarian needs , the un conceded to iraq's demand that it retain independent control over contract negotiations . accordingly , a may 1996 memorandum of understanding between the un and iraq allowed iraq to directly tender and negotiate contracts without un oversight and to distribute imported goods to the intended recipients . when the oil for food program began , the un was responsible for confirming the equitable distribution of commodities , ensuring the effectiveness of program operations , and determining iraq's humanitarian needs . according to the memorandum of understanding , the iraqi government was to provide un observers with full cooperation and access to distribution activities . however , observers faced intimidation and restrictions from iraqi regime officials in carrying out their duties . according to a former un official , observers could not conduct random spot checks and had to rely on distribution information provided by ministry officials , who then steered them to specific locations . the independent inquiry committee reported that observers were required to have government escorts and cited various instances of intimidation and interference by iraqi officials . the committee concluded that the limits placed on the observers' ability to ask questions and gather information affected the un secretariat's ability to provide complete field reports to the sanctions committee . under security council resolutions , all member states had the responsibility for enforcing sanctions . for iraq , the un depended on neighboring countries to deter the importation of illicit commodities and smuggling . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions you may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please call joseph christoff at ( 202 ) 512-8979 . other key contributors to this statement were lynn cothern , jeanette espinola , tetsuo miyabara , valérie nowak , and audrey solis . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . risk assessments can identify and manage the internal and external challenges affecting a program's outcomes and accountability , including those risks that emerge as conditions change . oip management mostly supported oios audits for program activities in northern iraq managed by other un agencies ; however , these northern programs constituted only 13 percent of the oil for food program . because oios did not review commodity contracts , it was difficult to quantify the extent to which the iraqi people received the humanitarian assistance funded by its government's oil sales .