last year , however , things were different . in addition , for the upcoming flu season cdc and its advisory committee extended the optimal period for getting a flu shot until the end of november , to encourage more people to get shots later in the season . hhs is also working to complete a plan for a national response to a severe worldwide influenza outbreak , called a pandemic . while the plan itself would likely be applied only in cases of public health emergencies , we believe that the advance preparations by manufacturers , distributors , physicians , and public health officials to implement the plan could provide a foundation to assist in dealing with less severe problems , such as those experienced last year . we believe it would be helpful for hhs agencies to take additional actions in three areas . progress in these areas could prove valuable in managing future flu vaccine disruptions and targeting vaccine to high - risk individuals . first , because vaccine production and distribution are private - sector responsibilities , cdc needs to work with a wide range of private entities to prepare for potential problems in the future . cdc can take an ongoing leadership role in organizing and supporting efforts to bring together all interested parties to formulate voluntary guidelines for vaccine distribution in the event of a future vaccine delay or shortage . specifically , i will focus on the following: what circumstances contributed to the production delay , and what effects did the delay have on the prices paid for vaccine ? how effectively do current distribution channels ensure that high - risk populations receive vaccine on a priority basis ? compounding the problem is that when the supply of vaccine is short , there is no system to ensure that high - risk people have priority for receiving flu shots . in considering how to better prepare for possible future shortages , it is important to recognize that the purchase , distribution , and administration of flu vaccine are mainly private - sector responsibilities . consequently , federal actions to help mitigate any adverse effects of vaccine delays or shortages need to rely to a great extent on collaboration between the public and private sectors . besides focusing on improving distribution of influenza vaccine , it may also be beneficial to consider how to increase immunization rates against pneumococcal pneumonia , which is one of the primary causes of deaths and hospitalizations associated with influenza . annual vaccination is the primary method for preventing influenza , which is associated with serious illness , hospitalizations , and even deaths among people at high risk for complications of the disease , such as pneumonia . senior citizens are particularly at risk , as are individuals with chronic medical conditions . the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) estimates that influenza epidemics contribute to approximately 20,000 deaths and 110,000 hospitalizations in the united states each year . here in oregon , and throughout the nation , influenza and pneumonia rank as the fifth leading cause of death among persons 65 years of age and older . producing the influenza vaccine is a complex process that involves growing viruses in millions of fertilized chicken eggs .