gao - 05-730 . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact derek b. stewart at ( 202 ) 512-5559 or stewartd@gao.gov . dod will face multiple implementation challenges . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? for example , in addition to the challenges of continuing to involve employees and other stakeholders and providing adequate resources to implement the system , dod faces the challenges of ensuring an effective , ongoing two - way communication strategy and evaluating the new system . in recent testimony , gao stated that dod's communication strategy must include the active and visible involvement of a number of key players , including the secretary of defense , for successful implementation of the system . congress should also consider establishing a governmentwide fund whereby agencies , based on a sound business case , could apply for funding to modernize their performance management systems and ensure that those systems have adequate safeguards to prevent abuse . this approach would serve as a positive step to promote high - performing organizations throughout the federal government while avoiding further human capital policy fragmentation . many of the basic principles underlying dod's civilian human capital proposals have merit and deserve serious consideration . the federal personnel system is clearly broken in critical respects — designed for a time and workforce of an earlier era and not able to meet the needs and challenges of our current rapidly changing and knowledge - based environment . dod's proposal recognizes that , as gao has stated and the experiences of leading public sector organizations here and abroad have found strategic human capital management must be the centerpiece of any serious government transformation effort . more generally , from a conceptual standpoint , gao strongly supports the need to expand broad banding and pay for performance - based systems in the federal government . however , moving too quickly or prematurely at dod or elsewhere , can significantly raise the risk of doing it wrong . this could also serve to severely set back the legitimate need to move to a more performance and results - based system for the federal government as a whole . thus , while it is imperative that we take steps to better link employee pay and other personnel decisions to performance across the federal government , how it is done , when it is done , and the basis on which it is done , can make all the difference in whether or not we are successful . in our view , one key need is to modernize performance management systems in executive agencies so that they are capable of supporting more performance - based pay and other personnel decisions . unfortunately , based on gao's past work , most existing federal performance appraisal systems , including a vast majority of dod's systems , are not currently designed to support a meaningful performance - based pay system .