the owner never responded . in december 2006 , the va denied the owner's application for compensation and status as a service - disabled veteran . six months later , sba issued a decision , in response to an sdvosb status protest , stating that the owner of the firm was not a service - disabled veteran . in its decision , the sba concluded the sdvosb firm and its joint venture did not qualify for sdvosb contracts . based on this decision , in july 2007 , fema sent a letter terminating any future task orders for the firm and the joint venture and giving them until the end of august 2007 to cease all operations under both contract awards . in the end , the firm received approximately $7.5 million dollars from fema's sdvosb set - aside contracts prior to termination . the firm received no other punishments or sanctions for the fraudulent misrepresentation and has not been suspended or debarred from receiving future government contracts . case 2: this firm , functioning as a pass - through for non - sdvosb firms , improperly received over $5 million in sdvosb contracts . our investigation revealed that this firm , located in chico , california , improperly subcontracted 100 percent of the work from an sdvosb contract to a corporation headquartered in europe that reported almost $12 billion dollars in revenue in 2008 . the firm consists of two owners and three full - time employees . while the majority owner listed on company documents is a service - disabled veteran , neither the owner nor the firm's employees perform any of the work related to sdvosb contracts the firm receives . sdvosb janitorial service contracts require that at least half of the personnel costs are incurred by employees of either the firm or another sdvosb . pursuant to 15 u.s.c . ยง 657 f ( d ) , firms that knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations in certifying sdvosb status are subject to penalties . of the 10 cases we identify in this report , all 10 of them represented to be sdvosbs in the central contractor registration ( ccr ) . table 1 provides details on our 10 case - study firms that fraudulently or abusively misrepresented material facts related to their eligibility for the sdvosb program . we plan to refer all 10 firms to appropriate agencies for further investigation and consideration for removal from the program . case 1: this firm fraudulently certified itself as an sdvosb in ccr so it could compete for over $200 million in sdvosb contract awards that fema set aside for site maintenance for trailers provided to hurricane katrina and rita victims in louisiana . in may 2006 , the same month as the fema request for proposals were posted , the majority owner of the sdvosb applied for the first time to va for service - connected disability compensation related to claimed injuries incurred during military service in the mid - 1970s . in july 2006 , va requested that the sdvosb's owner provide evidence of his / her service - connected disability .