department of defense . dod is responsible — subject to the availability of resources and the direction of the president or by approval of the secretary of defense — for providing support functions and supplementing civil authorities' resources in response to public health and medical disasters . several of its key functions under esf #8 include providing military personnel for casualty clearing or staging and other providing support for the evacuation of patients to locations where hospital care or outpatient services are available ; and providing military personnel to assist in the protection of public health by providing , for example , food , water , wastewater removal , solid waste disposal , hygiene , and vector control . ( see appendix iii for a more complete discussion of these federal agencies' roles and responsibilities in support of the national response framework through esf #8. ) dod typically provides support in response to a formal request for assistance ( rfa ) from other federal departments or agencies and — in cases where response is needed immediately — from state , local , or tribal and territorial governments . support provided in response to such rfas may help these civil authorities to prepare for , prevent , protect against , respond to , and recover from domestic incidents , including terrorist attacks and major disasters . dod assets are usually requested if other federal , state , local , and tribal assets are not available . however , dod resources are not typically required to respond every domestic incident . dod resources can be made available to support disaster response through a presidential declaration . for example , according to the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( commonly referred to as the stafford act ) , when a state's capabilities and resources are overwhelmed and the president declares an emergency or disaster , the state governor can request assistance from the federal government . the stafford act gives the president the authority to establish a program of disaster preparedness and response support . homeland security presidential directive - 5 designates the secretary of homeland security as the principal federal official for domestic incident management . defense resources are committed only after the primary agency submits a request for assistance , through proper channels , and the president or secretary of defense authorizes dod to provide support . such support may help civil authorities prepare for , prevent , protect against , respond to , or recover from domestic incidents — including pandemics and major disasters . figure 1 illustrates how dod's support is obtained through the current rfa process following a presidential declaration of a major disaster or emergency . fema currently is developing guidance that will include a standardized mission assignment process , which will replace the current mission assignment process . according to fema officials , they have not yet determined when a final version of the guidance will be issued . defense support of civil authorities also can be requested and provided when there has been no presidential declaration . dod directive 3025.18 , defense support of civil authorities , authorizes immediate response authority for providing support .