gao - 08-667 . washington , d.c.: july 17 , 2008 . pension benefit guaranty corporation: a more strategic approach could improve human capital management . gao - 08-624 . washington , d.c.: june 12 , 2008 . pbgc clearly faces many challenges . ( see table 1 ) . these top 10 claims alone currently account for nearly two - thirds of all of pbgc's claims and are concentrated among firms representing the steel and airline industries . overall , these industries account for about three - quarters of pbgc's total claims and total single - employer benefit payments in 2006 . while the claims presented by the steel and airline industries were due in some part to restructuring and competitive pressures in those industries , it is important to recognize other economic and regulatory factors affected pbgc and db plan sponsors as a whole . for example , when we reported on airline pension plan underfunding in late 2004 we noted that several problems contributed to the broad underfunding of db plans . these problems included cyclical factors like the so called “perfect storm” of key economic conditions , in which declines in stock prices lowered the value of pension assets used to pay benefits , while at the same time a decline in interest rates inflated the value of pension liabilities . the combined “bottom line” result was that many plans were underfunded at the time and had insufficient resources to pay all of their future promised benefits . figure 4 shows the underfunding of pbgc's single - employer plans from 1991 to 2007 . underfunding among large plans ( as reuired by erisa section 4010 ) in 2003 , gao designated pbgc's single - employer program as high - risk , or as a program that needs urgent congressional attention and agency action . we specifically noted pbgc's prior - year net deficit as well as the risk of the termination among large , underfunded pension plans , as reasons for the programs high - risk designation . as part of our monitoring of pbgc as a high - risk agency we have highlighted additional challenges faced by the single - employer program . among these concerns were the serious weaknesses that existed with respect to plan funding rules and that pbgc's premium structure and guarantees needed to be re - examined to better reflect the risk posed by various plans . additionally the number of single - employer insured db plans has been rapidly declining , and , among the plans still in operation , many have frozen benefits to some or all participants . additionally the prevalence of plans that are closed to new participants seems to imply that pbgc is likely to see a decline in insured participants , especially as insured participants seem increasingly likely to be retired ( as opposed to active or current ) workers . there have been a number of developments with respect to pbgc's situation since we issued our most recent high risk updates in 2005 and 2007 . at least until fairly recently , key economic conditions have been generally favorable for db plan sponsors and plan funding has generally improved .