i will be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . see our december 2010 report for more details . in addition , identity fraud remains a challenge because employers may be able to determine if employees are presenting genuine identity and employment eligibility documents that are borrowed or stolen . e - ver also cannot detect cases in which an unscrupulous employer assists unauthorized employees . uscis concurred with our recommendation and outlined actions to address it . for example , uscis commented that in novemb 2010 it began to distribute the u.s . citizenship welcome packet at all naturalization ceremonies to advise new citizens to update their records with ssa . uscis also commented that it has commissioned a study , to b completed in the third quarter of fiscal year 2011 , to determine how to enhance its name - matching algorithms . uscis's actions for reducing the likelihood of name - related erroneous tncs are useful steps , but they do not fully address the intent of the recommendation because they do not provide specific information to employees on how to prevent a name - related tnc . uscis has taken actions to address fraud , mos notably with the fiscal year 2007 implementation of the photo match ing tool for permanent residency cards and employment authorization documents and the september 2010 addition to the matching tool of passport photographs . although the photo tool has some limitations , it can help reduce some fraud associated with the use of genuine documents in which the original photograph is substituted for another . to help comba identity fraud , uscis is also seeking to obtain driver's license data from states and planning to develop a program that would allow victims of identity theft to “lock” their social security numbers within e - verify until they need them to obtain employment authorization . combating identity fraud through the use of biometrics , such as through fingerprint or facial t recognition , has been included in proposed legislation before congress an element of comprehensive immigration reform , but implementing a biometric system has its own set of challenges , including those associated with cost and civil liberties . resolving these issues will be important if this technology is to be effectively implemented in combating identity fraud in the employment verification process . an effective employment authorization system requires a credible worksite enforcement program to ensure employer compliance with applicable immigration laws ; however , uscis is challenged in ensuring employer compliance with e - verify requirements for several reasons . f example , uscis cannot monitor the extent to which employers follow program rules because uscis does not have a presence in emplo yers' workplaces . we reviewed documentation explaining how to resolve tncs and assist employees with name and citizenship changes . we reviewed uscis's privacy policy for e - verify and conducted interviews with privacy officials at uscis to determine what , if any , challenges exist in resolving tncs . we assessed uscis's and ssa's life - cycle cost estimates and ssa's workload estimates , and compared them to characteristics of a reliable cost estimate as defined in gao's cost estimating and assessment guide .