the investments selected were major systems when we began our review . they also ( 1 ) represented a mix of enterprisewide ( i.e. , headquarters ) and component agency investments ; and ( 2 ) spanned different life cycle phases . table 7 summarizes the purpose of each of these processes . dhs has not yet fully established any of the policies and procedures associated with managing the 22 it portfolios that it recently established . for example , the department does not have documented policies and procedures for creating and modifying portfolio selection criteria or for creating its portfolios . in addition , dhs does not have documented policies and procedures for evaluating ( or controlling ) its portfolios . an organizational structure is shown in figure 1 . within the management directorate is the office of the cio , which is expected to leverage best available technologies and it management practices , provide shared services , coordinate acquisition strategies , maintain an enterprise architecture that is fully integrated with other management processes , and advocate and enable business transformation . other dhs entities also are responsible or share responsibility for critical it management activities . specifically , they said that a portfolio manager for four portfolios — grants , case management , portal , and disaster management — was hired in the fall of 2006 , and this manager's responsibilities include developing the direction , guidance , and procedures for departmental portfolio management . they also said that another portfolio manager is currently being recruited . in addition , dhs officials stated that the pir procedures defined in the operational analysis guide are being updated to focus more on lessons learned . not having documented policies and procedures for portfolio management is a significant weakness , particularly since officials told us that they recently began performing control reviews of these portfolios . until dhs fully establishes the policies and procedures for portfolio - level management , dhs is at risk of not selecting and controlling the mix of investments in a manner that best supports the department's mission needs . as illustrated in table 10 , none of the practices associated with policies and procedures for stage 3 have been executed . table 8 summarizes the rating for each critical process required to manage investments as a portfolio and summarizes the evidence that supports these ratings . dhs has not fully implemented any of the key practices needed to control investments — either at the project level or at the portfolio level . for example , according to dhs officials and our review of the department's control review schedule , the investment boards have not conducted regular reviews of investments . further , while control activities are sometimes performed , they are not performed consistently across projects . although ( as discussed in the previous section ) , dhs has established some policies and procedures , dhs has not implemented any of the prerequisites and activities associated with effective project control . in addition , because the policies and procedures for portfolio management have yet to be defined , control of the department's investment portfolios is ad hoc , according to dhs officials .