improve performance goal data . in our october 2017 review of coast guard performance goals , we reported that the coast guard and dhs identified limitations with two of the seven selected performance goals we reviewed , including the five year average number of recreational boating deaths and injuries . in particular , officials believe that many recreational boating injuries that do not require hospitalization are not reported to the coast guard . these officials believe that the amount of underreporting may vary over time due to changes in industry trends , making it difficult to accurately determine actual injury rates and program performance . we determined that the data for this performance goal was not sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives due to these likely limitations . we found that the coast guard did not report the possible extent of these limitations with this performance goal in its fiscal year 2016 apr . for the other performance goal , the coast guard and dhs identified limitations with the number of detected incursions of foreign fishing vessels violating u.s. waters , which is publicly reported in dhs's apr . dhs's review of this performance goal , reported in august 2015 , raised questions about the validity of this goal — that is , whether it provides a useful measure of the coast guard's performance . specifically , the review noted that this performance goal is intended to measure a deterrence effect , but doing so is inherently difficult and may lead to contradictory interpretations of performance . in october 2017 , we found that the data for this performance goal was sufficiently reliable for our reporting objective purposes , but questions remain about its validity . reliable data is not a useful indication of performance unless it is also a valid representation of the goal being addressed . dhs officials reported that they did not include a discussion of the limitations for this performance goal in dhs's fiscal year 2015 apr because the performance goal met the minimum threshold for data reliability despite the goal's limitations . coast guard officials reported they were aware of these limitations and were working with dhs and omb to improve the performance goal and implement corrective actions within 1 to 2 years . we recommended that the coast guard assess the extent to which documentation on performance data reliability contains appropriate information on known data reliability limitations and update these documents , as needed , based on the results of the assessment . the coast guard concurred and in february 2018 , informed us that it had taken initial actions to address our recommendation . however , our preliminary review of these actions indicates that further action will be needed to fully address our recommendation , such as documenting and reporting the limitations of performance data . our previous reports have identified areas in which the coast guard could improve the transparency of its data used for reporting on its mission performance and planning . improve transparency of data on mission performance . in our october 2017 report on performance goals , we found that the coast guard's apr has not been released publicly since 2011 due to a previous dhs leadership decision .