ntia had no official comment . fcc officials told us they believe the commission could have some role , such as defining which equipment would be eligible for the subsidy , but did not believe fcc was best suited to administer the entire subsidy program . further , an fcc official said it might be advantageous for the administering entity to leverage the expertise of state government agencies to assist with delivering the subsidy to low - income households . we also asked two agencies that have experience administering federal assistance programs , the department of health and human services and the department of agriculture's food and nutrition service , about their ability to implement a dtv subsidy . although these agencies have experience with subsidy programs , they do not have expertise in telecommunications . officials from the department of health and human services told us the agency would not be well suited to administer a dtv subsidy because their programs , such as temporary assistance for needy families , are narrowly defined — a household must have children to be eligible for temporary assistance for needy families — and would not offer broad enough coverage for a dtv subsidy . similarly , officials from the food and nutrition service said they did not believe their agency would be the best entity to administer the subsidy . however , after we asked whether the state agencies that administer food stamps could provide a dtv subsidy to their recipients , food and nutrition service officials said that this might be possible under certain conditions , but that an agreement would most likely have to be reached with each state and , in their view , the states should be paid for the costs they incur in doing so . when we contacted four state heath and human services agencies that administer various assistance programs on behalf of the federal government , such as food stamps , all four indicated that it might be possible for the states to provide the dtv subsidy to the low - income individuals who already receive assistance from one or more programs they administer . however , they told us there would be costs associated with implementing a subsidy program , such as staff time , programming costs , postage , and envelopes . one state we contacted estimated that it would cost approximately $552,000 to mail vouchers to the approximately 1.5 million households that receive food stamps , medicaid , and temporary assistance for needy families within the state . however , two states told us that if the program ran over a period of time it would be difficult to track which households already received the dtv subsidy as people go on and off of assistance over time , so some households could receive duplicate benefits . further , three of the four states told us that such a program would be burdensome on their limited staff resources . a rulemaking process might be required to implement a dtv subsidy , and if so , this would likely have implications for how quickly a subsidy program could be established .