subsidy eligibility . applicants for coverage are to attest that they have not intentionally provided false or untrue information . applicants who provide false information are subject to penalties under federal law , including fines and imprisonment . marketplaces are required by law to take several steps to verify application information to assess eligibility for enrollment in a qualified health plan and , if applicable , to qualify for an income - based subsidy . these verification steps include validating an applicant's social security number , if one is provided ; verifying an applicant's citizenship , status as a national , or lawful presence with the social security administration ( ssa ) and / or the department of homeland security ; verifying household income and family size against the most recent tax - return data from the internal revenue service ( irs ) , as well as data on social security benefits from the ssa ; and verifying whether the applicant is eligible for health coverage under another qualifying plan or program that would preclude eligibility for subsidy purposes . where the marketplace identifies certain inconsistencies in an application that it cannot resolve through reasonable effort , the marketplace must undertake an “inconsistency process,” under which the applicant is given 90 days to present satisfactory evidence to resolve the identified inconsistencies . for example , the inconsistency process applies when the marketplace is unable to validate an individual's social security number or attestation regarding citizenship or immigration status . it also applies when the marketplace is unable to verify eligibility for income - based subsidies , including , for example , if an applicant indicates a change in circumstances , such as substantial changes in income compared with the most recent tax return available , or irs does not have recent tax - return data . during the inconsistency period , the marketplace must allow the applicant to enroll in a qualified health plan and , if applicable , authorize the advance payment of any premium tax credit or cost - sharing reduction to the applicant's issuer on the basis of the applicant's attestations . ppaca authorizes the department of health and human services to extend the 90-day period for enrollments occurring during 2014 . ppaca , § 1411 ( e ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ( ii ) , 124 stat . cms regulations also generally permit the marketplaces to extend the 90-day period if the applicant has made a good faith effort to obtain documentation required to resolve the inconsistency . § 155.315 ( f ) ( 3 ) . inconsistency period , an applicant also must attest to understanding that any advance payments of premium tax credits received during this period are subject to reconciliation . after we did so , this non - navigator did not respond to three follow - up phone calls . another of the three non - navigators , a health care services company , told us it only handles applications from those having a medical bill at its medical facility . the third non - navigator did not provide assistance , telling us it handles only applications for medicaid .