( see fig . the daag for criminal enforcement , who traditionally has been a career employee , has overall supervisory and management responsibility for the litigation i section and the division's seven field offices and is primarily responsible for the division's criminal enforcement program . errors have been identified that have not been corrected . for example , links were not consistently established between related matters , and actions were recorded after matters had reportedly been closed . given the problems we encountered with the mts database throughout this assignment , we believe that mts information should be used with caution and that an accurate , detailed picture of the division's workload cannot readily be determined until the division corrects the errors that have been identified and verifies that all mts data are accurate and reliable . to ensure that ( 1 ) all complaints and leads are documented as required by the division policy ; ( 2 ) data are readily available on the final outcome of complaints and leads , the source of matters , referrals of matters to other agencies , and the specific industries in which the division receives complaints and leads ; and ( 3 ) the division has an accurate and reliable database that can be used to prepare meaningful management and budget reports , we recommend that the attorney general direct the assistant attorney general for antitrust to modify ccts to capture the related sic code ( s ) ; monitor compliance with the november 27 , 2000 , policy regarding documenting and tracking public inquiries ; link ccts to mts to provide a mechanism to determine the source of the matter and the ultimate outcome of a complaint ; and correct the errors that have been identified in mts as a result of our work and verify that the mts data are accurate and reliable . justice's antitrust division provided written comments on a draft of this report . in its comments , which are included as appendix v , the division stated that our recommendation to incorporate a data field for sic codes into ccts was reasonable and that it would also consider our recommendation to link ccts to mts to enable the division to track the results of citizens' complaints . the division was silent on our recommendation that it monitor compliance with the november 27 , 2000 , policy regarding documenting and tracking public inquiries . the division took issue with our recommendation to correct errors and improve the accuracy and reliability of mts data . the division stated that although data linkages can be improved and data coding reviewed to ensure consistency , mts is soundly structured , logically presented , and contains fully reliable data . the division contended that we based our conclusion concerning the reliability of mts data largely on the results of 25 of 1,050 agriculture - related matters . we continue to believe that the division needs to take steps to improve the accuracy and reliability of mts data . contrary to the division's assertions , the basis for our conclusion goes beyond the 25 matters highlighted in the report .