we will examine each of these more closely during the course of our review . our preliminary observation is that dndo's pilot programs appear to be a step in the right direction for improving the current architecture . however , these efforts to address gaps are not being undertaken within the larger context of an overarching strategic plan . while each agency that has a role in the architecture may have its own planning documents , dndo has not produced an overarching strategic plan that can guide its efforts to address the gaps and move to a more comprehensive global nuclear detection architecture . our past work has discussed the importance of strategic planning . specifically , we have reported that strategic plans should clearly define objectives to be accomplished , identify the roles and responsibilities for meeting each objective , ensure that the funding necessary to achieve the objectives is available , and employ monitoring mechanisms to determine progress and identify needed improvements . for example , such a plan would define how dndo will achieve and monitor the goal of detecting the movement of radiological and nuclear materials through potential smuggling routes , such as small maritime craft or land borders in between ports of entry . moreover , this plan would include agreed - upon processes and procedures to guide the improvement of the architecture and coordinate the activities of the participating agencies . dndo and other agencies face a number of challenges in developing a global nuclear detection architecture , including ( 1 ) coordinating detection efforts across federal , state , and local agencies and with other nations , ( 2 ) dealing with the limitations of detection technology , and ( 3 ) managing the implementation of the architecture . our past work on key aspects of international and domestic programs that are part of the architecture have identified a number of weaknesses . in order for the architecture to be effective , all parts need to be well thought out , managed , and coordinated . as a chain is only as strong as its weakest link , limitations in any of the programs that constitute the architecture may ultimately limit its effectiveness . specifically , in past work , we have identified the following difficulties that federal agencies have had coordinating and implementing radiation detection efforts . we reported that dod , doe , and state had not coordinated their approaches to enhance other countries' border crossing . specifically , radiation portal monitors that state installed in more than 20 countries are less sophisticated than those dod and doe installed . for example: in a report on preventing nuclear smuggling , we found that a cargo container containing a radioactive source was not detected as it passed through radiation detection equipment that doe had installed at a foreign seaport because the radiation emitted from the container was shielded by a large amount of scrap metal . additionally , detecting actual cases of illicit trafficking in weapons - usable nuclear material is complicated: one of the materials of greatest concern in terms of proliferation — highly enriched uranium — is among the most difficult materials to detect because of its relatively low level of radioactivity .