we met with officials of the u.s . postal inspection service , which collects complaint data on lost or stolen mail , and they told us that while there are fields on the online form for mail receptacle type , these fields usually are not completed by the mail customer reporting the theft . customers can also call a usps help line or go to a post office in - person to report mail loss or theft , and often in those cases the mail receptacle data are not collected . postal inspection service officials said that for their investigative purposes , the complaint does not need to include the receptacle type in order to pursue cases of lost or stolen mail . see appendix iv for available data on convictions for mail theft and other mail security violations . finally , according to usps officials , there are places , such as densely populated urban areas , where it is difficult to find suitable locations for cbus . this could make converting existing door delivery to centralized or curbline boxes that meet both customer needs and usps requirements difficult . field officials we spoke with in washington , d.c. , and los angeles , california , noted this concern . for example , a field official in washington , d.c. noted that with extensive street parking and limited common space , it can be very difficult to find a suitable location for cbu units . a usps official noted that if public space was not available for a cbu on a delivery route , gaining access rights to install one requires working with local governments and can be cumbersome . he said that easements or other property access rights vary across localities and regions and some neighborhoods would not have sufficient or convenient space available for installation of cbus . however , as shown in fig . 1 , cbus and other centralized delivery methods have a range of types and sizes that could be used to accommodate the available footprint and placement options . usps cost estimates for each mode of delivery and potential savings from converting door delivery points to other delivery modes are based on a 20-year - old study and are of questionable accuracy . although usps extrapolated fiscal year 1994 delivery mode costs to fiscal year 2012 by applying inflationary increases to the cost of each delivery mode , it is unclear whether this extrapolation reflects the actual change in postal costs , such as changes in carrier wage and benefits , which increased faster than inflation over this period . because usps productivity also increased , the accuracy of usps's fiscal year 2012 cost estimates is unknown . we also interviewed u.s . postal inspection service officials to obtain information on mail security issues . further details on our scope and methodology appear in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from june 2013 to may 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .