ii ) . the un's field procurement process involves the peacekeeping department and includes additional steps ( see fig . 6 , app . ii ) . each field mission is required to establish a local committee on contracts to review and recommend contract awards for approval by the chief administrative officer of the mission . the local committee on contracts is composed of four members from the mission: a legal advisor , and the respective chiefs of the mission's finance , general services , and transport sections . field missions may not award contracts worth more than $75,000 without approval by the chief administrative officer of the mission based on the advice of the local committee on contracts . in addition , field missions may not award contracts worth more than $200,000 without approval first by the mission's chief administrative officer based on the advice of the local committee on contracts and then by the department of management based on the advice of the headquarters committee on contracts . the headquarters committee on contracts evaluates the proposed contracts and advises the department of management as to whether the contracts are in accordance with un financial regulations and rules and other un policies . the procurement service employs about 70 individuals to procure items for the un's headquarters operations , peacekeeping missions , international criminal tribunals , regional commissions , and upon request , other un agencies and subsidiary organs . the peacekeeping department employs about 270 field procurement staff at its field missions . the members of the headquarters committee on contracts are drawn from the un office of central support services ; office of programme planning , budget and accounts ; office of legal affairs ; and the department of economic and social affairs . the committee relies on support staff to assist it in coordinating its activities and drafting minutes detailing the results of its meetings . un procurement has more than tripled over the past decade as un peacekeeping operations have grown . un procurement grew from $430 million in 1997 to $1.6 billion in 2005 . this increase has been due primarily to a rapid increase in un peacekeeping operations . eight of the un's 15 current peacekeeping missions were established in 1999 or later . peacekeeping expenditures more than quadrupled between 1999 and 2005 , as shown in figure 2 . in addition , the number of military personnel in peacekeeping missions has increased fivefold , from about 14,000 in 1999 to about 73,000 as of february 2006 . although peacekeeping missions were originally conceived as short term in nature , many missions are long - standing and have continued for more than 5 years . as shown in figure 3 , 85 percent of un procurement in 2004 was conducted in support of peacekeeping operations . peacekeeping field missions alone procured 35 percent of all un procurement in 2004 . internal control is an integral part of managing an organization and can be used to identify areas of weaknesses and strengths in the un's procurement process . internal control guidance provides a framework for establishing and maintaining internal control and for identifying and addressing major performance and management challenges and areas at greatest risk of fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement .