for many of the activities . sequencing and linkages among activities . va's updated plan provided new details about some sub - activities related to processing legacy appeals , monitoring implementation , drafting board policies , and training . moreover , the may 2018 updated master schedule was reorganized to improve its flow and alignment , according to va officials . however , the overall updated master schedule generally does not indicate logical relationships regarding the sequence in which activities should occur , and whether any delays in one activity will dynamically affect other activities linked to it . this type of logic is necessary to define both when an activity may start and finish and when an activity must start and finish for meeting a specified program completion date . these are known as early and late dates , respectively . for example , the plan does not indicate the latest date regulations can fall behind schedule before the planned february 2019 implementation date is impacted , or related activities such as training . this sound planning practice is especially important because va officials said the agency is concurrently executing many of the activities . without logical relationships , the master schedule is less effective for modeling the impact of delayed or accelerated activities on related activities , and ultimately for estimating the final implementation date . interim goals and milestones for monitoring implementation . va has taken steps to address this aspect of the recommendation . in addition to reiterating the use of an agency - wide governance structure to coordinate implementation of its new appeals process , va in its updated may 2018 plan added indicators to monitor and assess its readiness for full implementation . indicators include monitoring the status of implementing regulations and information technology as well as considering any lessons learned through its piloting of the new process . these “readiness indicators” could help va better identify potential issues related to implementation of the new appeals process . however , the master schedule does not show sequencing and linkages for these indicators . establishing resources . va's updated plan states the agency will use existing resources to implement the new appeals process . moreover , the master schedule identifies the “owners” or parts of the organization that are playing a role in appeals reform , such as the veterans health administration ( vha ) . however , other than identifying the “owners” for the activities , resources needed are not identified for the groups of related activities identified in the master schedule or for processing legacy and new appeals processes once implemented in february 2019 . va officials also reported progress with developing new sensitivity analyses that will allow the agency to change assumptions related to key variables — both individually and in conjunction with one another . va anticipates these analyses will allow the agency to project potential budget needs and staffing requirements and more accurately predict resolution of legacy appeals given certain assumptions . further , va anticipates using the analyses to determine distribution of resources , and quickly react to changes in its pending legacy and new appeals processes , and other trends .