terrorist safe havens pose a threat to u.s. national security . the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( 9 / 11 commission ) noted that safe haven in afghanistan allowed al qaeda the operational space to gather recruits and build logistical networks to undertake planning for the attacks on september 11 , 2001 . state reports that denying safe haven is central to combating terrorism , which it cited as the united states' top security threat . according to u.s. agencies , a variety of groups that pose threats to the united states operate in countries identified by state as terrorist safe havens . for example: pakistan: various terrorist organizations operate in pakistan . first , al qaeda leader osama bin laden was located in a compound in pakistan from which u.s. officials have stated he was actively involved in planning attacks against the united states . additionally , according to state , al qaeda also uses the federally administered tribal areas ( fata ) to launch attacks in afghanistan , train and recruit terrorists , and plan global operations . state also reports that the pakistani taliban has used the fata to plan attacks against civilian and military targets across pakistan . the pakistani taliban have claimed responsibility for several attacks against u.s. interests , including an attack on the u.s. consulate in peshawar in april 2010 . moreover , according to the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) , the pakistani taliban has repeatedly threatened to attack the u.s. homeland and claimed responsibility for the failed vehicle bombing in new york city's times square in may 2010 . in addition , according to state , lashkar - e - tayyiba — the group responsible for attacks in mumbai , india , in november 2008 , which killed at least 183 people — continues to plan operations from pakistan and views american interests as legitimate targets . more recently , in response to the killing of osama bin laden , aqap issued a press release vowing revenge against the united states . in addition , members of aqap have been named specially designated nationals by the united states government . the irtpa required the president to submit a report to congress that includes an outline of the strategies , tactics , and tools the u.s. government uses to disrupt or eliminate the security provided to terrorists by terrorist safe havens , and recommended that state update the report annually , to the extent feasible , in its country reports on terrorism . in response to these provisions , state submitted a report to congress in april 2006 , which it has updated annually as part of its country reports on terrorism . these reports include a section on u.s. strategies , tactics , and tools that identifies several u.s. efforts to address terrorist safe havens . in the country reports on terrorism released in august 2010 , state identified several u.s. efforts for addressing terrorist safe havens , including programs such as state's regional strategic initiative and antiterrorism assistance programs . however , state's august 2010 country reports on terrorism does not fully identify u.s. efforts to deny terrorists safe haven .