these interviews are not generalizable to all tribes or all service providers . furthermore , we identified and interviewed industry stakeholders such as research groups and telecommunications associations on their views regarding the barriers to increasing high - speed internet access to broadband on tribal lands . to determine the level of interrelation and coordination between federal programs at fcc and usda that promote high - speed internet access on tribal lands , we reviewed fcc and usda program funding and guidance materials for fiscal year 2010 through 2014 , interviewed fcc and usda officials , and interviewed tribal officials from the selected 21 tribal governments or alaska native regions and six service providers operating on tribal lands . these interviews are not generalizable to all tribes or all service providers . we evaluated usf and rus program coordination based on criteria for implementing interrelated programs developed in previous gao work on fragmentation , overlap , duplication , and interagency coordination within the federal government . to determine what data and fcc performance goals and measures , if any , exist related to access to high - speed internet service on tribal lands and to tribal institutions , we analyzed fiscal year 2010 through 2014 data from usf programs providing assistance , reviewed applications and the guidance materials for those programs , and the agencies' performance reports . however , both fcc and usda independently conduct outreach and training efforts for related programs promoting internet access . for example , fcc was authorized to spend up to $300,000 on tribal consultation and training in fiscal year 2015 . while fcc officials said they invite usda officials to fcc training workshops and are sometimes invited to usda training workshops , they said that they do not coordinate to develop joint outreach or training events . this could result in an inefficient use of limited federal resources and missed opportunities for resource leveraging between the two agencies and cost - savings to the tribes attending training events . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6670 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . you asked us to review the availability of broadband access on tribal lands . this report examines ( 1 ) perspectives of selected tribes and providers on the importance of internet access for tribes and any barriers to increasing access to internet on tribal lands ; ( 2 ) the level of interrelation and coordination between federal programs at fcc and usda that promote high - speed internet access on tribal lands ; and ( 3 ) existing data and fcc performance goals and measures related to access to internet service on tribal lands and for tribal institutions . to determine perspectives of selected tribes and providers on the importance of high - speed internet and any barriers to increasing access to high - speed internet on tribal lands , we reviewed relevant literature and interviewed officials from 18 tribal governments in the continental united states and 3 alaska native regions .