liaisons . officials told us that staff members in other cms offices serve as liaisons to the innovation center , though they are not formally designated as such . officials said that these staff members primarily serve as a central point of contact so that there is a systematic way to keep track of coordination across offices . for example , cmcs has a staff member serving as a liaison to the innovation center who , among other things , ensures that the innovation center's models employ policies and procedures that are compatible with medicaid program rules . targeted reviews . cms officials said that as part of selecting participants for the innovation center's medicaid models , the innovation center works with cmcs , cms regional offices , and omb to ensure that the models do not duplicate funding for states that are already being funded to engage in the same activity through a cmcs demonstration . for example , the application for the strong start for mothers and newborns model — which tests , among other things , the effectiveness of three different approaches to providing enhanced prenatal care to medicaid beneficiaries — specified that states that were already paying for enhanced prenatal services were not allowed to participate in the model . while the innovation center uses these mechanisms , it is also still working on ways to make its coordination with other offices more systematic . specifically , cms officials said that while some of the innovation center's coordination mechanisms are formalized through documented policies and procedures , the center is considering the extent to which additional policies and procedures are needed . for example , officials said that while the enterprise management board , which is responsible for addressing how models are coordinated with other cms efforts operationally , is formally established through a written charter , they have considered whether a similar group that deals with coordination at the policy level needs a more formal structure in place . in another example , the innovation center has directed the outside firm that began an evaluation of innovation center operations in june 2012 to consider , as part of its statement of work , whether there are any gaps in current center policies and procedures — including those related to coordination with other offices — and to propose solutions to those gaps . the innovation center is also currently developing a process to ensure that cms does not pay for the same service under both hen and qio contracts . officials said that cms recognizes there are areas of overlap between hens and qios and that they made an explicit decision to include overlapping activities in hen and qio statements of work , because , among other things , the nature of trying to reduce hospital - acquired conditions and readmissions requires multiple entities working from different perspectives in a reinforcing manner . although the hen and qio contractors were originally told to work out areas of overlap locally , largely because of questions asked during our review , officials recognized the need for a more - formal process to ensure coordination was working in practice .