( app . ii describes our scope and methodology in greater detail. ) nih plans to post this information on its web site . regarding our recommendation to develop guidance or regulations concerning institutional conflicts of interest , hhs said that nih's regulatory burden reduction committee has begun to address institutional conflicts of interest . to the extent that specific policies or guidance on human subjects protection and financial conflict of interest are developed , hhs said it will be coordinated within the department . hhs made several specific comments . it noted that financial conflicts of interest occur in the context of all areas of research , not just clinical research . we agree with this assessment , but our report focuses on biomedical research funded or regulated by hhs . hhs suggested that we expand on the rationale for selecting the five universities in our report in order to better explain the institutional variability we observed . we did not add any information because we believe appendix ii clearly states our selection criteria and the sample is too small to draw conclusions about how specific characteristics of the universities relate to policy differences . hhs also noted that one reason nih typically obtains only limited information about financial conflicts of interest from institutions is that any information nih has about these matters would be subject to disclosure under the freedom of information act . we agree that financial details disclosed by investigators to nih potentially are subject to disclosure under the freedom of information act . however , as fda has recognized in its treatment of such information , the likelihood of such disclosures is slim , and only when necessary to effect a public purpose that outweighs a particular privacy interest . fda decides such matters on a case - by - case basis and has recognized that , in some cases , there may be legitimate public interests in the financial information of investigators that warrants its disclosure . in its comments , hhs also questioned the purpose for which follow - up information would be gathered . we revised the report to avoid implying that nih should routinely seek further information and to emphasize instead that nih already has authority to obtain additional information on the conflict of interest if it chooses to do so . we believe , however , that there may be instances where nih may need to know the nature and details of a financial conflict of interest to determine whether it was acted on appropriately . hhs also stated that concerns remain that the phs regulation on financial interests does not specifically or adequately address the impact of financial relationships on the interests and welfare of human subjects and added that an irb may not be the most appropriate body to consider financial conflicts of interest . we have added a discussion about the absence of a link between the hhs financial interest regulations and the human subjects protection regulations .