must do . a technology deemed “must do” means that it is the only technology available that can meet a minimum requirement ( or “need” ) for the warhead to function . the technology that previously fulfilled this requirement is generally obsolete or no longer produced , and there are no alternatives . must do ( trade space ) . “must do ( trade space ) ” technologies fulfill a minimum requirement ( or “need” ) for the warhead , but there are two or more technologies that could meet this need . nnsa must evaluate and select which technology it will use to fulfill the need . personnel . at the time of our review , nnsa was reconstituting a program management team . specifically , as mentioned above , nnsa assigned a new program manager in march 2017 . in the spring of 2018 , nnsa began assigning additional federal staff and contractor support to help ramp up the program in advance of the fiscal year 2019 restart date . according to the program manager , he expected to complete a plan in the late summer or early fall of 2018 that nnsa could use to hire additional federal staff needed to manage the program in fiscal year 2019 . the advanced development and implementation of staffing plans prior to each phase of an lep was a key lesson learned from an nnsa review of another lep — the w76- 1 . while the program was suspended , nnsa supported other programs that developed weapons technologies — including materials and manufacturing processes — that could potentially be used by the w78 replacement program and potentially by other future life extension programs . specifically , according to nnsa officials , nnsa supported the development of technologies through ongoing leps ( such as the w80-4 lep ) and other technology maturation projects ( such as the joint technology demonstrator ) that could support future leps . for example , the w80-4 program has supported development at lawrence livermore of certain new materials as a risk mitigation strategy in case certain legacy materials used in the secondary are not available . according to nnsa officials , nnsa will likely continue to develop these new materials for use in future weapons , including the w78 replacement . in addition , contractors at lawrence livermore told us that test demonstrations conducted under the joint technology demonstrator have helped to mature potential technologies for a w78 replacement . examples they cited included additively manufactured mounts and cushions for securing and stabilizing the nuclear explosive package inside the air force's aeroshell . in may 2018 , in anticipation of the restart of a w78 replacement program and to retroactively address nnsa's new supplemental requirement to conduct a technology readiness assessment in phase 6.1 , nnsa's office of systems engineering and integration completed a technology readiness assessment that evaluated the maturity of technologies potentially available for the w78 replacement program . according to nnsa officials , the assessment identified and evaluated technologies that nnsa would have available for the next lep , irrespective of whether the final program will replace the w78 warhead in icbms only or will also be used in the navy's slbms .