pub . 111-117 and pub . appendix ii: federal agencies using the payment management system ( pms ) for grant payments ( as of june 2011 ) . appendix iii: federal agencies using the automated standard application for payments ( asap ) system for grant payments ( as of june 2011 ) . omb circular no . a - 110 , uniform administrative requirements for grants and agreements with institutions of higher education , hospitals , and other non - profit organizations , and omb circular no . a - 102 , grants and cooperative agreements with state and local governments , provide omb guidance to federal agencies on grant administration . four agencies — the department of commerce ( doc ) , doj , national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , and national science foundation ( nsf ) — provided responses in their annual performance reports . psc informed us that it would not be able to exclude letters of credit from the data they provide us . for reporting purposes , we separated data into two sets of expired grant accounts: ( 1 ) one set consisted of expired accounts for which all of the funds made available had been disbursed and ( 2 ) a second set of accounts that included expired accounts with a positive undisbursed balance . to obtain an estimate of the total amount of fees paid for maintaining accounts with no undisbursed balances remaining , we requested data from psc for all accounts that appear on the year - end fiscal 2011 closeout report ( i.e. , as of september 30 , 2011 ) with a unique accounting status symbol indicating that no undisbursed balances remained and that the awarding agency only needed to submit the final closeout code to psc to finalize grant closeout . according to data provided by psc , pms users were charged a total of roughly $173,000 per month to maintain more than 28,000 expired grant accounts with no undisbursed balances remaining listed on the year - end closeout report . roughly $137,000 of this was charged to hhs operating divisions . the closeout report provided by psc does not provide information on when the authorized funds in these accounts were fully disbursed . however , more than 9,000 of these grants were more than 3 years past their end date . for illustrative purposes , we multiplied the monthly fees for these accounts by 12 to obtain a rough approximation of what the total annual fees charged for these accounts would be assuming that all accounts with no undisbursed balances remaining balance as of september 30 , 2011 , had a zero dollar balance for the entire fiscal year . if the grant has otherwise been administratively and financially closed out , then agencies paying fees for expired accounts with zero dollar balance are paying for services that are not needed instead of providing services to grant recipients . the presence of expired grant accounts with no undisbursed funds remaining also raises concerns that administrative and financial closeout — the final point of accountability for these grants , which includes such important tasks as the submission of financial and performance reports — may not have been completed .