( app . i describes our overall objectives , scope , and methodology. ) fms receives payment records from and makes payments on behalf of most federal agencies . however , a number of federal agencies have their own disbursing authority . for example , usps paid about $42 billion in salary and benefits to almost 800,000 career employees in calendar year 1999 , and entered into more than 47,000 contracts with vendors in calendar year 1998 , totaling almost $8 billion . dod disbursed over $295 billion in fiscal year 2000 , including about $150 billion in contractor and vendor payments and about $100 billion in salary and retirement payments . in addition , medicare contractors processed over 900 million fee - for - service claims during fiscal year 2000 , totaling nearly $175 billion . in addition to disbursing payments for various federal agencies , fms provides centralized debt collection services for most federal agencies . to aid in federal debt collection , fms has in place the treasury offset program , which uses a centralized database of delinquent debts that have been referred for offset against federal payments . this database includes federal nontax debts and federal tax debts , as well as state tax debts and child support debts . fms currently matches federal tax refunds , federal retirement and vendor payments , and certain federal salary and social security benefit payments against its database of delinquent debts , and when a match of both tin and name control occurs , fms offsets the payment , thereby reducing or eliminating the debt . fms plans to include some non - fms disbursed federal salary payments in the treasury offset program in the latter half of 2001 . a provision included in the taxpayer relief act of 1997 enhanced irs' ability to collect delinquent federal tax debt by authorizing irs to continuously levy up to 15 percent of certain federal payments made to delinquent taxpayers . fms modified the treasury offset program to enable irs to electronically serve a tax levy to fms once irs has notified the delinquent taxpayer of the pending levy . in july 2000 , irs began adding tax debts to fms' database of delinquent federal debts , thus initiating the continuous levy program . for this program , fms compares federal payee information from agency payment records with irs' accounts receivable records . when a match of both the tin and name control occur , fms informs irs of the match and irs then notifies the taxpayer of the pending tax levy . if the taxpayer fails to make an effort to satisfy the tax debt within 30 days , such as by payment in full or entering into an installment agreement , irs will then instruct fms to begin levying 15 percent of subsequent payments made to the taxpayer or the exact amount of tax owed if it is less than 15 percent of the next payment . for payments disbursed on behalf of other agencies , fms deducts the amount to be levied before making the payment , and the levied amount is then credited to irs . in an april 2000 report , we estimated that irs could potentially collect as much as $478 million annually through this program .