gao - 16-374t . washington , d.c.: february 10 , 2016 . veterans' health care budget: improvements made , but additional actions needed to address problems related to estimates supporting president's request . gao - 13-715 . washington , d.c.: august 8 , 2013 . we found that all six visns certified that they had implemented this policy . third , in november 2015 , va issued a policy requiring vamcs to identify any discrepancies between the estimated costs for cic authorizations recorded in fbcs and the amount of estimated obligations recorded in fms . va's policy also requires vamcs to correct discrepancies they identify — such as increasing unreasonably low estimated obligations to make the estimates more accurate — and document the corrections they make . this policy also requires visns to certify monthly to va's chief business office that the appropriate review and corrective actions have been taken and appropriately documented . as we previously stated , in part because fbcs is not fully integrated with fms , va officials concluded this policy was necessary to detect and address discrepancies between the two systems . according to va officials , if estimated costs for cic authorizations recorded in fbcs are higher than estimated obligations recorded in fms , it may leave va at risk of potentially being unable to pay for authorized care . alternatively , if estimated costs for cic authorizations recorded in fbcs are lower than estimated obligations recorded in fms , va may be dedicating more resources than needed for this care . while we found that all six selected visns and the vamcs they manage certified that they had implemented this new policy , the methods used to identify and correct discrepancies between estimated costs for cic authorizations in fbcs and the amount of estimated obligations in fms varied . moreover , in some cases , we found that discrepancies vamcs identified and associated corrections were not documented or that documentation lacked specificity , making it difficult to determine whether appropriate corrections were made . to achieve greater consistency in how vamcs implement this new policy , va officials reviewed vamcs' reports and in february 2016 , provided visns and vamcs with additional guidance and best practices for identifying discrepancies and documenting corrections . for example , va instructed vamcs to be as specific as possible in documenting corrections they make to the estimated obligations . va officials also told us that they are developing additional guidance that would define an acceptable level of variation between estimated costs for cic authorizations and the amount of estimated obligations in fms . this guidance , once implemented , would require that vamcs ensure that estimated costs and estimated obligations were no more than $50,000 or 10 percent apart , whichever is less . finally , to better track that vamcs' obligations for cic do not exceed available budgetary resources for fiscal year 2016 , va allocated funds specifically for cic to each vamc . va officials , including some visn officials we interviewed , told us that they identify vamcs that may be at risk for exhausting their funds before the end of the fiscal year by reviewing monthly reports comparing each vamc's obligations for cic to the amount of funds allocated for that purpose to the vamc .