employer use is voluntary . although these systems only confirm whether submitted names and ssns match , they could help employers identify workers who provide an ssn with fictitious information . over the years , ssa has developed several different verification methods under evs . for example , employers may submit lists of workers' names and ssns by mail on a variety of media , such as magnetic tapes or diskettes . alternatively , employers may call a toll - free number or present a hard - copy list via fax , mail , or hand delivery to a local ssa office . ssa verifies the information received from employers by comparing it with information in its own records . ssa then advises the employer whether worker names and ssns match . evs offers the benefit of verifying name and ssn combinations for a company's entire payroll . however , the system would not be able to detect a worker's misuse of another person's name and ssn as long as the name and ssn matched . employers do not widely use this service . in an attempt to make verification more attractive to employers , in 2005 , ssa implemented the web - based ssnvs . it is designed to respond to employer requests within 24 hours . requests of up to 10 worker names and ssns can be verified instantaneously . larger requests of up to 250,000 names can be submitted in a batch file , and ssa will provide results by the next business day . while this new system is attracting more employer interest , it is still not widely used . like ssa's verification services , the basic pilot is voluntary and is not widely utilized . as of january 2006 , about 5,500 businesses nationwide had registered to participate , although a significantly smaller number of these are active users . active participants have made about 4.7 million initial verification requests over a 5-year period ( 981,000 requests were made in fiscal year 2005 ) . dhs reported on actions taken to address weaknesses in the program that had been identified during the early years of the program . they included delays in updating immigration records , erroneous nonconfirmations , and program software that was not user friendly . if ssa is unable to verify the ssn , name , and date of birth or dhs record searches cannot verify work authorization , a tentative nonconfirmation response is transmitted to the employer . after checking the accuracy of the information and resubmitting the information , if necessary , the employer must advise the worker of the finding and refer him or her to either dhs or ssa to correct the problem . during this time , employers are not to take any adverse actions against those workers related to verification , such as limiting their work assignments or pay . when workers do not contest their tentative nonconfirmations within the allotted time , the basic pilot program issues a final nonconfirmation . employers are required to either immediately terminate employment or notify dhs of their continued employment . in addition , because the esf contains privileged taxpayer data , ssa cannot share this information with dhs without specific legislative authorization .