( see fig . as part of its enforcement efforts , ofccp changed its compliance evaluations process in december 2010 from what it called active case management ( acm ) to active case enforcement ( ace ) . maintain personnel or employment records . post certain equal employment opportunity notices . allow ofccp access to their premises during normal business hours for the purpose of conducting on - site investigations , and to permit ofccp to inspect any records relevant to the matter under investigation . in addition , ofccp's executive order 11246 regulations generally require contractors with 50 or more employees and one or more contracts of $50,000 or more to annually submit an employer information report eeo - 1 ( eeo - 1 report ) . the eeo - 1 report , also known as the standard form 100 , is a joint report used by the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) and ofccp to collect certain employment data from employers . in addition , federal contractors subject to vevraa must annually report to the dol's veteran's employment and training service ( vets ) the number of employees and new hires who are qualified covered veterans . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . appendix i: the laws and executive order enforced by the office of federal contract compliance programs ( ofccp ) the descriptions below provide only a summary and are not intended to be comprehensive . although construction contracts are not included in the body of the report , they are included here . additional details on applicable requirements and coverage can be found in the cited sources . executive order 11246 ( equal employment opportunity ) : executive order 11246 — first issued in 1965 and amended by subsequent executive orders several times over the years — prohibits covered federal contractors from discriminating in employment decisions on the basis of race , color , religion , sex , sexual orientation , gender identity , or national origin . it also requires these contractors to take affirmative action to ensure that equal opportunity is provided in employment without regard to these protected characteristics . in addition , executive order 11246 prohibits covered contractors from , under certain circumstances , taking adverse employment actions against applicants and employees for asking about , discussing , or sharing information about their pay or the pay of their co - workers . in general , federal contractors and subcontractors , and federally - assisted construction contractors and subcontractors , who do over $10,000 in federal government business in a year are covered by executive order 11246 . under ofccp's implementing regulations , non - construction contractors with contracts of $50,000 or more and 50 or more employees must develop and maintain a written affirmative action program ( aap ) that covers each of their establishments . companies whose sole coverage comes from construction contracts or federally assisted construction contracts are not required to develop an aap , but they must comply with a set of specific affirmative actions outlined in the regulations .