macdorman . “examining interpregnancy intervals and maternal and perinatal health outcomes using u.s. vital records: important considerations for analysis and interpretation.” paediatric and perinatal epidemiology , vol . brogly , s.b. saia , m.m . werler , et al . “why are obstetric units in rural hospitals closing their doors ? ” health services research , vol . kozhimannil , k.b. , c. henning - smith , p. hung , et al . “ensuring access to high - quality maternity care in rural america.” women's health issues , vol . kozhimannil , k.b. , p. hung , m.m . casey , et al . “factors associated with high - risk rural women giving birth in non - nicu hospital settings.” journal of perinatology , vol . kozhimannil , k.b. casey , p. hung , et al . “location of childbirth for rural women: implications for maternal levels of care.” american journal of obstetrics and gynecology , vol . kozhimannil , k.b. , c. henning - smith , and p. hung . “the practice of midwifery in rural us hospitals.” journal of midwifery & women's health , vol . kozhimannil , k.b. , p. hung , m.m . casey , et al . “relationship between hospital policies for labor induction and cesarean delivery and perinatal care quality among rural u.s. hospitals.” journal of health care for the poor and underserved , vol . weigel , p.a. , f. ullrich , d.m . shane , et al . “variation in primary care service patterns by rural - urban location.” journal of rural health , vol . nih support research , including funding maternal health research through a number of its institutes and centers , such as the eunice kennedy shriver national institute of child health and human development ; the national heart , lung , and blood institute ; the national institute of alcohol abuse and alcoholism ; the national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases ; the national institute of mental health ; the national institute of nursing research , and the office of research on women's health . for example , nih officials noted that the eunice kennedy shriver national institute of child health and human development supports essential research designed to overcome many of the complex challenges that women encounter in trying to achieve and maintain healthy pregnancies , and to prevent maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity . in fiscal year 2018 , nih funded 661 projects totaling almost $303 million that included a focus on maternal health . the following nih website includes a link to funded research for fiscal years 2015 through 2018 and estimates for fiscal year 2019 and 2020 by category , including maternal health , https: / / report.nih.gov / categorical_spending.aspx . macdorman , m.f. , e. declercq , and m.e . thoma . “making vital statistics count: preventing u.s. maternal deaths requires better data.” obstetrics & gynecology , vol . macdorman , m.f. , e. declercq , h. cabral , et al . “recent increases in the u.s. maternal mortality rate: disentangling trends from measurement issues.” obstetrics & gynecology , vol . thoma , m.e. de silva , and m.f . “prenatal treatment and outcomes of women with opioid use disorder.” obstetrics & gynecology , vol . dimidjian , s. , s.h .