oas did not provide comments . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of state , the secretary of homeland security , the attorney general of the united states , the director of the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives , and the oas secretary general . additional information about these activities follows . firearms training ( atf ) : for firearms - related training , atf tracks the number of training courses it manages in a fiscal year and the number of students who participate . atf produces weekly activity reports for its efforts in central america that recount law enforcement activities , referrals , and training or proposed training , among other things . atf also collects student course evaluations and feedback provided by the students to the instructors . however , atf has not established targets for these activities , such as the number or type of courses it plans to hold in a year . doing so could help atf leverage the existing feedback it collects , such as requests for longer courses or that atf offer a second , more in - depth course on a given topic . targets could also help to ensure that atf is providing enough of the specific types of courses that it and partner countries determine to be most important for countering firearms trafficking activities . etrace support and training ( atf ) : atf tracks the number of seized weapons traced through etrace in each country , as well as the number of etrace training courses conducted . we included an activity in the scope of our review if it specifically included firearms among the issues it was intended to address . because other activities may also indirectly touch on firearms trafficking , the list may not be comprehensive . to understand broader strategies underlying these activities , we reviewed strategic planning documents specific to belize , guatemala , and mexico , including state's integrated country strategies , as well as several interagency strategic and planning documents regarding u.s. engagement with central america , including the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america , the u.s. strategy to combat transnational organized crime , and the national southwest border counternarcotics strategy . we collected funding data from state and the department of justice's bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) for these activities for fiscal years 2010 through 2014 and , based on interviews with knowledgeable agency officials and a review of state's relevant internal controls , determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we identified key factors for agencies to consider in presidential policy directive 23 , a presidential directive covering security sector assistance , including firearms trafficking . to determine whether agencies considered these factors , we reviewed agency documentation and interviewed u.s. and foreign officials . we interviewed u.s. officials and officials from the organization of american states in washington , d.c. , and u.s. and mexican officials in mexico .