nasa concurred with our recommendations . in commenting on the draft of our report , nasa pointed out that it already had a plan in place that addresses our first set of recommendations , namely the need for the agency to identify all dsn requirements for the near and long - term , how it will meet those requirements , and identify costs associated with meeting those requirements . while we recognize that nasa has a dsn roadmap , the agency still lacks a detailed strategy for addressing dsn needs for the future that includes all program requirements , i.e . deferred maintenance , in addition to the already projected mission needs . to accomplish our work , we visited and interviewed officials responsible for dsn operations at nasa headquarters , washington , d.c. ; the jet propulsion laboratory in pasadena , calif. ; and itt industries contractor officials at their offices in monrovia , calif. , and at the dsn site complex in goldstone , calif. at nasa headquarters , we met with officials from the science mission directorate , including lead representatives from the deep space network program , the exploration missions directorate and the space operations mission directorate , including the space communications architecture working group . furthermore , the dsn roadmap does not include estimation of costs and does not address the impact of unmet needs on its ability to meet mission requirements . complete details of our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we performed our review from may 2005 to april 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . nasa established dsn over 40 years ago with the intention of coordinating all deep space communications through a single ground system to improve efficiency and minimize duplication . today , dsn consists of communications antennas at three major sites around the world — goldstone , calif. ; madrid , spain ; and canberra , australia . these sites are specifically positioned to offer complete coverage to deep space mission craft regardless of their positions around the earth . dsn officials informed us that while contractor personnel operate all three sites , nasa owns the physical assets and is responsible for funding all operations at the sites . each site has a 70-meter antenna , which can provide communications with the most distant spacecraft , and several smaller antennas that can facilitate communications with closer spacecraft or can be arrayed to communicate with more distant missions . nasa's jet propulsion laboratory is responsible for management of dsn and also serves as the distribution point for data collected from deep space . dsn supports an average of 35 to 40 deep space missions each year . according to program officials , as a mission is being developed , a representative from the dsn program works with the mission team to establish the amount of coverage the mission will need from dsn assets during its lifetime . we also reviewed the terms of reference ( tor ) for this group to better understand its goals and time frames . we also met with dsn mission officials from the mars rovers , deep impact , cassini - huygens , and stardust programs .