( see fig . 1 for entities involved in school meals oversight. ) we found that fns had not conducted any nationwide studies on the extent of online sales of wic formula by program participants , though information gathered from state wic officials and our own limited monitoring suggested that some wic formula was offered for sale online . ( see sidebar. ) the use of the internet as a marketplace had substantially increased in the years preceding our report ; therefore , actions needed to ensure wic participants did not inappropriately use infant formula had changed as well . yet , we found that fns had not studied cost - effective techniques for monitoring potential online sales of wic benefits . standards for internal control in the federal government note that agencies should identify , analyze , and respond to significant changes that could impact the internal control system . however , fns had not directed states to inform participants that selling wic formula , including online , is against program rules , which could lead to participants making these sales and unknowingly using program resources inappropriately . further , we noted that although states are responsible for controlling participant violations — including sales of wic benefits — fns is responsible for determining compliance with the wic statute and regulations . however , we reported that fns had not required states to describe procedures for controlling these violations in their wic state plans , leaving the agency without assurance that efforts were taking place nationwide . through interviews with state and local wic agency officials from 12 states for our december 2014 report , we found that states varied in their approaches and the amount of resources devoted to monitoring attempted wic formula sales , and some expressed concerns about the return on investment for these efforts . because wic participants purchase the same brands and types of infant formula from stores as non - wic customers , monitoring attempted online sales of wic formula can present a challenge . state officials we spoke with cited additional challenges to monitoring online sales , including the difficulty of identifying wic participants in online posts that allow sellers to remain relatively anonymous , and as a result , some expressed concerns about the return on investment for these monitoring efforts . standards for internal control in the federal government suggest that agencies consider both benefits and costs when designing and implementing internal controls . however , because fns had not assessed the nationwide extent of online sales of wic formula by program participants , nor determined cost - effective approaches for identifying and addressing these sales , fns and the states were poorly positioned to strike the appropriate balance of costs and benefits when determining how to target their resources to ensure program integrity .