in contrast , h.r . 4 didn't address financial assurances or contain provisions for bonding . under this bill , bonding requirements for the arctic refuge could be the same as those authorized for other refuges . the reclamation requirements contained in h.r . 4 , s. 388 , and s.a. 3132 for the arctic refuge are similar to the state of alaska's general requirement for the dismantlement , removal , and restoration of its land on the north slope . as previously discussed , this general requirement has resulted in differing interpretations of what will ultimately be required in terms of dismantlement , removal , and restoration on the north slope by the parties involved . in april 2002 , the senate voted to block s.a. 3132 , which would have authorized drilling for oil and gas in the arctic refuge . however , the senate and house energy bills must still be reconciled in conference , where , once again , members of congress have the opportunity to reconsider . generally , existing bond amounts for oil industry activities for federal lands on the north slope will not cover the potential costs of eventual dismantlement , removal , and restoration activities . financial assurances , such as bonds , can ensure that if a company defaults on a lease or contract , the obligations will still be completed . the amount of the financial assurance can be fixed or can vary and be based on , among other things , such factors as the company's experience and financial viability and the estimated cost of future restoration . while blm has some bonding requirements on its land and on fws refuges , its $300,000 bond for all leases a company holds in the npr - a and its $25,000 amount for a statewide bond on refuges are unlikely to meet all restoration costs that could be incurred on the lands . although both blm and mms have the authority to ensure that full funding be available for restoration activities , only mms has implemented a general bonding structure that provides for higher bond amounts as the scope of oil industry activity increases . the corps has not required any financial assurance that funds will be available to conduct dr&r requirements as part of its permit process on the north slope . in the npr - a , the bureau of land management requires oil companies to post a bond for oil activities conducted on federally leased land . blm bonds are used to ensure compliance with all the terms of the lease , including the payment of rentals and royalties and the performance of dr&r . the tariffs were last adjusted in 1985 under a settlement agreement between the taps's owners , the state of alaska , and the department of justice . the pipeline's owners do not have to place collected funds for dr&r in escrow or any other special account . instead , taps's owners can reinvest those funds as they choose , but retain a liability to fund dr&r costs . if funds collected exceed the cost of dr&r , as some assert they will , the owners of the pipeline may realize additional benefits if they are not required to refund excess funds collected .