for example , see figure 3 . finally , several real property reform bills have been introduced in congress that could address the long - standing problem of federal excess and underutilized property . for example , the federal assets sale and transfer act of 2016 could help address stakeholder influence by establishing a public buildings reform board to identify opportunities for the federal government to significantly reduce its inventory of civilian real property and reduce its costs . additionally , the public buildings report and savings act of 2016 would promote consolidations and disposals by requiring , among other things , that gsa ( 1 ) justify to congress any new or replacement building space in the prospectus , including reasons that it cannot be consolidated or collocated into other owned or leased space and ( 2 ) dispose of specific properties in washington , d.c. , including the cotton annex . although both bills have passed the house of representatives , neither one has been enacted yet . chairman mica , ranking member duckworth , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact david wise at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are keith cunningham ( assistant director ) , katie hamer ( analyst in charge ) , luqman abdullah , david lutter , sara ann moessbauer , josh ormond , michelle weathers , and crystal wesco . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . specifically , gsa has created an online resource page on warehouse asset management best practices and , according to gsa officials , is in the process of developing a guide for strategic warehouse planning , which gsa plans to complete in 2016 . in september 2014 , we recommended that gsa and dhs work jointly with regard to the dhs headquarters project on the st. elizabeths campus , to ( 1 ) conduct a comprehensive needs assessment and gap analysis of current and needed capabilities and an alternatives analysis that identifies the costs and benefits of leasing and construction alternatives and ( 2 ) update cost and schedule estimates for the remaining portions of the project . according to agency documents and our interviews with dhs and gsa officials , dhs and gsa have made progress in developing an enhanced plan for the project . gsa only lists warehouses as unutilized if they are already in the disposal process . this interpretation of utilization in frpp caused gsa to list as utilized some warehouses that had been vacant for years . we made a recommendation , discussed below , for improving gsa's management of its warehouses . we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since 2012 , the government has made efforts to improve real property management .