some employees have expressed following concerns . removing gao from the traditional process significantly alters a key element of federal pay protection that led some employees to seek employment in the federal sector . changing this protection could diminish the attractiveness of federal service and result in the need for higher salaries to attract top candidates . a portion of appropriations historically intended to provide all federal employees with increases to keep pace with inflation and the cost of living in particular localities should not be tied to individual performance . gao - based annual economic adjustments are more likely to be less than , rather than more than , amounts annually provided by the congress ; thus employees performing at lower ( but satisfactory ) levels who may not receive an equal or greater amount in the form of a bonus or dividend may experience an effective pay cut from amounts traditionally provided . the flexibility for the comptroller general to use funds appropriated for cost - of - living adjustments for pay - for - performance purposes could imperil future gao budgets by making that portion of the annual budget discretionary where it was once mandatory . the wide latitude provided in the proposal gives the comptroller general broad discretion and limited accountability for determining whether employees receive annual across - the - board economic adjustments , the amount of such adjustments , and the timing of adjustments could result in unfair financial harm for some employees if the broad authorities were improperly exercised . the comptroller general has not made a compelling case regarding the need for these pay - related and other legislative changes , for example by showing that existing cost - of - living adjustment mechanisms are inaccurate or that the agency has had difficulty in attracting and retaining high - quality employees . on the other hand , some employees also recognize that the proposed pay provisions may offer some distinct advantages for some employees . some employees commented in support of the provision indicating that the existing system for calculating inflation and local cost adjustments may not accurately reflect reality ; most employees would not likely be harmed by a system that allocates a greater share of pay to performance - based compensation ; the authorities would allow gao managers to provide greater financial rewards to the agency's top performers , as compared to the present pay - for - performance system ; making a stronger link between pay and performance could facilitate gao's recruitment of top talent . in addition , the provision may , to a limited extent , address a concern of some field employees by providing alternatives to reductions in force in times when mandated pay increases are not fully funded or in other extraordinary circumstances . for example , from 1992 to 1997 , gao underwent budgetary cuts totaling 33 percent ( in constant fiscal year 1992 dollars. ) to achieve these budgetary reductions , gao staff was reduced by 39 percent , primarily through field office closures and the associated elimination of field - based employees .