circuit . a fjc study of that court's workload determined that adjusted case filings were not an appropriate means of measuring the court's judgeship needs . the court had a high proportion of administrative agency appeals that occurred almost exclusively in the court of appeals for d.c. and were more burdensome than other types of cases in several respects — eg , more independently represented participants per case , more briefs filed per case , and a higher rate of case consolidation . essentially , the adjusted case filings workload measure counts all case filings equally , with two exceptions . first , cases refiled and approved for reinstatement are excluded from total case filings . second , two - thirds of pro se cases — defined by the administrative office as cases in which one or both of the parties are not represented by an attorney — are deducted from total case filings ( that is , they are effectively weighted at 0.33 ) . for example , a court with 600 total pro se filings in a fiscal year would be credited with 198 adjusted pro se case filings ( 600 x 0.33 ) . the remaining nonpro se cases would be weighted at 1.0 each . thus , a court of appeals with 1,600 case filings ( excluding reinstatements ) — 600 pro se cases and 1,000 nonpro se cases — would be credited with 1,198 adjusted case filings ( 198 discounted pro se cases plus 1,000 nonpro se cases ) . if this court had 6 judges ( allow two panels of 3 judges each ) , it would have 599 adjusted case filings per 3-judge panel , and , thus , under judicial conference policy , could be considered for an additional judgeship . the current court of appeals workload measure represents an effort to improve the previous measure . in our 1993 report on judgeship needs assessment , we noted that the restraint of individual courts of appeals , not the workload standard , seemed to have determined the actual number of appellate judgeships the judicial conference requested . at the time the current measure was developed and approved , using the new benchmark of 500 adjusted case filings resulted in judgeship numbers that closely approximated the judgeship needs of the majority of the courts of appeals , as the judges of each court perceived them . the current courts of appeals case - related workload measure principally reflects a policy decision using historical data on filings and terminations . it is not based on empirical data regarding the judge time that different types of cases may require . on the basis of the documentation we reviewed , we determined that there is no empirical basis for assessing the potential accuracy of adjusted filings a measure of case - related judge workload .