gao - 10-940t . washington , d.c.: july 21 , 2010 . dhs concurred with our recommendation . in addition , dhs and cbp provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in response to dhs's technical comments and subsequent discussion with agency officials , we modified our recommendation to clarify its intent that dhs test and evaluate container security technologies consistent with all of the operational scenarios it has identified for potential implementation . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of homeland security , energy , and defense ; and interested congressional committees . what remaining steps and challenges , if any , does dhs face in implementing container security technologies ? if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact stephen l. caldwell at ( 202 ) 512-9610 or timothy m. persons at ( 202 ) 512-6412 , or by e - mail at caldwells@gao.gov or personst@gao.gov , respectively . to address the first objective , we reviewed all four ongoing container security projects initiated by s&t to develop technologies that can detect cargo container intrusions and track the movement of cargo containers through the supply chain . for each of the four projects , we reviewed project requirements documents , test plans , technology transition agreements , and task orders to determine the projects' scope and requirements . we then evaluated dhs's plans against criteria for planning in dhs's developing operational requirements guide . to assess dhs's progress in developing technologies , we reviewed the test reports outlining the performance of the technologies under evaluation to identify the capabilities of the technologies and performance deficiencies . we also reviewed each of the project schedules and compared them to the current status of each of the container security technology projects as of june 2010 . in particular , this report addresses the following questions: to what extent has dhs made progress in conducting research and development and defining performance standards for container security technologies ? we interviewed senior officials in s&t's borders and maritime security division in washington , d.c. , who are responsible for the four container security projects to discuss the status of the projects . we also interviewed officials representing the four members of the container security test and evaluation ( cste ) team created by s&t to test and evaluate the technologies — lawrence livermore national laboratory , pacific northwest national laboratory , sandia national laboratories , and the space and naval warfare systems center pacific — to discuss the results of the four projects' test and evaluation processes . in addition to these interviews , we also conducted a site visit to sandia national laboratories in albuquerque , new mexico — the location for all laboratory testing of the container security technologies — to view technology prototypes , observe the test facilities , and to learn more about the specific laboratory tests that have been conducted on the container security technologies .