in commenting on this report , hhs agreed with our recommendation . cms has subsequently modified some elements and conducted monitoring of the process . however , cms has not taken certain important steps that could help ensure the effectiveness of these actions . as cms considers future modifications to the enrollment screening process and undertakes its second program - wide revalidation effort , opportunities exist to address limitations in its current monitoring of the process . identified provider and supplier enrollment records that needed increased scrutiny . providers and suppliers more knowledgeable about their responsibilities to keep enrollment information up to date . specifically , we identified ( 1 ) the number of new enrollment application decisions made , ( 2 ) the number of enrollment records with a change in enrollment status , for example , from approved to deactivated , and ( 3 ) the number of approved enrollment records as of march 25 , 2011 , that did not have an enrollment status change during the time period . each enrollment record could only fall in to a single group and we excluded from our analysis deactivated or revoked enrollment records that did not have an enrollment status change during the time period since cms would not have applied the enrollment screening process to these enrollment records . to determine the number of approved , denied , and rejected new enrollment applications during the time period we reviewed , we analyzed pecos data to calculate the number of enrollment applications by outcome . for the denied and rejected new enrollment applications , we analyzed the pecos recorded reasons for the denial or rejection and calculated the number of denials and rejections by recorded reason and by provider and supplier risk category during that time period . cms officials reported that there could be multiple reasons for a denial or rejection , but due to pecos system limitations , the medicare administrative contractors ( mac ) responsible for enrolling providers and suppliers can only record one reason . in addition , the reason codes that can be recorded in pecos changed during the time frame covered by our analysis . to determine the number of existing enrollment records deactivated or revoked during the time period we reviewed , we analyzed pecos data to identify enrollment record statuses that changed to deactivated or revoked during the time period . we identified both the total number of status changes , as well as the number of unique enrollment records deactivated or revoked . the total number of deactivations or revocations is greater than the number of unique enrollment records deactivated or revoked because a provider's or supplier's enrollment record could have been deactivated or revoked more than once during that time . cms officials stated that while they want to assess the screening process , they are uncertain of what performance measures to establish in part because they are concerned that some measures would be inappropriate . for example , cms officials stated that while they review the number of deactivations and revocations , it would not be appropriate to have targets for deactivating or revoking a predetermined number of providers or suppliers .