( see fig . in 2009 , cpo also established national upper and lower inventory targets for pennies , nickels , dimes , and quarters to track and measure the coin inventory . cpo officials noted that these targets help meet their primary goal in managing the nation's coin inventory: ensuring a sufficient supply of all coin denominations to meet the public's demand . the upper national - inventory target serves as a signal for cpo to reduce future coin orders from the u.s. mint to avoid the risk of approaching coin - storage capacity limits and the lower national - inventory target serves as a signal to cpo that there is a need to increase future coin orders to avoid shortages . we analyzed national inventory targets from 2009 to 2012 and found that in most cases these targets were met . in managing the coin inventory , cpo determines if coins should be transferred from an area with more coins than needed to fulfill demand or if additional coins should be ordered from the u.s. mint . the actions that it has planned to address our recommendations could potentially contribute to reducing federal costs related to circulating coins , a reduction that could increase the amount of money returned to the general fund . while the federal reserve has a framework that it believes can adapt to expected gradual changes in coin demand , a significant and unexpected decrease in demand could lead to increased storage needs . chairman campbell , ranking member clay , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . if there is an insufficient supply of coins to meet demand and transferring coins from another location would not be cost - effective , cpo orders new coins from the u.s. mint based on its 2-month rolling forecast of expected demand . after submitting orders to the u.s. mint , cpo may increase an order or defer shipments to later months based on updated information . in part to respond to these changes , each month the u.s. mint produces a safety stock of coins . our analysis found that in 2012 , reserve bank costs related to coin management were approximately $62 million . to monitor costs related to currency management , including coins as well as notes , cpo officials said they review these costs at the national level because individual reserve banks may vary in their accounting for operational costs related to coins and notes . in october 2013 , we found that from 2008 through 2012 total annual reserve bank currency - management costs increased by 23 percent at the national level . while cost information for coins and notes is available separately , cpo does not separately monitor the reserve bank's coin management costs . looking specifically at coin management costs , which include direct and support costs , our analysis found that they increased by 69 percent from 2008 through 2012 . more specifically , reserve bank direct costs for coin management increased by 45 percent during this period , about $5 million across the 28 offices , and support costs increased by 80 percent , about $19.6 million across these offices . direct costs include personnel and equipment .