additionally , there were other reporting inaccuracies . each of the methods for presenting data — cumulatively or by fiscal year — has certain drawbacks . showing data cumulatively shows the long term progress that dod has made in recovering costs , but it can also obscure instances in which no recoveries occurred in a given fiscal year . the details of our scope and methodology are in appendix i . the reported increase in recoveries is incorrect because $250.4 million , over half of the $421.5 million reported as cost recoveries in 1999 , was not the amount dod recovered but the amount it spent on environmental cleanups conducted by other parties . for example , the army corps of engineers reported that at weldon spring , missouri , it had recovered $180.6 million . supporting records , however , show the amount as the corps' share of costs for cleanup the department of energy is performing at the site . corps officials told us they reported only the corps' share of cleanup costs at these sites because the guidance did not define “cost sharing.” in addition , these officials said they did not know what others spend on cleanup at the sites . ( this is further discussed in the section on the data's completeness. ) the corps of engineers also incorrectly reported recoveries totaling about $70 million at other sites that were also its share of cleanup costs rather than recovered amounts . for example , two sites with ongoing recoveries — the rocky mountain arsenal and the massachusetts military reservation — that should have been reported by the army in the fiscal year 1998 report were not reported until the following year . the reported recoveries at these two sites were $17.3 million and $28.2 million , respectively , and were not reported because the army did not report cost sharing arrangements in fiscal year 1998 . dod's guidance did not specify how to calculate the costs of pursuing recovery or whether components should report fiscal year data , cumulative data , or both . consequently , the components' reported data for both cost recoveries and the costs of pursuing recoveries were not consistent . calculating the costs of pursuing recoveries has been particularly problematic . for example , although some costs , such as certain legal costs , are obviously related to efforts to recover costs , other legal costs , such as those incurred in defense against charges brought by states or counties , are not . having nearly 28,000 potentially contaminated sites , the department of defense manages one of the world's largest environmental cleanup programs . under the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 , contractors and other private parties may share liability for the cleanup costs at these sites . two major types of sites that may involve such liability are government - owned , contractor - operated facilities ( whose operators may be liable ) and formerly used defense sites ( whose current and past owners and operators may be liable ) . there were 55 comments in other parts of the reports for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 that indicated the presence of potential responsible parties or that cost recovery was being considered or pursued .