but concerns remain . interior also faces challenges in managing oil and gas operations on federal lands , adapting to climate change , and resolving natural resource conflicts through collaborative management . the wildland fire problems facing our nation continue to grow . the average annual acreage burned by wildland fires has increased by approximately 70 percent since the 1990s , and appropriations for the federal government's wildland fire management activities tripled from about $1 billion in fiscal year 1999 to nearly $3 billion in fiscal year 2007 . as we have previously reported , a number of factors have contributed to worsening fire seasons and increased firefighting expenditures , including an accumulation of fuels resulting from past land management practices ; drought and other stresses , in part related to climate change ; and an increase in human development in or near wildlands . while agriculture's forest service receives the majority of fire management resources , interior agencies — the national park service ( nps ) ; the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) ; the u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) ; and , particularly , the bureau of land management ( blm ) — are key partners in responding to the threats of wildland fire . consequently , most of our work and recommendations on wildland fire management address agencies in both departments . specifically , we have called on the agencies to develop a cohesive strategy that identifies options and associated funding to reduce potentially hazardous vegetation and address wildland fire problems . in 1999 , to address the problem of excess fuels and their potential to increase the severity of wildland fires and the cost of suppression efforts , we recommended that a cohesive strategy be developed to identify the available long - term options for reducing fuels and the associated funding requirements . six years later , in 2005 , we reiterated the need for a cohesive strategy and broadened our recommendation's focus to better address the interrelated nature of fuel reduction efforts and wildland fire response . in january 2009 , agency officials told us they were working to create such a cohesive strategy , although they could not provide an estimate of when it would be completed . establish clear goals and a strategy to help contain wildland fire costs . in 2007 , we reported that the agencies were taking a number of steps intended to help contain wildland fire costs , but had not clearly defined cost - containment goals or developed a strategy for achieving those goals . agency officials identified several documents that they believed provide clearly defined goals and objectives that make up interior's strategy to contain costs . however , the documents lack the clarity and specificity officials in the field need to help manage and contain wildland fire costs . we therefore continue to believe that our recommendations , if effectively implemented , would help the agencies better manage their cost - containment efforts and improve their ability to contain wildland fire costs . continue to improve their processes for allocating fuel reduction funds and selecting fuel reduction projects .