we believe that cms should do so expeditiously . in 2010 , we recommended that cms designate responsible personnel with authority to evaluate and promptly address vulnerabilities identified to reduce improper payments . cms concurred with this recommendation and has begun to implement this process , but does not yet have written policies and procedures for a fully developed corrective action process that includes monitoring of actions taken . likewise , we recently testified before the senate committee on finance regarding cms efforts to combat medicare fraud . we reiterated our prior recommendation and noted that cms could do more to strengthen provider enrollment screening to avoid enrolling those intent on committing fraud , improve pre - and postpayment claims review to identify and respond to patterns of suspicious billing activity more effectively , and identify and address vulnerabilities to reduce the ease with which fraudulent entities can obtain improper payments . enhancing payment safeguard mechanisms . in 2008 , we reported on rapid spending growth for advanced imaging services . we recommended that cms examine the feasibility of adding front - end approaches , such as prior authorization , to improve payment safeguard mechanisms . cms has not implemented our recommendation , but is currently engaged in a demonstration project to assess the appropriateness of physicians' use of advanced diagnostic imaging services furnished to medicare beneficiaries . aligning coverage for services with clinical recommendations . we reported in early 2012 that medicare beneficiaries' use of preventive services did not always align with the u.s. preventive services task force's recommendations . we concluded that opportunities exist to improve the appropriate use of preventive services through means such as revising coverage and cost - sharing policies and educating beneficiaries and physicians . in the case of osteoporosis screening , for instance , medicare coverage rules may preclude utilization of the recommended screening by all those for whom the service is recommended . conversely , given that the task force recommended against prostate cancer screening for men aged 75 or older , the absence of cost sharing for that population may encourage inappropriate use of this service . to better align preventive service use with clinical recommendations , we recommended that cms provide coverage for task force recommended services , as appropriate , given cost - effectiveness and other criteria . in response to our recommendation , the agency stated that it had recently used its authority to expand benefits to cover several new preventive services . this additional coverage , however , does not address the misalignment that remains between medicare coverage for certain services and the corresponding task force recommendations . we also offered a matter for congressional consideration . we suggested that congress consider requiring beneficiaries to share the cost of the services if they receive services the task force recommends against . minimizing improper payments and fraud . we have a body of issued and ongoing work about improper payments in medicare . in 2007 , we reported on program integrity activities conducted by cms contractors to minimize improper payments for medical equipment and supplies . we recommended that cms require its contractors to develop automated prepayment controls to identify potentially improper claims when billing reaches atypical levels . cms agreed with the recommendation , but has not implemented it .