we continue to believe that such an analysis is needed . because of the current tight fiscal climate and the secretary of defense's continual urging that dod identify additional opportunities for achieving efficiencies and cost savings , dod should reassess the option of relocating africom's headquarters to the united states . the department's written comments are reprinted in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and the secretary of state . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . it addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) what courses of action did dod consider for the permanent placement of the headquarters for africom ? ( 2 ) to what extent was dod's decision to keep africom headquarters in stuttgart , germany , based on a well - documented analysis of the costs and benefits of the options available to dod ? to determine the courses of action dod considered for the permanent placement of africom headquarters , we interviewed officials from the office of the under secretary of defense for policy , the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for african affairs , the joint staff , the u.s. european command , and africom . we also reviewed documents written at the time that africom was established and compared them with the latest statistics provided by africom to determine how the command's mission , size , and cost have changed over time . we reviewed briefings and presentations prepared by various organizations throughout dod since 2006 . these organizations included cape's predecessor , the office of program analysis and evaluation , as well as the office of the under secretary of defense for policy ; office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for african affairs ; the u.s. european command ; and transition team africa command , a group that was established to assist in the standup of africom . to determine the extent to which dod's decision to keep africom headquarters in stuttgart , germany , was based on a well - documented analysis of the costs and benefits of the options available to dod , we reviewed the cape study on this subject , discussed the study with cape officials , and requested and analyzed supporting documentation for the study's findings . we also obtained documentation from and interviewed officials with africom , the u.s. central command , the u.s. european command , and the u.s. southern command . to obtain an understanding of how other combatant commands have conducted cost benefit analyses to inform decisions on headquarters locations , we reviewed the studies prepared by the u.s. southern command before dod decided where to locate its headquarters and discussed these studies with a southern command official involved in preparing them . we reviewed criteria for conducting economic analyses from key principles that we derived from a variety of cost estimating , economic analysis , and budgeting guidance documents and compared it with dod's efforts on the cape study . we also analyzed documents and interviewed officials from africom's component commands: u.s. army , africa , in vicenza , italy ; u.s. air force , africa , in ramstein air base , germany ; u.s .