we disagree . our analysis and conclusions related to travel did take into account the possible conditions that could justify airfare costs in excess of the lowest customary coach - class fare . the far requires supporting documentation for first - class and other excessive airfare costs of the nature we identified to justify the higher airfare costs . no such documentation was provided to us to justify the excessive costs we identified . to estimate the cost of the coach - class tickets , we assumed that tickets were purchased 3 days in advance ( which was the average based on the trips we reviewed ) and did not include a saturday night stay over . specifically , we ( 1 ) used the web sites of the airlines used by each traveler , ( 2 ) searched for standard fully - refundable coach - class tickets with the same destinations , ( 3 ) calculated an average cost based on the lowest and highest ticket prices available at the time of our search , and ( 4 ) adjusted the average cost for inflation applicable to airfare . we believe that this approach , which closely approximated what travelers were doing at that time , resulted in reasonable estimates as to how much the travel should have cost . we also believe that adjusting current fares for inflation applicable to airfare results in a reasonable benchmark to compare to historical prices , since it does take into account price changes as a result of changes in the airline industry , including the effects of competition . lastly , we fully agree with gsa that the passage of time makes it difficult to determine historical airfare costs , which is another reason that costs should be reviewed real time instead of as part of an after - the - fact audit . an after - the - fact analysis is no substitute for the contemporaneous monitoring and oversight that we recommend in this report . more specific discussions are provided following gsa's comments , which are reprinted in appendix iv . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the director of the fbi , the acting administrator of gsa , and interested congressional committees . copies will also be made available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9508 or calboml@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . major contributors to this report are acknowledged in appendix v . the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi ) trilogy project experienced several delays , as shown in figure 4 .