policies and processes . implementing strategic decisions to achieve desired agency - wide outcomes requires clear and transparent policies and processes that are implemented consistently . policies establish expectations about the management of the contracting function . processes are the means by which management functions will be performed and implemented . effective policies and processes govern the planning , award , administration , and oversight of contracting efforts . human capital . successfully acquiring goods and services , and executing and monitoring contracts requires valuing and investing in the contracting workforce . agencies must think strategically about attracting , developing , and retaining talent , and creating a results - oriented culture within the contracting workforce . knowledge and information management . effective knowledge and information management provides credible , reliable , and timely data to make contracting decisions . stakeholders in the contracting process — procurement department and program staff who decide which goods or services to buy ; project managers who receive the goods and services ; managers who maintain supplier relationships ; contract administrators who oversee compliance with the contract ; and the finance department that pays for the goods and services — need meaningful data to perform their respective roles and responsibilities . contracting plays a central role in helping pbgc achieve its mission and address unpredictable workloads . pbgc's contracts cover a wide range of services , including the administration of terminated plans , payment of benefits , customer communication , legal assistance , document management , and information technology . its contract spending has increased steadily along with overall budget and workload , and use of contracted staff has outpaced its hiring of federal employees . pbgc has relied on contractors to supplement its workforce since the mid - 1980s as its workloads have grown due to a significant number of pension plan terminations . pbgc acknowledges that it has difficulty anticipating its workloads due to unpredictable economic conditions and relies on contractors to expand or reduce its workforce as necessary . to address the increase in the overall number of pension plans and participants , pbgc's budget increased steadily over the last 8 years , from $165 million in fiscal year 2000 to $398 million in fiscal year 2007 . similarly , pbgc's contract spending increased from $122 million in fiscal year 2000 to $297 million in fiscal year 2007 , as shown in figure 4 . contracting represented 71 percent of pbgc's appropriated budget during this period . across the federal government , contract spending has more than doubled since fiscal year 2000 , going from about $208.8 billion to $430 billion . the departments of defense and homeland security account for the majority of the increase , while other agencies vary in their budget changes . in previous work on contract spending at various agencies , we found that overall , about a quarter of agencies' discretionary spending was through contracts . therefore , pbgc's contract spending as a percentage of its discretionary budget is relatively high , although most federal agencies have increased their contract spending in recent years . the number of pbgc's contract employees has grown significantly more than pbgc employees . as figure 5 shows , pbgc had 791 contract employees in fiscal year 2000 .