we found shortcomings with most of these systems . for example: many studies that have evaluated the rural share of federal programs , including our 1989 report , have used the rural - urban continuum codes devised by the economic research service ( ers ) of the usda . these codes distinguish counties by their degree of urbanization and proximity to a metropolitan area or areas . while using rural - urban continuum codes allows geocoding at the county level , the results are often skewed , particularly in the western states , where counties often are very large . for example , using this approach , more than 50 percent of the nation's rural population would live in counties that would be considered urban ( based on the 2000 census ) . urban influence codes , which were developed by ers in 1993 as a way to measure rurality by quantifying the influence of urban areas on rural areas , use only county - level data and are based solely on urban factors . as a result , the classifications are heavily skewed toward urban . beginning in the 1990s , ers and other organizations have developed subcounty classification systems that attempt to better capture differences between rural and urban areas . these subcounty classification systems include elements such as commuting zones and labor market areas that are more precise than the county level systems in order to capture the economic and social diversity of rural areas . some use census tracts ( about 62,000 ) or other geographic areas smaller than counties ( about 3,000 ) that can better reflect rural - urban differences . census's urbanized areas and urban cluster system defines rural areas by exclusion — that is , it views as rural all areas that it has not already identified as urban . census defines urbanized areas as continuously built up areas with a population of at least 50,000 and compromising one or more places and adjacent densely settled areas . urban clusters are densely settled territories with at least 2,500 but fewer than 50,000 people . collectively , urbanized areas and urban clusters are referred to as urban areas and essentially depict densely settled territory as it may appear from the air ( see fig . on the basis of these definitions , data from the 2000 census suggest that 59 million americans ( 20 percent of the population ) reside in rural areas . as we reported in our 2004 report , using urbanized areas and urban clusters is an effective way to make consistent eligibility determinations for individual rural economic development programs when data is available at the census tract level . however , we found that our ability to track funds to the local level varied significantly across agencies . for example , while rural housing and most other usda program data could be geocoded to the local level , most dot spending could be tracked only to the counties . thus , while geocoding data using urbanized areas and urban clusters would effectively show rural and urban differences , limitations with the data would only allow us to geocode about half of the data under this classification system .