dod did not provide comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5431 or russellc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix i . in addition to the contact named above , guy lofaro , ( assistant director ) , ben atwood , naba barkakati , christopher gezon , amie lesser , dennis mayo , paulina reaves , michael silver , michael shaughnessy , stephen woods , and lillian yob made contributions to this report . combatant commands rely on eod to accomplish their missions . the department of defense ( dod ) increased its eod forces by more than 70 percent from 2002 to 2012 because of increased demand for these forces . eod forces execute a variety of duties during operations including countering improvised explosive devices and collecting and evaluating captured explosive - related enemy materiel . although the services' eod forces support combatant commanders , northcom's joint force headquarters - national capital region coordinates eod force support of land - based homeland defense and dsca missions . eod forces conduct combat - related and dsca missions that support national military objectives . eod combat - related missions include preparations for combat such as training and exercises , and the wartime execution of eod missions . eod forces play a major role in all phases of combat operations . for example , these forces contribute to information gathering during operations and serve to enable the safe conduct of operations within an operational area . additionally , eod forces support freedom of maneuver and force protection . further , they may directly support missions such as counterterrorism , deterring and defeating aggression , and countering weapons of mass destruction , among others across the spectrum of operations . officials from each service stated that eod forces prepare for these combat - related missions during predeployment in - garrison periods . eod forces also conduct dsca missions when they are not engaged in combat - related missions . dod provides eod forces when requested in advance by specific federal agencies and approved by the appropriate dod official . officials stated that generally , eod forces undertake vip support missions during in - garrison periods , just after returning from combat - related deployments or while preparing for the next deployment . the military services collectively have more than 6,300 eod positions to fulfill combatant command missions , and demand for eod manpower and expertise is high . each service determines the number of eod technicians it needs based on its respective requirements , which consider combatant commanders' wartime missions and plans .