we discussed this issue with ussc . after reviewing the underlying documents used for coding these 1,600 sentences , ussc determined that over 900 sentences were miscoded . these miscoded sentences were recoded in a variety of ways , including some coded as involving the safety valve , some coded as involving substantial assistance , some coded as having a changed drug quantity that affected the applicable mandatory minimum , and some coded as missing safety valve information . ( see fig . nearly all of the mandatory minimum drug sentences carried either a 5-year ( 48 percent ) mandatory minimum or a 10-year minimum ( 49 percent ) . on average , prosecutors' substantial assistance motions reduced drug offenders' 5-year mandatory minimum sentence by 33 months . sentences lowered for other reasons , such as the safety valve , that would otherwise be subject to a 5-year mandatory minimum were reduced by an average of 26 months . on average , prosecutors' substantial assistance motions reduced drug offenders' 10-year mandatory minimum sentences by 63 months , and sentences lowered for other reasons that would otherwise be subject to a 10-year mandatory minimum were reduced by an average of 52 months . see appendix i for more detailed information on sentence reductions . figure 7 provides a summary of the number and percent of federal drug sentences that fell below a mandatory minimum or guideline range compared with sentences that did not carry a mandatory minimum . almost all of the sentences ( 99 percent ) that fell below a mandatory minimum due to substantial assistance also departed downward from an applicable guideline range , whereas only a quarter of sentences that fell below an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum for other reasons also departed downward from an applicable guideline range . these percentage differences do not take into account offender and offense characteristics that may contribute to differences among circuits and districts . in 7 of the 12 circuits , more sentences fell below a mandatory minimum due to substantial assistance motions than for other reasons , as figure 8 shows . in addition to these differences among the circuits , across the 94 districts the percentage of sentences meeting or below an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum substantially varied . figure 9 shows the 94 judicial districts grouped according to the percent of sentences imposed that fell below an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum due to substantial assistance and for other reasons . in 40 districts , more than 30 percent of sentences fell below an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum due to substantial assistance whereas in 16 districts more than 30 percent fell below for other reasons . appendix ii has more details on our analysis of sentences for which the offense of conviction carried a mandatory minimum sentence . the percentage differences among circuits and districts suggest that variation existed in the way courts sentenced offenders ; however , as discussed earlier , these percentages do not take into account factors such as the offender and offense characteristics that may affect sentencing within a circuit or district .