points . dot also provided comments on the draft report , which we have incorporated into the report as appropriate . dhs generally concurred with the report's findings and commented that the recommendations are key to a successful r&d program and that the department would continue to evaluate its r&d processes in light of the report's findings and recommendations . however , dhs believed that the report did not sufficiently recognize recent changes that have taken place , particularly at tsa . according to dhs , tsa has made great strides in defining r&d projects and linking them to mission needs and identified gaps . in response to these and other technical comments that dhs provided , we revised the report as appropriate . dhs also provided additional perspectives on our recommendations: recommendation: tsa and dhs should ensure that their transportation security r&d portfolios contain projects in all phases of r&d , including basic research . dhs said that tsa's transportation security laboratory currently conducts basic research and that tsa's human factors program , manhattan ii project , and air cargo security projects include basic research . however , information provided by tsa in july 2004 in response to our request for data on projects , including their current phase of research , identified no projects in the basic research phase . this information from tsa covered the agency's r&d work on human factors , manhattan ii , and air cargo security . in addition , a senior tsa official said that the agency needed to do more basic research . in light of this information from tsa , we did not change our recommendation . recommendation: tsa and dhs should ( 1 ) complete strategic plans containing measurable objectives for tsa's and dhs's transportation security r&d programs and ( 2 ) complete risk assessments for all modes of transportation , and use the results of the risk assessments to help select and prioritize r&d projects . dhs said that in 2004 , it finalized its strategic plan , which defined missions and goals for all of the agencies under it , including tsa . dhs also said that the strategic plan being developed by tsa's office of security technology would include measurable goals and milestones for r&d projects . however , dhs's strategic plan does not specifically address transportation security r&d and neither tsa nor dhs has completed an r&d strategic plan containing measurable objectives . therefore , we did not revise this recommendation . recommendation: tsa and dhs should develop a database that will provide accurate , complete , current , and readily accessible project information for monitoring and managing their r&d portfolios . dhs said that tsa had developed a system to track r&d projects' goals and milestones , acquisition , funding , testing , and deployment information . while such a project tracking system could address our recommendation , tsa struggled as recently as of august 2004 to provide us with basic information on many of its r&d projects and , in the end , was unable to do so for a significant number . therefore , we retained this recommendation .