performance measures . finally , owcp officials stated that they are in the process of establishing quality - assurance reviews of per processing . as such , labor will convene accountability review teams of program specialists to evaluate the quality of workload processing in its district operations . these evaluations are to scrutinize processed work , such as elements relating to fiscal and operational integrity . accountability review findings are to be reviewed by the relevant owcp program director and corrective action plans will be developed , as necessary . in addition , according to owcp officials , two new quality measures have been implemented in fiscal year 2013 to rate the accuracy of compensation benefit payments , and whether the factual and medical evidence of record supports the current level of benefits provided . according to labor officials , owcp plans to start conducting these reviews by the end of fiscal year 2013 . in 2012 , we reported that periodic reviews of feca case files are a promising practice and can be used to help increase program officials' awareness of potential fraudulent activities . further , these controls are consistent with the detection and monitoring component of gao's fraud - prevention framework , and could help to validate claimants' eligibility including medical conditions and income information . if implemented properly , these steps will assist owcp in identifying cases for return - to - work potential and referral to vocational rehabilitation . in addition , verification of proper and accurate benefit levels will also support feca program fiscal integrity . as we have previously reported , because labor does not have statutory authority to directly access private or public wage data that is reported to ssa and the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) national directory of new hires ( ndnh ) database , owcp relies heavily on claimants' self - reporting of earnings on the annual form ca - 1032 to identify potential fraud . for example , while owcp requests that feca claimants provide it with consent to access their ssa earnings file , claimants are not required to provide owcp with consent , and authorization to obtain such information is not required to receive compensation . our review of a nongeneralizable sample of 32 individual cases identified eight feca claimants who had significantly underreported employment wages in comparison to the wages reported in the state's qw reports for the same period . we also found that three claimants did not provide authorization to owcp to access their ssa earnings file . gao - 12-402 . the ssa.that they studied whether to use ndnh and communicated with hhs , but determined that this would not be an effective solution because of cost issues , limited participation by employers in ndnh , and the likelihood that unreported earnings would not be listed . for example , owcp officials stated that it would cost about $1 million to implement an automated process for verifying wage information with ndnh .