i agree with this decision . we should approach our concern about appraisal ratings for african - americans with the same analytical rigor and independence that we use when approaching any engagement . we must also be prepared to implement recommendations coming out of this review . while we continue to have a major challenge regarding the average performance ratings of african - americans , the percentages of african - americans in senior management positions at gao have increased in the last several years . i believe that the o&i monitoring reviews , direct access to top gao management , and the other safeguards have played a significant role in these improvements . specifically , from fiscal year 2000 to fiscal year 2007 , the percentage of african - american staff in the ses / senior level ( sl ) increased from 7.1 percent to 11.6 percent , and at the band iii level the percentages increased from 6.7 percent to 10.8 percent . the following table shows the change in representation of african - american staff at the ses / sl and band iii levels for each year . furthermore , the percentages of african - americans in senior management positions at gao compare favorably to the governmentwide percentages . while the percentage of african - americans at the ses / sl level at gao was lower than the governmentwide percentage in 2000 , by september 2006 , the gao percentage had increased and exceeded the governmentwide percentage . at the band iii / gs - 15 level , the percentage of african - american staff at gao exceeded the governmentwide percentage in 2000 as well as in 2006 . table 2 lists the gao and governmentwide percentages . nonetheless , as an agency that leads by example , additional steps should be taken . we must continue to improve our expectation - setting and feedback process so that it is more timely and specific . we need additional individualized training for designated staff , and we need to provide training for all supervisors on having candid conversations about performance . we also need to improve transparency in assigning supervisory roles , ensure that all staff have similar opportunities to perform key competencies , and hold managers accountable for results . finally , we will implement an agencywide mentoring program this summer . we expect that this program will help all participants enhance job performance and career development opportunities . overall , gao is making progress toward improving its processes and implementing various program changes that will help address important issues . i believe there are two compelling diversity challenges confronting gao and the federal government . first , is the continuing challenge of implementing sufficiently specific merit - based policies , safeguards , and training in order to minimize the ability of individual biases to adversely affect the outcome of those policies . second , is the challenge of having managers that can communicate with diverse groups of staff , respecting their differences and effectively using their creativity to develop a more dynamic and productive work environment . for many people , the workplace is the most diverse place they encounter during the course of their day .