we address this issue in a separate report . since 1996 , the federal reserve has consolidated the management of the services provided by the individual reserve banks , particularly payment services . for example , payment system products and new technologies are now managed on a systemwide basis . the federal reserve also has undertaken an assessment of its role in providing payment services . in january 1998 , the committee on the federal reserve in the payments mechanism , chaired by the vice chair of the board of governors , issued its report entitled the federal reserve in the payments mechanism . the study examined the payment services provided by the federal reserve in light of the rapid changes occurring in the financial services and technology sectors . these services include check clearing and automated clearinghouse services such as direct deposits . the committee undertook a fundamental review of the federal reserve's role in the payments system and considered how alternative roles for the federal reserve might enhance or undermine the integrity , efficiency , and accessibility of the payments system . it concluded that the federal reserve's current role , or even a slightly enhanced role , in fostering technical change was preferred by most payment system participants . in july 1999 , the federal reserve formed the payments system development committee ( psdc ) to advise the board and system officials on medium - and long - term public policy issues surrounding developments in the retail payments system . the federal reserve act authorizes the federal reserve to charge fees for bank examinations , but the federal reserve has not done so , for the state member banks it examines . this committee , which includes two federal reserve board governors , a reserve bank president , and a reserve bank first vice president , was intended to follow up on the work of the committee on the federal reserve in the payments system . psdc's work has included the check truncation act , proposed legislation designed to remove certain legal impediments to check truncation and enhance the overall efficiency of the nation's payments system . it has also worked with payments industry officials to develop standards to facilitate increased use of electronic check processing . the federal reserve has introduced new payment products , such as its imaging service , to recognize the increasing role that image - based services are playing in the evolution of the u.s. payments system and the migration toward more electronic payments . the federal reserve has also undertaken numerous initiatives to streamline management structures , consolidate operations , and apply emerging technologies to the reserve banks' business processes in order to improve quality and reduce costs . federal reserve officials explained that many of their initiatives have the effect of consolidating functions of the federal reserve without consolidating the 12 reserve banks . for example , in 1999 , the treasury direct customer support function was consolidated so that only 3 reserve banks are providing customer service support to individuals who purchase treasury securities directly from the treasury . from 1999 to 2002 , the federal reserve consolidated several aspects of fedwire funds and securities transfer operations .