, received benefits from injury until death ) . we have identified several weaknesses in these areas . most recently , in april 2013 , we found examples of improper payments and indicators of potential fraud in the feca program , which could be attributed , in part , to oversight and data - access issues . for example , we found cases where , in comparison to state wage data reports , individuals underreported their employment wages to dol . underreporting earnings could result in overpayments of feca benefits . dol did not have access to wage data to corroborate the self - reported incomes . because of this limitation , we included a matter for congressional consideration , stating that congress should consider granting dol additional authority to access wage data to help verify claimants' reported income and help ensure the proper payment of benefits . congress has not yet passed legislation to give dol additional authority to access wage data . we also found that , although some feca claimants may be eligible to receive both feca and unemployment insurance benefits , dol did not have a process to share the necessary data to help the states identify overlapping payments . we recommended that the secretary of labor assess the feasibility of developing a cost - effective mechanism to share feca compensation information with states . dol agreed with the recommendation and has taken steps to develop a cost - effective mechanism to share feca compensation information with states , but has not completed its efforts . specifically , in august 2014 , a dol official stated that the agency's office of workers' compensation programs and office of unemployment insurance are working with dol's office of the solicitor to develop agreements that would allow dol to provide information on feca compensation to states for use in determining unemployment benefits . when completed , these actions should help states to identify whether claimants are inappropriately receiving overlapping ui and feca payments . our simulations of the effects of compensating non - usps and usps total - disability beneficiaries at the single rate of either 66-2 / 3 or 70 percent of wages at injury , regardless of the presence of dependents , reduced the median wage replacement rates . median wage replacement rates overall , and within the subgroups we examined , were generally lower under the 66-2 / 3 percent compensation proposal . as we reported in 2012 , compared to the current feca program , both proposals reduced 2010 median wage replacement rates for total - disability non - usps and usps beneficiaries , as shown in figure 1 . the decreases in the overall median wage replacement rates were due to the greater proportion of beneficiaries who had a dependent — 73 percent of non - usps beneficiaries and 71 percent of usps beneficiaries . beneficiaries with a dependent received lower compensation under both proposals whereas beneficiaries without a dependent saw their compensation increase or stay the same . as shown in the middle group of bars in figure 1 , the results of our simulation indicate that median wage replacement rates for usps beneficiaries were generally higher than those for non - usps beneficiaries .