( app . i contains a list of applications and petitions processed by the service centers , districts , and ascs ; and app . ins officials told us that they are also planning to reengineer their processes to achieve long - term solutions to managing their workload . we recommended that requests for future appropriations for information technology should be limited to efforts that are small , represent low technical risk , and support ongoing operations and maintenance . an ins official estimated that the enterprise architecture would be developed by the end of december 2001 , and its information technology investment management process would be developed and provided to the department of justice for approval by the end of may 2001 . ins undertook a 100-percent physical inventory ( manual count ) of all applications that were pending as of september 30 , 2000 , because the automated data systems did not contain sufficiently reliable data for ins to obtain an unqualified opinion on its fiscal year 1999 financial statements . this inventory was also needed , according to the isd director , because automated data were not available for most applications processed by the districts . to carry out the inventory , ins suspended most case processing for 2 to 3 weeks . as part of its fiscal year 1999 financial audit , ins' financial statement auditors tested the pending data in claims 3 and claims 4 and found that they were unreliable . according to the financial statement auditors , the pending data in claims 3 were unreliable because some data did not upload from the claims 3 local area network in the field offices centers to the claims mainframe , making ins' database on pending cases incomplete and inaccurate . what other actions has ins taken or planned to improve application processing ? since 1994 , to what extent have ins' adjudications budget , staffing , and workload changed ? since 1994 , to what extent has ins experienced backlogs in processing applications for immigration benefits ? how long does it take ins to process applications from the time the application is received until it is completed ? what factors affect ins' application backlogs and processing times , and what actions has ins taken or planned to address them ? ins , through its adjudications and naturalization program , delivers various immigration benefits and services to aliens , including naturalizing immigrants , adjusting the status of immigrants to permanent residence , providing employment authorization , and granting asylum . ins charges aliens fees for processing their applications and deposits the fees into the immigration examinations fee account ( iefa ) . this account was established in 1988 to reimburse any ins appropriation for expenses incurred in providing adjudications and naturalization services . in 1990 , congress authorized ins to set adjudications and naturalization fees at a level that would ensure recovery of the full costs of providing services.from fiscal year 1994 to fiscal year 1996 , the adjudications and naturalization budget was almost entirely funded by iefa . beginning in fiscal year 1997 and continuing through fiscal year 2000 , adjudications and naturalization program funding included direct appropriations , in addition to iefa funds , to reduce application caseloads .