these include requirements development and requirements management . requirements development includes activities such as identifying desirable functionality and quality attributes through an analysis of scenarios with relevant stakeholders ; analyzing and qualifying functionality required by end users ; and partitioning requirements into groups based on established criteria such as similar functionality to facilitate and focus the requirements analysis . requirements management provides management of the business and system requirements , and identification of inconsistencies among requirements and the project's plans and work products . a strategic approach to human capital management includes viewing personnel as assets whose value can be enhanced by investing in them . such an approach enables an organization to use their people effectively and to determine how well they integrate human capital considerations into daily decision making and planning for mission results . it also helps organizations to remain aware of and be prepared for current and future needs as an organization , and ensure that personnel have the knowledge , skills , and abilities needed to pursue the mission of the organization . in 2003 , we identified a set of key practices for effective strategic human capital management , including workforce planning.based on our reports and testimonies , reviews of studies by leading workforce planning organizations , and interviews with officials from the office of personnel management and other federal agencies . strategic workforce planning addresses two critical needs: ( 1 ) aligning an organization's human capital program with its current and emerging mission and programmatic goals and ( 2 ) developing long - term strategies these practices are for acquiring , developing , and retaining staff to achieve programmatic goals . the bureau also indicated that it has provided extensive training and education for its it workforce even though it lacked an integrated plan based on best practices . the bureau plans to develop a workforce plan to incorporate strategies for hiring , developing , and contracting to meet its identified requirements . it noted , however , that this could be affected by potential budget cuts . the bureau stated its bureau - wide assessment and competency gap analysis would be completed by fall 2012 . we are sending copies of this report to the acting secretary of commerce , the senior advisor to the acting director and the deputy director of the u.s. census bureau , and interested congressional committees . the report also is available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions on the matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to evaluate the ( 1 ) effectiveness of the census bureau's policies , procedures , and processes for managing information technology ( it ) investments and system development and ( 2 ) the census bureau's development of effective practices for acquiring and maintaining it human capital skills .