however , such efforts were largely unsuccessful . we look forward to presenting those findings to the caucus . cutting off terrorists' funding is an important means of disrupting their operations . as initial u.s. and foreign government deterrence efforts focused on terrorists' use of the formal banking or mainstream financial systems , terrorists may have been forced to increase their use of various alternative financing mechanisms . alternative financing mechanisms enable terrorists to earn , move , and store their assets and may include the use of commodities , bulk cash , charities , and informal banking systems , sometimes referred to as hawala . in its fight against terrorism , the united states has focused on individuals and entities supporting or belonging to terrorist organizations including al qaeda , hizballah , hamas ( harakat al - muqawama al - islamiya — islamic resistance movement ) , and others . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . these terrorist organizations are known to have used alternative financing mechanisms to further their terrorist activities . government officials and researchers believe that terrorists do not always need large amounts of assets to support an operation , pointing out that the estimated cost of the september 11 attack was between $300,000 and $500,000 . however , government officials also caution that funding for such an operation uses a small portion of the assets that terrorist organizations require for their support infrastructure such as indoctrination , recruitment , training , logistical support , the dissemination of propaganda , and other material support . in response to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , the departments of the treasury and justice both established multiagency task forces dedicated to combating terrorist financing . treasury established operation green quest , led by the customs service — now ice in the department of homeland security — to augment existing counterterrorist efforts by targeting current terrorist funding sources and identifying possible future sources . on september 13 , 2001 , the fbi formed a multiagency task force — which is now known as the terrorist financing operations section ( tfos ) — to combat terrorist financing . the mission of tfos has evolved into a broad role to identify , investigate , prosecute , disrupt , and dismantle all terrorist - related financial and fundraising activities . the fbi also took action to expand the antiterrorist financing focus of its joint terrorism task forces ( jttfs ) — teams of local and state law enforcement officials , fbi agents , and other federal agents and personnel whose mission is to investigate and prevent acts of terrorism . in 2002 , the fbi created a national jttf in washington , d.c. , to collect terrorism information and intelligence and funnel it to the field jttfs , various terrorism units within the fbi , and partner agencies . following september 11 , representatives of the fbi and operation green quest met on several occasions to attempt to delineate antiterrorist financing roles and responsibilities .