the costs of this delay will be significant . following the determination of the new delivery date , mda developed a new project schedule that , officials stated , incorporated historical data from the romania site , independent outside analysis , trends in the contractor's performance over time , and the resources that would be required at each stage of the schedule . mda estimated that the additional efforts by mda , the army corps of engineers , and the navy to mitigate the delay and provide assistance through the completion of the project totaled at least $90 million . according to program officials , the construction contract provides for significant liquidated damages , with the current daily assessment in excess of $125,000 . mda continues to oversee work at the aegis ashore site in romania , despite the navy's acceptance of the site for operational use . mda continues work on a variety of remaining items such as seismic hardening , shielding electrical infrastructure against high - energy electro - magnetic pulses , and cooling systems . in the case of cooling systems , the work is the result of the system failing to perform to specifications . mda has yet to assess the full cost , schedule , and performance impacts of the necessary repairs and modifications , but mda reported that none of the above issues had any impact on the romania sites operational availability or performance . in the case of the poland site , mda sought to secure the permission of the polish government to operate the facility's spy - 1 radar in the 3.1 to 3.5 ghz radio frequency spectrum . this section of the spectrum is important to the full functioning of the aegis ashore system , but portions of it have been allocated for commercial use in poland . mda was able to de - conflict the operations of its radar with other systems on these frequencies , and in march 2018 secured the approval of the polish government to operate the spy - 1 radar across the full range of frequencies . key findings for fiscal year 2018 the aegis ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) standard missile - 3 block ib program received authorization for full production this year and performed successful intercepts in flight tests . dod did not concur with this recommendation . consequently , the department continues to allow mda to schedule and plan its test program without risk analyses , or assigning resources to each test . unless the department takes action to address these challenges , the department should continue to expect mda to fall further behind in its test program . in fiscal year 2018 , mda focused additional regional capability efforts on the korean peninsula . this new effort was requested by the united states forces korea in december 2017 to counter north korean ballistic missiles . capabilities for the korean effort are currently planned for delivery between february 2018 and april 2021 , and are based on element - level upgrades as well as integration enhancements between thaad and patriot . in december 2017 , mda achieved a significant asset delivery milestone , completing the deployment of 44 operational ground - based interceptors ( gbi ) .