doe has taken several steps to implement the atvm program . first , it set three goals for the program: increase the fuel economy of u.s. passenger vehicles as a whole , advance u.s. automotive technology , and protect taxpayers' financial interests . in that regard , eisa calls for the program to make loans to provide funding to automobile manufacturers and component suppliers for projects that re - equip , expand , or establish u.s. facilities that are to build more fuel - efficient passenger cars and light - duty trucks . according to doe , the program's goals also support the agency's goals of building a competitive , low - carbon economy by , among other things , funding vehicles that reduce the use of petroleum - derived fuels and accelerating growth in advanced automotive technology manufacturing , and protecting u.s. taxpayers' financial interests . doe , in its interim final rule , also set technical , financial , and environmental requirements that vehicle and components manufacturers must meet to qualify to receive a loan under the program . for example , an established vehicle manufacturer — one that was manufacturing vehicles in 2005 — must demonstrate that the adjusted average fuel economy of the fleet of vehicles it produced in its most recent model year was at least equal to that of the fleet of vehicles it produced in model year 2005 . similarly , a manufacturer that was not producing vehicles in 2005 must show that its proposed vehicles' adjusted average fuel economy will at least equal that of established manufacturers for a similar classs of vehicles for model year 2005 . for applicants deemed eligible , doe also uses statutorily based technical criteria to determine which projects are eligible . for example , proposed vehicles must achieve at least 125 percent of the average fuel economy achieved by all manufacturers' vehicles with substantially similar attributes in 2005 . a detailed description of our scope and methodology can be found in the february report . we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition , doe established criteria for atvm staff , aided by experts from within and outside doe , to judge and score the technical and financial merits of applicants and projects deemed eligible , along with policy factors to consider , such as a project's potential for supporting jobs and whether a project is likely to advance automotive technology . finally , the credit review board , composed of senior doe officials , uses the merit scores and other information , including office of management and budget's approved subsidy cost estimates for projects , to recommend loan decisions to the secretary of energy . to date the atvm program has made about $8.4 billion in loans: $5.9 billion to the ford motor company ; $1.4 billion to nissan north america ; $529 million to fisker automotive , inc. ; $465 million to tesla motors , inc. ; and $50 million to the vehicle production group llc . about 62 percent of the funds loaned — $5.2 billion — are for projects that largely enhance the technologies of conventional vehicles powered by gasoline - fueled internal combustion engines .