app . vi contains the number of staff at fas offices by country during the same fiscal years. ) finally , to meet u.s. exporters' market preferences and increase exports , fcs has maintained relatively high staff levels in more mature markets that have open , accessible , and regularized trading relationships , compared to the often more difficult tpcc - targeted developing country markets , according to an fcs official . fcs decreased staff levels in three of the six g - 6 markets between fiscal years 1996 and 2001 , but 2001 staffing levels are higher in each of the g - 6 countries than in six of the bems . for example , argentina , hong kong , poland , south africa , south korea , and turkey each have fewer staff than italy , the country with the lowest staff level among the g - 6 countries . moreover , staff levels have increased dramatically in the united kingdom and canada — where the number of fcs staff grew by 63 percent and 33 percent , respectively . the tpcc has improved interagency coordination in many areas , but as it recognized in its may 2002 national export strategy , it has not completed implementing several of its early initiatives to coordinate export promotion programs aimed at better delivery of federal export services . the tpcc has improved the delivery of export services by collocating export finance services and establishing a network to assist u.s. businesses in addressing barriers to trade . however , the tpcc did not complete its efforts to clarify and make more readily available the numerous resources available to exporters , in part because the tpcc did not consistently meet at the cabinet level to address these issues . in october 2001 , the committee reconvened at the cabinet level to readdress these issues , and it is currently working to alleviate exporters confusion over the export process by ( 1 ) instituting cross - agency staff training , ( 2 ) improving the dissemination of trade information , and ( 3 ) improving outreach to new - to - export businesses . overall , we found that , for overseas export promotion activities in the countries we visited , fcs staff serve as focal points in coordinating other agency efforts . with interagency cooperation , the tpcc achieved some early successes in coordinating member agencies' export promotion activities , as the following examples show . the tpcc recommended the establishment of an “advocacy coordinating network” to develop a system of high - level government advocacy in coordination with the private sector , for u.s. firms seeking contracts from other governments . created in 1993 , this advocacy center is a unit within commerce and functions as a coordinated , interagency effort . the tpcc recommended that the agencies work together to create “one - stop shops” so that exporters could receive assistance from several agencies in one location . in 1994 , the tpcc established a network of u.s . export assistance centers that grew to 19 centers by 1999 . the centers are staffed by commerce , the sba and , in some cases , the eximbank to provide centralized export assistance .