gao - 03-409 . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2003 . regulatory flexibility act: clarification of key terms still needed . gao - 02-491t . a successful reexamination of the base of the federal government will entail multiple approaches over a period of years . the reauthorization , appropriations , oversight , and budget processes should be used to review existing programs and policies . however , no single approach or institutional reform can address the myriad of questions and program areas that need to be revisited . gao has recommended certain other initiatives to assist in the needed transformations . these include ( 1 ) development of a governmentwide strategic plan and key national indicators to assess the government's performance , position , and progress ; ( 2 ) implementing a framework for federal human capital reform ; and ( 3 ) proposing specific transformational leadership models , such as creating a chief operating officer / chief management official with a term appointment at select agencies . standards: the information collection — is necessary for the proper performance of agency functions . avoids unnecessary duplication . reduces burden on the public , including small entities . uses language that is understandable to respondents . will be compatible with respondents' recordkeeping practices . indicates period for which records must be retained . gives required information ( eg , whether response is mandatory ) . was developed by an office with necessary plan and resources . uses appropriate statistical survey methodology ( if applicable ) . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 05-424 . makes appropriate use of information technology . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact linda koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or koontzl@gao.gov . the total is not always 12 because not all certifications applied to all collections . the unfunded mandates reform act of 1995 ( umra ) was enacted to address concerns about federal statutes and regulations that require nonfederal parties to expend resources to achieve legislative goals without being provided federal funding to cover the costs . umra generates information about the nature and size of potential federal mandates on nonfederal entities to assist congress and agency decision makers in their consideration of proposed legislation and regulations . however , it does not preclude the implementation of such mandates . the parties gao contacted provided a significant number of comments about umra , specifically , and federal mandates , generally . their views often varied across and within the five sectors we identified ( academic / think tank , public interest advocacy , business , federal agencies , and state and local governments ) . overall , the numerous strengths , weaknesses and options for improvement identified during the review fell into several broad themes , including umra - specific issues such as coverage and enforcement , among others , and more general issues about the design , funding , and evaluation of federal mandates . first , umra coverage was , by far , the most frequently cited issue by parties from the various sectors .