containers . although containers continue to represent a small fraction of total cargos on the st. lawrence seaway , container traffic on the seaway more than tripled from 18,156 tons in 2001 to 64,984 tons in 2016 . the only regular container service on the system began in 2014 and operates between ports in cleveland and antwerp , belgium . the service is offered through a partnership between the port of cleveland , where officials told us they view the service as a way to attract traffic , and a dutch carrier , whose representatives view it as a way to educate u.s. manufacturers on the advantages of maritime transportation . representatives from the carrier said that the service offers 44 sailings annually . cruises . several stakeholders said that there is recent growth of small passenger cruises on the great lakes - seaway with the potential for further growth . some of those stakeholders said that the region affords advantages including a variety of scenic destinations . a typical cruise may begin and end in chicago and toronto , both of which have air connections for arriving and departing passengers . an official from the u.s. seaway corporation said that the number of cruise ships operating on the system grew from 5 to 8 and the number of voyages offered grew from 54 to 92 between 2014 and 2018 . the official said that additional ships and voyages are expected in the future . stakeholders we met with identified a range of challenges to using the great lakes - seaway and noted that these challenges pose risks to the future use of the system . although many of the challenges that stakeholders identified — such as the annual winter closure — affect all users of the system , some challenges may impact the system's various users differently . specifically , some challenges directly affect the “traditional use” of the system — including the transport of bulk cargos such as iron ore , grain , and steel — while other challenges primarily affect “emerging use” of the system , such as the cruise industry and container market , as discussed below . the cumulative effect of all the challenges represents costs and system reliability risks to shippers that can erode the advantages that the system has traditionally offered over other transportation modes . for example , a representative from one shipping company told us the company frequently compares the cost of using the great lakes - seaway to other modes and noted that the margin favoring the great lakes - seaway is becoming narrower due to the system's various challenges . stakeholders identified several challenges that affect traditional uses of the great lakes - seaway , including transport of dry bulk commodities and imported steel . recent increase of pilotage rates: the majority of stakeholders we interviewed reported that recent rate increases in the costs of securing pilots , who are intended to ensure safe navigation , have significantly increased costs for foreign ocean going vessels operating in the great lakes - seaway . federal law requires that certified pilots board foreign vessels while in the great lakes - seaway . a pilot may be on board for multiple days on a single voyage , given the size of the system .