not present: the factor did not exist at all . the program appears to have lacked assistance from any potential transition partners , or their assistance was very infrequent or insignificant . achievement of clearly defined technical goals fully present: measurable technical goals were set in the program and fully achieved to the satisfaction of darpa and any transition partner involved in the program , to the extent that one or more had been identified for the technology . partially present: measurable technical goals were set in the program , but met with varying levels of success . the technical successes achieved , however , were sufficient to produce a technology responsive to the interests of a transition partner , to the extent that one or more had been identified for the technology . not present: measurable technical goals were either not set or sufficiently met in the program . the level of technical success was not sufficient to produce a technology responsive to the interests of a transition partner , to the extent that one or more had been identified for the technology . using this rating system , two gao analysts analyzed and coded whether each of the four factors was fully present , partially present , or not present in each of the 10 programs we reviewed . each gao analyst coded all the constituent items independently , and the two analysts then met to discuss and reconcile the differences between their codings . following this initial round of coding , another gao analyst independently verified the accuracy of the coding by reviewing the supporting program documentation . the final assessment reflected the analysts' consensus based on the individual assessments . to assess darpa's implementation of dod policies and programs intended to facilitate the transition of technologies , we identified and analyzed information sources including policy instructions , guidance , training materials , and technical data repositories intended to promote technology transition within darpa , dod and the federal government . we also reviewed previous federal directives issued by the executive office of the president that were related to technology transition at darpa . we reviewed previous darpa - sponsored reports on technology transition produced in previous years . we reviewed our prior related reports and program information regarding dod's technology transition programs and relevant dod funding information . we reviewed available training , resources , and tools used by darpa officials to help bring about technology transition . we reviewed the contents of dod computer systems used to disseminate information on darpa programs to potential transition partners . we reviewed our prior reports and dod documentation on dod transition programs , including the small business innovation research , small business technology transfer , and joint capability technology demonstration programs , among others , to understand the extent to which darpa participates in these programs . we reviewed the extent to which darpa uses dod transition funds , and requested data regarding darpa's use of small business funds and its technology transition outcomes , although these data were unavailable for our analysis , as is discussed elsewhere in this report . we also reviewed historical information on darpa's use of dod transition funds available from public sources , including dod budget documentation .