we disagree . as stated in this report , justice has not taken timely action to address all of the july 2001 recommendations , which were designed to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of justice's criminal debt collection processes . most important , from the standpoint of resolving key jurisdictional issues and functional responsibilities , justice has not taken action along with certain other agencies to develop a strategic plan for criminal debt collection . of the 13 interim recommendations made to stem the growth of reported uncollected criminal debt while justice and the other agencies worked to develop the strategic plan , justice completed action on only 7 . actions to address 4 of these 7 recommendations were completed about 2 years after we made them , and actions to address the remaining 6 interim recommendations are still in process . in support of its view that it has taken extensive implementation action , eousa referred to a june 16 , 2003 , letter and stated that excerpts from this letter were included with its comments . we are not aware of a june 16 , 2003 , letter ; however , all of the excerpts contained in eousa's comments are included verbatim in justice's july 15 , 2003 , letter to the congress regarding actions eousa had taken in response to recommendations we made in our 2001 report . justice submitted this letter 2 years after the date of our 2001 report , and after we had made inquiries about the status of justice's response to the congress regarding justice's implementation of our recommendations . in accordance with 31 u.s.c . 720 , the head of a federal agency is required to submit a written statement of the actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and to the house committee on government reform not later than 60 calendar days from the date of the report and to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 calendar days after that date . moreover , as stated in this report , to evaluate actions justice has taken to implement our previous recommendations , we obtained and reviewed pertinent justice documents , including correspondence to certain congressional committees related to our 2001 report . as such , in drafting our report , we fully considered each of eousa's assertions that were contained in the previously mentioned excerpts from its letter . our responses to specific parts of these excerpts appear in appendix i. eousa also stated that our draft report failed to address its comments on our 2001 report that responsibility for accounting for and reporting criminal debt does not rest with justice . in our 2001 report , we stated that justice's comments related to accounting for and reporting of criminal debt , plus the lack of response from aousc regarding its position on this issue , illustrated the need for cooperation and coordination in the criminal debt collection area . thus , we emphasized the need for the development of the previously mentioned strategic plan to improve the criminal debt collection processes and establishment of an effective mechanism to coordinate efforts among all entities involved in these processes .