ii ) . the variables expected to affect state highway spending fall into four broad categories: ( 1 ) fiscal capacity , ( 2 ) the cost of transportation services to the representative voter / consumer ( tax price ) , ( 3 ) federal grants , and ( 4 ) indicators of state preferences for highway spending . the specific variables we considered are listed in table 6 . what is the appropriate role of each level of government ? would the roles need to be redefined in order to align federal spending more closely with a greater performance and outcome orientation ? in particular , what refocusing of federal involvement ( eg , interstate commerce , homeland security , national defense ) would need to occur ? how could the design of the federal - aid highway program's grants and funding mechanisms best support accomplishment of agreed - upon performance goals and outcomes ? what funding incentives are needed to introduce a greater performance and outcome orientation ? what type of departmental administrative structure for the federal - aid highway program would best ensure that the performance goals established by congress and articulated in dot's strategic plans and outcomes are measured and accomplished ? can a greater performance and outcome orientation to the federal - aid highway program be reconciled with congressional and state legislative policies and preferences toward providing at least some transportation funding in the form of specific project earmarks ? addressing the issues raised in this report would require weighing competing and sometimes conflicting options and strategies . beyond these options , our work raises broader and more fundamental issues given the challenges the nation faces in the 21st century . if , for example , reducing the level of grant substitution is an important concern , then design changes in the current program , including adopting features that have been used in other federal programs , may be warranted . the opportunity to better align the federal - aid highway program with performance goals and outcomes comes at a time when both houses of congress have already approved separate legislation to create a national commission to examine future revenue sources to support the highway trust fund and to consider the roles of the various levels of government and the private sector in meeting future surface transportation financing needs . the proposed commission is to consider how the program is financed and the roles of the federal and state governments and other stakeholders in financing it ; the appropriate program structure and mechanisms for delivering that funding are important components of making these decisions . thus , this commission may be an appropriate vehicle through which to examine these options for the future structure and design of the federal - aid highway program . in light of the issues raised in this report and the fiscal challenges the nation faces in the 21st century , congress may wish to consider expanding the proposed mandate of the national commission to assess possible changes to the federal - aid highway program to maximize the effectiveness of federal funding and promote national goals and strategies .