the study has two primary goals . the first is to determine the national impact of head start on children's school readiness by comparing children in head start to children not in head start . data in areas related to school readiness , such as cognition , physical well - being , social and emotional development , and language usage , will be collected from both groups of children . in addition , information on parenting practices , family structure , demographics , and socioeconomics will be collected . we are sending copies of this report to the honorable richard durbin , ranking member of the subcommittee on oversight of government management , restructuring and the district of columbia , committee on governmental affairs ; the honorable roderick r. paige , secretary of education ; the honorable tommy g. thompson , secretary of health and human services ; relevant congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-7215 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . other gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix i . in addition to those named above , john smale and corinna nicolaou made key contributions to this report . the second goal is to determine under which conditions and for which children head start works best . in crafting the study proposal , westat noted the difficulties inherent in denying services to eligible children in order to create the control group and suggested ways to soften the ethical objections to random assignment . for example , the proposal allows head start staff to provide information to control group families on alternative services in the community , and exempts a small number of children with significant disabilities from the random assignment . the plan also acknowledges the need to make parents comfortable with the process and , in some instances , provides financial incentives for participation . a comparison group can be developed in a variety of ways . one way is to use a set of individuals who have similar characteristics to the group receiving the program services under study . for example , the group might live in the same neighborhood as the group receiving services and have family and income characteristics similar to those receiving serivces . the extent to which quasiexperimental comparison groups are actually similar to program participants is not entirely known . for this reason , quasiexperimental evaluations cannot rule out all of the factors that influence participants' outcomes . other factors could explain differences between the two groups , making it difficult to conclude , with certainty , the effect of the program being examined . when well planned and executed , however , such designs can provide some indication of program impact . the two programs most focused on early childhood education — head start and even start — are currently being studied using impact evaluations with an experimental design . hhs is conducting impact studies of head start and early head start , and education is using an impact evaluation to study even start .