the subsidies these programs provide are not an entitlement . typically , the number of low - income households eligible for assistance exceeds the number of subsidized units and vouchers that is available . specifically , hud estimated that in 1999 about a quarter of all households eligible for housing assistance received it . hud's programs are administered differently and vary in the number of households they assist and the amount of funding they receive . the voucher program , which local phas administer on hud's behalf , is hud's largest rental assistance program . the program , authorized under section 8 of the united states housing act of 1937 , as amended , provides housing vouchers that eligible individuals and families can use to rent houses or apartments in the private housing market from property owners participating in the program . to obtain third - party verification , program administrators must directly contact employers , welfare offices , health care providers , and others to ensure that the information tenants have reported is accurate and complete . however , third - party verification on its own may not identify all income not reported ( intentionally or otherwise ) by tenants . the program administrator must maintain all verified information in the tenant's file . after verifying tenants' income information , program administrators must compute the amounts tenants pay in rent . hud regulations define these payments as the highest of the following amounts: ( 1 ) 30 percent of a family's monthly adjusted income — that is monthly income after exclusions or deductions ; ( 2 ) 10 percent of the family's gross monthly income — that is , monthly income before exclusions or deductions ; or ( 3 ) the applicable minimum monthly rent , which is typically between $0 and $50 . generally , the amount paid by low - and very - low - income tenants is not enough to cover the entire rent for a unit or , for public housing , to cover operating costs . as a result , for vouchers and project - based section 8 , hud generally covers the difference between the unit's rent and the tenant's rental payment in the form of a housing assistance payment . for public housing , hud pays the pha an operating subsidy to cover the difference between the pha's operating costs and rental receipts . in this report , we refer to both types of payments as rent subsidies . we also estimated the potential impact on tenant rents under possible approaches using data hud had collected for the update to its 2001 report , quality control for rental assistance subsidies determinations . specifically , we compared the difference between the amount of rent paid by tenants ( as identified in hud's data ) and the amount tenants would pay under the two simplification approaches . we interviewed officials at hud headquarters and field offices and at state and local agencies that administer hud's rental assistance programs . we also met with industry groups representing state and local housing agencies and tenants . these groups include the national association of housing and redevelopment organization , national leased housing association , public housing authorities directors association , and massachusetts union of public housing tenants .