gao - 09-235 . washington , d.c.: february 10 , 2009 . this information is important because of the cost of outsourcing . according to the company official , outsourcing may be more costly — all other factors being equal — because of the profit consideration for the contractor . as a result , outsourcing decisions can become a trade - off between multiple factors , such as cost , quality , capacity , capability , and speed . major shifts in workforce demographics and a changing strategic environment present significant challenges for dod in assessing and overseeing an acquisition workforce that has the capacity to acquire needed goods and services , as well as monitor the work of contractors . while recent and planned actions of at&l and other dod components could help dod address many of these challenges , the department has yet to determine the acquisition workforce that it needs to fulfill its mission or develop information about contractor personnel . while dod has begun to estimate the number of full - time - equivalent contractor personnel through its inventory of contracts for services , this effort will not identify the skill sets and functions of contractor personnel performing acquisition - related work or the length of time for which they are used . at the same time , dod lacks guidance on the appropriate circumstances under which contractor personnel may perform acquisition work . without such guidance , dod runs the risk of not maintaining sufficient institutional capacity to perform its missions . until dod maintains detailed departmentwide information on its contractor personnel performing acquisition - related work , it will continue to have insufficient information regarding the composition , range of skills , and the functions performed by this key component of the acquisition workforce . without this information upon which to act , the department runs the risk of not having the right number and appropriate mix of civilian , military , and contractor personnel it needs to accomplish its missions . to better ensure that dod's acquisition workforce is the right size with the right skills and that the department is making the best use of its resources , we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following four actions: collect and track data on contractor personnel who supplement the acquisition workforce — including their functions performed , skill sets , and length of service — and conduct analyses using these data to inform acquisition workforce decisions regarding the appropriate number and mix of civilian , military , and contractor personnel the department needs . identify and update on an ongoing basis the number and skill sets of the total acquisition workforce — including civilian , military , and contractor personnel — that the department needs to fulfill its mission . dod should use this information to better inform its resource allocation decisions . review and revise the criteria and guidance for using contractor personnel to clarify under what circumstances and the extent to which it is appropriate to use contractor personnel to perform acquisition - related functions . develop a tracking mechanism to determine whether the guidance has been appropriately implemented across the department .