gao - 06-88 . washington , d.c.: november 18 , 2005 . depot maintenance: dod needs plan to ensure compliance with public - and private - sector funding allocation . gao - 04-871 . washington , d.c.: september 29 , 2004 . our reasons for including these adjustments are discussed in this report . dod's written comments are reprinted in appendix iii . dod also provided technical comments which we have incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions on the matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8365 or solisw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . to determine whether the military departments provided accurate data in reporting depot maintenance funding allocations and whether they met the 50-50 requirement for fiscal year 2005 , we reviewed military services' procedures and internal management controls for collecting and reporting their depot maintenance allocations . we discussed with key officials the process used to identify and report depot maintenance workload allocation between the public and private sectors . we selected a nonprobability sample of reported 50-50 obligations totaling $2.7 billion of the reported $26.4 billion reported in the department of defense's ( dod ) report to congress on depot maintenance funding allocation . we based our sample on previously identified areas of concern , varying program amounts , and selected locations for our site visits . we also contacted service audit agencies and third - party officials at service headquarters to discuss their verification review of the fiscal year 2005 50-50 obligation data . we did not conduct a review of all reported 50-50 data ; therefore , there may be additional errors , omissions , and inconsistencies that were not identified . because we used a nonprobability sample , our results cannot be projected . we visited departmental headquarters , major commands , and selected maintenance activities . we interviewed service officials responsible for data collection , and we reviewed the reported data for accuracy and completeness . we compared reported amounts to funding documents , contracts , and accounting reports for selected programs for all the military services , but we placed greater emphasis on the army data because the army was close to the 50 percent threshold for fiscal year 2005 . to determine the actions taken by the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) and military departments to improve the quality of the reported 50- 50 data and implementation of gao's prior year's recommendations , we reviewed the results of studies conducted by the service audit agencies and reconciled areas of concern identified during prior years' audits .