noncompliance . are there particular economic or industrial sectors , geographic areas , or facility operations where regulated entities have demonstrated serious patterns of noncompliance ? epa responsibility . what identified national problem areas or programs are better addressed through epa's federal capability in enforcement or compliance assistance ? for example , while oeca had allowed regions considerable discretion / flexibility on procedures for file selection , the evaluation identified a number of weaknesses in the file selection process and highlighted potential improvements to oeca's file selection protocol . the consultant developed an improved sampling model that would yield representative file reviews across states and provide a more representative picture of enforcement and compliance assurance across states with varying levels of enforcement activity . what are the known or estimated public health or environmental risks ? table 1 shows the potential national priorities , and those that were selected . according to state and regional officials , oeca's approach for selecting national priorities has fostered a more collaborative working relationship , and they pointed to the financial assurance national priority under rcra as a case in point . this priority focuses on ensuring that owners and operators of facilities handling hazardous substances , such as lead or mercury , provide assurance that they have the financial resources necessary to close their facilities , clean up any contamination , and compensate communities and individuals affected by any contamination they cause . stakeholders — epa regions , states , pollution control associations , and the public — told oeca that financial assurance should be a national priority . epa and state supporting investigations confirmed that ( 1 ) there are significant noncompliance issues relating to the financial assurance requirements ; ( 2 ) the issues are of national importance and deal with several environmental laws and regulatory programs ; and ( 3 ) areas of noncompliance were not isolated to a specific sector , industry , or geographic location . in selecting financial assurance as a national priority , oeca stated that an effective national enforcement and compliance strategy would help address many of the problems created by the regulated facilities' failure to fulfill their financial responsibility obligations . in this regard , epa is providing training to state inspectors — who often do not have expertise in financial management — on how to assess the adequacy of financial documentation provided by regulated facilities . while state and regional officials told us the priority setting process is more collaborative , some state officials raised a number of issues about how epa considered their comments about national priorities . for example , massachusetts and oregon officials told us that they did not understand why oeca ranked some of their priorities lower than the national priorities that were selected and would like to have feedback on how their views were considered when selecting national enforcement priorities . in addition , while minnesota , utah , and arizona officials agree that the planning and priority setting has improved , they would prefer earlier involvement in the decision - making process , that is , in developing the candidate list .