we disagree . our analysis indicates that doj's option and atf's investigative avenues are only partial solutions . as indicated previously , fbi data show that — of the 228 firearm - retrieval actions initiated during the period july 3 , 2001 , through january 2 , 2002 — about one - half were initiated using the purchasers' personal identifying information retained under the current 90-day retention policy . the fbi generally would not have been able to initiate these retrieval actions under doj's proposed option of retaining the dealer's identification number but not retaining personal identifying information about the respective purchaser . further , we recognize that atf has various investigative avenues to determine if a prohibited person is in possession of firearms . for instance , in the course of an investigation , atf can question the individual and examine gun dealer records . however , in many cases , absent an fbi referral , atf would have no reason or basis for opening an investigation . further , expecting atf agents to probe for illegally possessed firearms would not be as effective as the fbi using retainable records to notify atf that firearms definitely have been transferred to prohibited persons . the full text of doj's comments is reprinted in appendix iii . the department of the treasury and the fbi provided technical comments and clarifications , which have been incorporated in this report where appropriate . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce this report's contents earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report . we will then send copies to the relevant congressional committees , the attorney general , the fbi director , and the atf director . we will also make copies available to other interested parties upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 , or danny burton at ( 214 ) 777-5600 , if you or your staff have any questions . other key contributors to this report were philip caramia , eric erdman , geoffrey hamilton , jan montgomery , and linda kay willard . this appendix provides an overview of the history of retention periods related to national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) records . the appendix also summarizes the current department of justice ( doj ) notice of proposed rulemaking , which , among other things , would require next - day destruction of nics records related to allowed firearms transfers . the brady handgun violence prevention act ( brady act ) required the attorney general to establish a national instant criminal background check system to be contacted by licensed firearms dealers for information as to whether the transfer of a firearm would violate federal or state law.in june 1998 , doj published the initial notice of proposed rulemaking that outlined policies and procedures for implementing nics . the proposed rule provided that the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) would maintain information on allowed firearms transfers in nics for 18 months , after which time the information would be destroyed .