if a match is not identified , a purchase request can be prepared . given nasa's current and projected budget constraints , cutting costs through equipment reutilization and improved equipment management efficiencies will be critical if it is to free up vital resources for other mission - related objectives . unfortunately , ineffective controls over equipment reutilization and limited utilization of the new system may prevent the pp&e module from fully delivering on its potential cost savings . these shortcomings may prevent the pp&e module from providing nasa employees and contractors with the tools needed to make informed decisions regarding the disposal or reutilization of equipment , including over 1.2 million types of equipment if the space shuttle is retired in 2010 and nasa transitions to its new space exploration policy as planned . strong leadership will be critical to promoting and enforcing existing equipment reutilization requirements , emphasizing the need for better equipment accountability , and stressing the importance of reutilizing equipment . strengthening nasa - wide oversight and monitoring controls and processes could help nasa managers more effectively oversee nasa's compliance with its policies and procedures . another problem was that the five centers we visited were not following up to see if end users were purchasing new equipment in lieu of reutilizing equipment items identified during screening . one center did not have a designated center equipment screener to conduct searches . another center made equipment procurements regardless of the outcome of the screening process . for example , an equipment screener at one of the centers identified a digital oscilloscope — an instrument commonly used at nasa for testing — that was available at another center . however , upon notifying the purchaser that a potential equivalent oscilloscope was available , the screener was told that the requester preferred to purchase a new oscilloscope . in another case , upon notifying a purchaser who had requested a spectrometer — test equipment — that six equivalent spectrometers were located , the screener was told that new equipment had already been purchased . additional details of our scope and methodology are provided in appendix i . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the nasa administrator or his designee . written comments from the deputy administrator are presented and evaluated in the agency comments and our evaluation section of this report and are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . nasa's mission is to pioneer the future in space exploration , scientific discovery , and aeronautics research . to accomplish its mission , nasa procures , fabricates , and maintains significant amounts of equipment . for example , as of september 30 , 2008 , nasa reported that it had approximately 307,000 controlled equipment items , costing $11.5 billion . in april 2000 , nasa launched the integrated enterprise management program ( iemp ) , which is expected to improve the efficiency of many of its financial and management functions . the iemp system is intended to promote standardization and integration of business processes and systems across the agency , and various components have been designed and implemented since its launch in 2000 .