circular no . a - 4 is designed to assist analysts in regulatory agencies by defining good regulatory analysis and standardizing the way benefits and costs of federal regulatory actions are measured and reported . cbp published its regulatory assessment and final regulatory flexibility analysis , referred to in this report as cbp's regulatory assessment , as part of the rulemaking process for the 10+2 rule . this assessment was prepared for cbp by an outside contractor . cbp conducted this assessment to address ( 1 ) the requirement to conduct a regulatory analysis for economically significant actions ; and ( 2 ) the safe port act of 2006 , which requires dhs to consider the cost , benefit , and feasibility of the rule . to what extent have importers used the flexibilities when submitting their importer security filings since january 2009 ? how has cbp used information it collected and assessed to inform its efforts to implement the 10+2 rule since january 2009 ? to what extent has cbp used 10+2 data to identify high - risk cargo for inspection and enhance cargo security while minimizing the impact on trade flow ? to answer these four objectives , we reviewed legal documentation , including the 10+2 rule and the safe port act , which requires dhs to consider the cost , benefit , and feasibility of the rule and consult with stakeholders . additionally , to address the second , third , and fourth objectives , we interviewed cbp officials from cbp's 10+2 program office , which is responsible for overseeing implementation of the 10+2 rule ; the national targeting center - cargo , which is responsible for targeting high - risk shipments for inspection ; and the office of intelligence and operations coordination , which is responsible for adjustments to ats to incorporate the 10+2 data . we interviewed officials from these offices to discuss the status of cbp's efforts to integrate the 10+2 data elements into its targeting strategy . we also interviewed representatives of four industry associations that cbp identified as involved in 10+2 outreach — the american association of exporters and importers ( aaei ) , the national association of manufacturers ( nam ) , the national customs brokers and forwarders association of america ( ncbfaa ) , and the world shipping council ( wsc ) . further , we interviewed representatives from 30 importers and 2 carriers , as referred to us by the industry associations we met with and the trade co - chair of cbp's commercial operations advisory committee ( coac ) isf subcommittee . our interviews with trade industry associations , importers , and carriers solicited views on the flexibilities in the 10+2 rule and cbp's consultation with the trade industry in developing and implementing the 10+2 rule . the aaei and nam representatives we met with identified representatives of 27 importer member companies who were knowledgeable about their companies' policies and procedures for filing isfs . for the purposes of this report , we refer to these individuals as importers . we conducted interviews with these importers in group settings . this interview format allowed us to determine consensus and also identify and examine instances where viewpoints differed among importers .