usenet . usenet newsgroups are also providing access to pornography , with several of the image - oriented newsgroups being focused on child erotica and child pornography . these newsgroups are frequently used by commercial pornographers who post “free” images to advertise adult and child pornography available for a fee from their web sites . the increase in the availability of child pornography in usenet newsgroups represents a change from the mid - 1990's , when a 1995 – 96 study of 9,800 randomly selected images taken from 32 usenet newsgroups found that only a small fraction of posted images contained child pornography themes . peer - to - peer networks . although peer - to - peer file - sharing programs are largely known for the extensive sharing of copyrighted digital music , they are emerging as a conduit for the sharing of child pornography images and videos . a recent study by congressional staff found that one use of file - sharing programs is to exchange pornographic materials , such as adult videos . the study found that a single search for the term “porn” using a similar file - sharing program yielded over 25,000 files , more than 10,000 of which were video files appearing to contain pornographic images . in another study , focused on the availability of pornographic video files on peer - to - peer sharing networks , a sample of 507 pornographic video files retrieved with a file - sharing program included about 3.7 percent child pornography videos . table 2 shows the key national organizations and agencies that are currently involved in efforts to combat child pornography on peer - to - peer networks . the national center for missing and exploited children ( ncmec ) , a federally funded nonprofit organization , serves as a national resource center for information related to crimes against children . its mission is to find missing children and prevent child victimization . the center's exploited child unit operates the cybertipline , which receives child pornography tips provided by the public ; its cybertipline ii also receives tips from internet service providers . the exploited child unit investigates and processes tips to determine if the images in question constitute a violation of child pornography laws . the cybertipline provides investigative leads to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , u.s. customs , the postal inspection service , and state and local law enforcement agencies . the fbi and the u.s. customs also investigate leads from internet service providers via the exploited child unit's cybertipline ii . the fbi , customs service , postal inspection service , and secret service have staff assigned directly to ncmec as analysts . two organizations in the department of justice have responsibilities regarding child pornography: the fbi and the justice criminal division's child exploitation and obscenity section ( ceos ) . the fbi investigates various crimes against children , including federal child pornography crimes involving interstate or foreign commerce . it deals with violations of child pornography laws related to the production of child pornography ; selling or buying children for use in child pornography ; and the transportation , shipment , or distribution of child pornography by any means , including by computer .