sludge . the denser , water - insoluble components of the waste generally settle to the bottom of the tank to form a thick layer known as sludge , which has the consistency of peanut butter . although sludge makes up the smallest portion of waste in the hanford tanks ( 10.7 million gallons ) , it comprises over half ( 56 percent ) of the total radioactivity in the tank waste . the tanks contain a complex mix of radioactive and hazardous waste in both liquid and solid form . about 46 different radioactive elements — by - products of chemically separating plutonium from uranium for use in nuclear weapons — represent the majority of the radioactivity currently in the tanks . some of these elements lose most of their radioactivity in a relatively short time , while others will remain radioactive for millions of years . the rate of radioactive decay is measured in half - lives , that is , the time required for half the unstable atoms in a radioactive substance to disintegrate , or decay , and release their radiation . the half - lives of radioactive tank constituents differ widely . the vast majority ( 98 percent ) of the radioactivity of the tank waste comes from two elements , strontium - 90 and cesium - 137 , which have half - lives of about 29 and 30 years , respectively . the remaining radioactive elements , which account for about 2 percent of the waste's total radioactivity , have much longer half - lives . for example , the half - life of technetium - 99 is 213,000 years , and that of iodine - 129 is 15.7 million years . the hazardous wastes in the tanks include various metal hydroxides , oxides , and carbonates . some of the chemicals — including acids , caustic sodas , solvents , and toxic heavy metals , such as chromium — came from chemically reprocessing spent nuclear fuel to extract weapons - grade plutonium . altogether , about 240,000 tons of chemicals were added to the tanks from the 1940s to the mid - 1980s . a majority of the chemicals were added to neutralize acids in the waste . other chemicals , such as solvents and several organic compounds , were added during various waste extraction operations to help recover selected radioactive elements ( uranium , cesium , and strontium ) for reuse . these hazardous chemicals are dangerous to human health , and they can remain dangerous for thousands of years . doe's storage of waste at hanford is governed by federal and washington state laws and regulations . doe's tank waste cleanup program at hanford is governed by , among other things , the resource conservation and recovery act of 1976 , as amended ( rcra ) , as implemented by washington under its hazardous waste management act , and the atomic energy act of 1954 . rcra governs the treatment , storage , and disposal of hazardous waste and the non - radioactive hazardous waste component of mixed waste .