nbib concurred with the recommendations . the director of national intelligence concurred with some , but not all , of our recommendations . we continue to believe these recommendations are valid . information that odni and opm deemed sensitive was omitted . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the pac has made progress in reforming the personnel security clearance process and implementing various security clearance reform initiatives . for example , the pac has taken action on 73 percent of the recommendations of a february 2014 review conducted in the wake of the washington navy yard shooting . actions in response to these recommendations included odni and opm jointly issuing quality assessment standards in january 2015 , which establish federal guidelines for assessing the quality of investigations . additionally , odni developed the quality assessment reporting tool , through which agencies will report on the completeness of investigations . similarly , the pac reported quarterly on the status and progress of key initiatives , as part of the insider threat and security clearance reform cross - agency priority goal . this reporting included the milestone due date and status for each initiative . according to pac program management office officials , although the data are no longer publicly reported , they have continued to track the status of these milestones internally , and identified almost half of the initiatives — 16 of 33 — as complete as of the third quarter of fiscal year 2017 . additionally , the pac has issued three documents that serve as its updated strategic framework for the next 5 years . in july 2016 , it issued its strategic intent for fiscal years 2017 through 2021 , which identifies the overall vision , goals , and 5-year business direction to achieve an entrusted workforce . further , we reported in december 2017 that pac members noted additional progress in reforming the personnel security clearance process , such as the development of security executive agent directives , the identification of executive branch — wide it shared service capabilities , and the standardization of adjudicative criteria . although the pac has reformed many parts of the personnel security clearance process , the implementation of certain key initiatives , including the full implementation of the 2012 federal investigative standards and the development of government - wide performance measures for the quality of investigations , remain incomplete . the federal investigative standards outline criteria for conducting background investigations to determine eligibility for a security clearance , and are intended to ensure cost - effective , timely , and efficient protection of national interests and to facilitate reciprocal recognition of the resulting investigations . however , the standards also changed the frequency of periodic reinvestigations for certain clearance holders and include continuous evaluation as a new requirement for certain clearance holders . continuous evaluation is a key executive branch initiative to more frequently identify and assess security - relevant information , such as criminal activity , between periodic reinvestigations . continuous evaluation is a process to review the background of an individual who has been determined to be eligible for access to classified information or to hold a sensitive position at any time during the period of eligibility .