the acting commissioner agreed with our recommendations . we are encouraged that irs plans to implement all but one of our recommendations in time for the 2004 forms development cycle . understandably , the remaining recommendation to ensure that an appropriate range of evaluations is conducted of tests would take more time to put into practice . the acting commissioner also provided additional comments and observations on our draft report . the acting commissioner commented that the crux of our report is that we do not believe irs has performed adequate testing on new and revised tax forms and instructions due to a lack of resources . he said that resources for testing forms and instructions have been adequate for the testing irs wanted to perform . while not questioning whether resources were adequate for the testing irs performed , we concluded that irs officials do not have information needed to determine the level of resources that should be allocated to testing forms and instructions . accordingly , we recommended that irs systematically identify opportunities to improve forms and instructions through testing and to evaluate the costs and benefits when testing is done . although agreeing that testing is beneficial , the acting commissioner also said that there are significant staff costs associated with testing that are not included in our cost analysis . we recognize that our analysis excluded staff costs and as stated in our draft report we sought to be conservative in estimating the benefits of testing , in part because we did not have information on the full range of costs irs incurs when undertaking projects to tests forms and instructions . during the course of our work , we requested estimates of staff costs for testing but irs was unable to provide them . nevertheless , at least in the cases we illustrated the potential benefits of testing were so much greater than the costs that including staff costs likely would not have substantially changed the results of our illustrations . the acting commissioner expressed concern about whether irs could have forms and instructions ready for the filing season if testing was done late in the forms development cycle as shown in our figure 2 depicting irs's process . we agree with the acting commissioner's concern ; however , our figure shows the various points at which testing can occur in irs's current processes based on interviews with irs officials and the documentation they provided us . as irs implements our recommendation to clarify when testing should be done , selecting a point as early as possible would help maximize the number of changes that can be tested during the annual forms update cycle . the acting commissioner also said that he disagreed with our conclusion that irs's experience with obtaining feedback on its products is limited or recent . he said irs uses various methods to obtain customer feedback . we agree that irs uses methods other than testing to obtain feedback on its forms and instructions . however , our report describes the potential benefits and costs of testing as a feedback method .