build trust over time . some agencies have undertaken a long - term effort to create an environment of trust and openness in working cooperatively with unions . for example , both irs and nteu officials credited the excellent working relationship they developed over the last decade for helping to reorganize irs . officials at irs stated that the reorganization has resulted in operating divisions that are focused on serving taxpayers and flatter decision - making structures with clear end - to - end accountability . the nteu president said that the union was willing to expedite some negotiations on mission - critical issues because a trusting relationship had developed and irs employees felt that management used the information they provided in shaping the new irs . participate jointly in making decisions . agencies involved unions and incorporated their input into proposals before finalizing decisions . for example , several unions provided suggestions about how agencies should share performance information with employees . in another instance , opm's operations center and afge worked jointly on pre - decisional matters , such as the hiring of a new director of the operations center . both employees and managers viewed training as a critical factor in learning how to work in new and different ways . to improve customer service , employees may need new skills , such as the ability to analyze and improve work processes or the ability to work effectively together on teams . in addition to job - specific skills and work processes , training in teamwork and communications and encouragement and coaching through mentoring and networking can help employees adapt to new ways of working that involve changes in their roles and job expectations . vba officials , for instance , told us that , along with providing various training modules , employees also need on - the - job training , coaching and mentoring to enhance their expertise through actual experience in processing claims . the following are examples of how agencies trained employees in new processes . provide a mix of on - the - job and formal training . agencies used a variety of training techniques to help employees adjust to organizational and operational changes . for example , opm provided on - the - job cross training so that a claims processing team could adjudicate both csrs and fers claims . according to the branch chief , because the team received cross - training , it was able to help another division reduce its backlog of fers cases . reorganize and integrate operations . leaders implemented their visions by realigning their organizations to improve performance and increase the coordination of mission - related activities . for example , a branch chief in opm's retirement and insurance service enabled a new team to improve claims processing by , among other things , providing cross - training for the team to handle both csrs and fers claims . create an environment of trust and honest communication . leaders made themselves available to employees and unions , promoted open and constructive dialog , and were receptive to ideas and suggestions from employees at all levels . following an approach to change management that is transparent and highly participatory is a key element in involving and empowering employees .