sec agreed to do so . section 21 ( e ) ( 1 ) of the exchange act authorizes sec to seek court orders that require violators to comply with certain orders issued under the act , which include those orders involving monetary sanctions imposed by sros , and affirmed by the sec . under the agreement reached between sec and nasd , sec requires that the cases meet certain criteria before it will seek these court orders . specifically , sec will seek such orders for cases that have been affirmed by sec on appeal , require the violator to pay any amount of restitution or a fine of $50,000 or more , and are less than 5 years old so that they are within the statute of limitations , and the appeal process has been exhausted . nasd officials said that one reason for seeking this agreement with sec was so to obtain federal court orders that would make it easier to pursue collection of fines owed by violators . between april 1999 and december 31 , 2000 , nasd submitted over 60 cases to sec . as of april 30 , 2001 , sec had accepted 34 of these cases and had obtained court orders on 11 of the cases , representing fines of over $648,000 . by that date , nasd had collected over $22,000 on 3 of the 11 cases , and had forwarded 8 to a private collection agency . in addition , nasd reported receiving about $67,000 on four cases before sec obtained final court orders . the remaining 26 cases of the over 60 submitted to sec , which did not meet sec's criteria , were returned to nasd . nasd officials said that they intend to submit the cases to a private collection agency . the cross - servicing program collects debts more than 180 days delinquent that have been referred by federal agencies . according to fms officials , 20 to 30 collectors perform the cross - servicing collection efforts at fms' collection center in birmingham , alabama , and about 40 people at headquarters perform agency liaison or manage private collection agencies , for a total of about 70 to 100 people who work in some capacity on cross - servicing . one tool that fms uses to collect these debts is the treasury offset program ( top ) , in which fms matches a database of delinquent debtors against payments to be disbursed by treasury and then offsets or withholds federal payments to recipients who also owe delinquent debts . fms ( 1 ) presently offsets office of personnel management retirement payments , federal income tax refunds , vendor payments , and some federal salary payments and ( 2 ) is planning to add social security benefit payments and the remaining federal salary and non - treasury - disbursed payments to the top system . fms' cross - servicing collections for fiscal year 2000 were in excess of $41 million , almost doubling the $23 million collected in fiscal year 1999 , which had more than doubled the $10 million collected in fiscal year 1998 . another improvement nasd made was to contract with a national collection agency to handle all aspects of its collections .