bia did not provide any comments . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , and the secretaries of agriculture , homeland security , housing and urban development , and interior . see 44 c.f.r . § 206.110 ( k ) . where the community is participating in nfip , unless the property is covered by flood insurance . participating communities can receive discounts on flood insurance if they establish floodplain management programs that go beyond the minimum requirements of nfip . fema can suspend communities that do not comply with the program and communities can withdraw from the program ( both with sanctions ) . currently , more than 21,000 communities participate in nfip . communities participating in nfip do so as part of either the regular or emergency program . a community participating in the regular nfip program is usually provided with a firm and a flood insurance study . as part of their agreement to participate in nfip , communities adopt and enforce floodplain management ordinances and firms . if communities do not adopt and enforce these ordinances , they can be placed on probation or suspended from the program . however , such actions take place only after fema has taken steps to help the community become compliant . the nfip emergency program is the initial phase of a community's participation in nfip and was designed to provide a limited amount of flood insurance . a community participating in the emergency program either does not have an identified and mapped flood hazard or has been provided with a flood hazard boundary map , and the community is required to adopt limited floodplain management standards to control future use of its floodplain . according to fema , fewer than 3 percent of the more than 21,000 communities participating in nfip are in the emergency program . the federal government has consistently recognized indian tribes as distinct , independent political communities with the inherent powers of a limited sovereignty that has never been extinguished . as of august 2012 , there were 566 federally recognized tribes — 341 in the contiguous 48 to help manage tribal affairs , tribes have states and 225 in alaska.formed governments and subsidiaries of tribal governments , including schools , housing , health , and other types of corporations . the united states has a trust responsibility to recognized indian tribes and maintains a government - to - government relationship with them . tribal lands vary dramatically in size , demographics , and location . they range from the navajo nation , which consists of about 27,000 square miles across portions of arizona , new mexico , and utah , to some tribal land areas in california of less than 1 square mile . over 176,000 american indians live on the navajo reservation , while some other tribal lands have fewer than 50 indian residents . some indian reservations have a mixture of indian and non - indian residents . most tribal lands are rural or remote , although some are near metropolitan areas . we have reported in the past that some tribes are landless .