female sbic managers . about 6 percent of multiple - license sbics and 11 percent of single - license sbics were estimated to have at least one female sbic manager . sbics in low - or moderate - income areas . slightly more than 12 percent of both multiple - and single - license sbics were estimated to be located in such areas . multiple licensees , in the aggregate , demonstrated better investment performance than single licensees from 2005 to 2014 , according to our analysis . despite some variation , for most other attributes there were not substantial differences between small businesses that received investments from multiple - license sbics and those that received them from single - license sbics . we could not report on minority , women , and veteran ownership of sbic investments because the data were unreliable , in part because sba does not provide guidance to sbic licensees on how to collect and report this information . a few sbics are corporations with publicly traded stock . to address the third objective , we examined data provided to us by sba on the aggregate financial performance of the sbic program , including data from the sbic ultimate loss reports prepared by sba . for the program overall , sba provided ultimate loss data for fiscal years 1994 through 2014 . for the sbic debenture and participating securities programs in particular , sba provided these data for fiscal years 2003 through 2014 because 2003 was the year in which sba started separately reporting losses for these two programs . we also reviewed the annual credit subsidy estimates and reestimates for the sbic program from fiscal years 1992 through 2014 in the corresponding years' president's budget . see appendix i for a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from july 2014 to january 2016 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the small business investment act of 1958 , as amended , created the sbic program to facilitate the flow of capital to small businesses and stimulate the economy . under the program , which is operated by sba's office of investment and innovation , sba does not make direct investments in small businesses but partners with privately owned and managed sbics that provide financing to qualifying small businesses . this financing consists of private capital that the sbic has raised and sba's financial assistance through the sbic program . sbics are able to borrow at favorable rates because sba guarantees the loan obligations ( known as debentures ) that sbics make . when an sbic is ready to make an investment , in addition to using private capital , it may draw down on sba's leverage by issuing a debenture with a repayment schedule for principal and interest . sbics also may use their leverage and private capital to pay for operating expenses .