see figure 3 . the committee members stated that having representatives from various divisions within the agency allows them to integrate all views into the decision - making process . the committee meets weekly , typically for 2 or 3 hours and works to facilitate communication and consensus throughout fdic on human capital issues . the committee also advises senior leadership on significant human resources issues . human resources committee members told us that they review policy recommendations and share information with their respective division directors . further , committee members stated that division managers are able to bring the concerns of their subordinate staff to the committee , and managers are able to notify their subordinate staff of human capital initiatives that may address their concerns . for example , staff members are able to communicate training needs to the human resources committee through their division managers . the division representatives on the human resources committee are able to communicate information to the managers about future training programs that would meet staff needs . according to committee members , this helps facilitate the flow of information to and from division managers and subordinate staff . another step fdic took to strengthen its human capital framework was establishing its corporate university in 2003 . corporate university supports the agency's mission and goals by training and developing fdic employees . corporate university provides training and development opportunities for fdic executives , managers , supervisors , and employees in order to help them enhance their job performance . before establishing corporate university , fdic focused and confined training within divisions ; the agency gave relatively little attention to building a corporate culture or making employees aware of activities outside their own divisions . however , since establishing corporate university , fdic's efforts have been lauded for reflecting best practices in aligning training functions with the agency's mission and goals . in 2005 , fdic's corporate university received an excellence award from the corporate university xchange for its organizational structure and alignment within the agency . the corporate university xchange cited features of fdic's corporate university that made it appropriately aligned within the agency , such as the existence of a governing board that includes division managers and having deans and chairs from the divisions serve on a rotational basis . fdic's corporate university works with the human resources committee , the corporate university's governing board , and deans to design curriculum and implement training programs . the structure of corporate university is intended to support a balance between the agency's goals and the needs of the individual divisions . fdic's chief operating officer , chief financial officer , and division directors work with the chief learning officer to deliver training and development programs . corporate university also has structures in place to facilitate the exchange of information related to the training needs of the division of supervision and consumer protection . two committees — the curriculum oversight group and the training oversight committee — assist corporate university in identifying training and development needs . the curriculum oversight group consists of midlevel supervisors who meet with corporate university staff to map out training needs and curriculum changes that require focused strategies .