implemented . ( 1 ) the joint staff has sponsored hundreds of vulnerability assessments — known as joint staff integrated vulnerability assessments — based on a defined set of criteria . ( 2 ) the joint staff has issued one volume of dod - wide construction standards in december 1999 , and plans to complete two additional volumes by december 2002 . ( 3 ) dod has provided more guidance and outreach programs to share lessons learned among commands . to ensure that security responsibility for dod personnel overseas is clear , we recommend that the secretary of defense take the necessary steps to ensure that the memorandum of understanding now under discussion with the department of state is signed expeditiously . further , the secretary should provide the geographic combatant commanders with the guidance to successfully negotiate implementation agreements with chiefs of mission . implemented . the departments of defense and state have signed a memorandum of understanding , and scores of country - level memorandums of agreement have been signed between the geographic combatant commanders and their local u.s. ambassadors or chiefs of mission . these agreements clarify who is responsible for providing antiterrorism and force protection to dod personnel not under the direct command of the geographic combatant commanders . combating terrorism: spending on governmentwide programs requires better management and coordination ( gao / nsiad - 98-39 , dec. 1 , 1997 ) . recommendations , p. 13 . we recommend that consistent with the responsibility for coordinating efforts to combat terrorism , the assistant to the president for national security affairs of the national security council ( nsc ) , in consultation with the director , office of management and budget ( omb ) , and the heads of other executive branch agencies , take steps to ensure that ( 1 ) governmentwide priorities to implement the national counterterrorism policy and strategy are established , ( 2 ) agencies' programs , projects , activities , and requirements for combating terrorism are analyzed in relation to established governmentwide priorities , and ( 3 ) resources are allocated based on the established priorities and assessments of the threat and risk of terrorist attack . partially implemented . ( 1 ) the attorney general's five - year counter - terrorism and technology crime plan , issued in december 1998 , included priority actions for combating terrorism . according to nsc and omb , the five - year plan , in combination with presidential decision directives ( pdd ) 39 and 62 , represented governmentwide priorities that they used in developing budgets to combat terrorism . ( 2 ) according to nsc and omb , they analyzed agencies' programs , projects , activities , and requirements using the five - year plan and related presidential decision directives . ( 3 ) according to nsc and omb , they allocated agency resources based upon the priorities established above . more recently , the office of homeland security issued a national strategy for homeland security , which also established priorities for combating terrorism domestically . however , there is no clear link between resources and threats because no national - level risk management approach has been completed to use for resource decisions .