gao - 07-21 . washington , d.c.: november 16 , 2006 . ( see app . i for a detailed description of survey data we reviewed and analyzed. ) for a list of related gao products see the end of this report . we performed our work from april 2006 through february 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . many u.s. workers participate in employer - sponsored health benefit and retirement pension programs and the costs of these benefits in recent years have risen faster than wages . the designs of these benefit programs have changed over the course of the past several decades , and these changes have often been made in response to growing costs associated with providing the benefits . millions of workers are not in traditional full - time , year - round work arrangements and some may legally be excluded from benefit plans that are offered to full - time workers . employers are not required to offer health and retirement benefits to any workers , although when they are offered , federal laws provide some protections to workers related to their provision . the u.s. system of employer - sponsored health and retirement benefits is financed by employers , individual worker contributions , and state and federal governments through foregone tax revenue . the degree to which individuals rely on employer - sponsored health care and retirement benefits depends on several factors , including age , income , employment status , and access . in addition to wages and other benefits , employers often provide workers with health and retirement benefits as a part of their total compensation . employer - sponsored health benefits provide coverage to over 155 million individuals through coverage of active workers and their dependents . employers may also provide health benefits to medicare - eligible retirees and individuals who retire prior to their eligibility for medicare ( typically referred to as early retirees ) and their dependents . approximately 12 million retirees on medicare and 3 million early retirees are covered under employer - sponsored health benefits.4 , 5 about half of all private - sector workers participate in an employer - sponsored retirement plan according to the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) national compensation surveys . the overall rate of worker participation in employer - sponsored retirement pension plans has not changed significantly in the last few decades . health and retirement benefits help employers attract and retain skilled workers ; however , the costs of these benefits have accounted for an increasingly larger share of workers' total compensation . during most of the period from 1991 until 2002 , wages and benefits increased by about the same percentage , after which time real wages began to stagnate and real benefit costs continued to grow through 2005 . figure 1 shows the real growth in hourly expenses attributable to wages and benefits between 1991 and 2005 . kaiser / hewitt surveys on retiree health benefits , 2003-2005 . employer - sponsored coverage for early retirees often mirrors coverage for current workers .