elizabeth a . field , ( 202 ) 512-2775 or fielde1@gao.gov in addition to the contact named above , suzanne perkins ( assistant director ) , geoffrey peck ( analyst - in - charge ) , pedro almoguera , noah gerber , mae jones , matthew kienzle , amie lesser , felicia lopez , and jeanne sung made key contributions to this report . we provided a draft of this product to dod for review and comment . gao - 18-151sp . deca and one or more exchange organization , or two or more of the exchange organizations ( and not deca ) . however , we found that the task force's projected savings from reducing the cost of goods sold may be overestimated , and that projected costs for it development and headquarters relocation may be underestimated . further , while the military departments concurred with the task force's recommendation to consolidate , dod did not fully share their comments and concerns about the business case analysis with congress . dod's proposed consolidation will cost several hundred million dollars , take years to implement , and involve multiple dod organizations . given the cost and complexity of the proposed defense resale consolidation , dod can ensure that congress has the reliable information it needs to consider consolidation by reviewing and updating savings and cost estimates and sharing comments and concerns from the military departments . this calculation showed an estimated annual savings of $329 million to $517 million from reducing the cost of goods sold . however , additional information from the task force suggests this savings estimate may be overstated because there is limited overlap in the products deca sells ( i.e. , groceries and household goods ) and the products the exchange organizations sell ( i.e. , goods and services similar to retail stores ) . according to the task force , about $2.2 billion of deca's cost of goods sold in fiscal year 2017 were for products also sold by at least one of the exchange organizations , which is equivalent to about 23 percent of the total cost of goods sold for the four resale organizations . this differs from the data provided in the business case analysis , which stated that 62 percent of the total cost of goods sold was for identical products sold by two or more resale organizations ; however , that figure also includes products sold by two or more exchange organizations and not deca ( we further discuss product overlap among the exchange organizations below ) . given the more limited product overlap between deca and the exchange organizations , it is unclear whether using the total cost of goods sold for all four resale organizations as the basis for estimating savings was appropriate . in addition to overlap in identical products sold , task force officials told us that savings from category management reforms are dependent , in part , on the amount of overlap in vendors that sell products to the resale organizations . specifically , task force officials stated that there are opportunities to reduce cost of goods sold through negotiations with vendors that sell items to both deca and the exchange organizations .