vi ) . one difference between the implementation and consultative group mechanisms is that , since the establishment of the latter , the afghan government has asked donor government and assistance organizations to categorize their assistance projects under the subprograms in the national development framework and to direct funding toward the projects in the afghan national development budget . despite the effort to develop a more effective coordination mechanism , the consultative group mechanism has not surmounted the conditions that prevented the implementation group from effectively coordinating assistance . for example , in 2003 , donor governments and assistance agencies have continued to develop their own strategies , as well as fund and implement projects outside the afghan government's national budget . in addition , agricultural assistance is divided up among several consultative groups including the groups for natural resources management and livelihoods . further , unlike food assistance where donors primarily use one agency , wfp , for channeling resources , donors continue to use a variety of channels for their agriculture assistance . although the afghan government asserts that it is assuming a greater level of leadership over the coordination effort , as of may 2003 , we could not determine whether the new coordination mechanism would be more successful than earlier efforts . agriculture is essential to afghanistan . despite the fact that only 11.5 percent ( 7.5 million hectares ) of afghanistan's total area is cultivable , 85 percent of the population depends on agriculture for its livelihood , and 80 percent of export earnings and more than 50 percent of the gross domestic product have historically come from agriculture . however , afghanistan's agricultural sector continues to suffer from the effects of prolonged drought , war , and neglect . it lacks high - quality seed , draft animals , and fertilizer , as well as adequate veterinary services , modern technology , advanced farming methods , and a credit system for farmers . further , afghanistan's ministry of agriculture and animal husbandry and its ministry of irrigation and water resources lack the infrastructure and resources to assist farmers . because afghanistan experiences limited rainfall , its agricultural sector is highly dependent on irrigation — 85 percent of its agricultural products derives from irrigated areas . thus , the conservation and efficient use of water is the foundation of the agricultural sector . for example , in august 2002 , the minister of agriculture stated , “the ministry does not know the priorities of the international community for the agricultural sector , how much money will be spent , and where the projects will be implemented.” fao claimed that the ministry of agriculture had endorsed fao's agricultural rehabilitation strategy . however , no letter of agreement or memorandum of understanding between the fao and the ministry documents the acceptance of the strategy . specific monitoring activities include an examination of food stocks held by implementing partners . the monitors spot - check the weight of randomly selected bags in storage and compare the total stock held with wfp stock balance reports . the monitors also survey local markets to determine whether any wfp food is being resold rather than used by beneficiaries . projects are monitored on a periodic basis .