testing . testing is the process of executing a program with the intent of finding errors . testing is a critical process that improves an entity's confidence that the system will satisfy the requirements of the end user and operate as intended . project planning and oversight . project planning is the process used to establish reasonable plans for carrying out and managing the software project . it includes estimating resources needed for the work to be performed , establishing commitments , and defining the work plan . risk management . risk management is a set of activities for identifying , analyzing , planning , tracking , and controlling risks . risk management starts with identifying the risks before they can become problems . organizations that do not effectively implement the disciplined processes lose the productive benefits of these processes as a project moves through its development and implementation and are forced to implement them later when it takes more time and they are less effective . a major consumer of project resources in undisciplined efforts is rework . rework occurs when the original work has defects or is no longer needed because of changes in project direction . disciplined organizations focus their efforts on reducing the amount of rework because it is expensive . studies have shown that correcting a defect during the testing phase costs anywhere from 10 to 100 times the cost of correcting it during the design or requirements phase . projects that are unable to adopt disciplined processes successfully will eventually only be spending their efforts on rework and the associated processes that are needed rather than productive work . in other words , the project may find itself continually reworking items . we found in our review of three agencies' implementation of new financial management systems that these agencies are not following the disciplined processes that are necessary to reduce the risks to acceptable levels . in our may 2004 report , we reported that long - standing problems continue at dod despite the significant investments made in dod business systems each year . gao's two case study examples of logistics systems modernization efforts , business systems modernization ( bsm ) at the defense logistics agency ( dla ) and the army's logistics modernization program ( lmp ) , found that disciplined processes were not implemented . we also reported in september 2004 that hhs had not followed key disciplined processes and is at risk of implementing a new financial management system that will not fully meet the needs of its users . further , in 2003 and 2004 we issued five reports and testified about the considerable challenges facing nasa's implementation of a new financial management program . nasa is on its third attempt in 12 years to modernize its financial management process and systems and has spent about $180 million on its two prior failed efforts . dod reported in april 2003 that its business systems environment consisted of 2,274 systems . dod requested approximately $19 billion for fiscal year 2004 to operate , maintain , and modernize its reported 2,274 business systems . more recently , dod stated that its inventory of business systems was over 4,000 and more systems are expected to be identified .