aoc and the other agencies agreed with our recommendations . in addition to the work we did for our april 2007 report , we analyzed the potential costs of fuel - switching from coal to natural gas at the capitol power plant , as directed by the chief administrative officer of the house of representatives in the green the capitol initiative . specific actions outlined in the initiative included purchasing electricity generated by renewable sources , purchasing carbon offsets , and directing aoc to adjust the fuel mix of the capitol power plant so that the portion of its output consumed by the house is derived entirely from natural gas . in may 2008 , we recommended that , before adjusting the plant's fuel mix beyond the level directed by the initiative , aoc consult with its oversight committees in the congress and evaluate the economic and environmental tradeoffs associated with the use of each fuel at the plant . my statement today will focus on ( 1 ) the status of aoc's efforts to implement the recommendations in our april 2007 report and , ( 2 ) opportunities for the senate to decrease greenhouse gas emissions , including the cost - effectiveness of decreasing demand for energy relative to other options such as fuel switching at the capitol power plant or purchasing renewable electricity and carbon offsets . today's remarks are based on our prior work , analysis of documents provided by aoc on its progress in responding to recommendations in our april 2007 report , and related discussions with aoc management . energy audits typically identify information on projects that could address the consumption of fossil fuel and electricity as well as projects that could reduce emissions from other sources , such as leaks in refrigeration equipment . energy audits also include information on the cost - effectiveness of projects and on the extent to which the projects could reduce emissions . this information can then be used to evaluate and select projects . the audits generally fall into three categories — preliminary , targeted , and comprehensive — and are distinguished by the level of detail and analysis required . preliminary audits are the least detailed and provide quick evaluations to determine a project's potential . these audits typically do not provide sufficiently detailed information to justify investments but may prove useful in identifying opportunities for more detailed evaluations . targeted audits are detailed analyses of specific systems , such as lighting . comprehensive audits are detailed analyses of all major energy - using systems . both targeted and comprehensive audits provide sufficiently detailed information to justify investing in projects . energy - saving projects that fall outside the scope of energy audits include efforts to enhance outreach and education efforts to curtail energy use by building occupants and purchasing high - efficiency appliances . outreach and education efforts include providing information on how employees can conserve energy , such as aoc's “how - to guides” that detail cost - effective methods to save energy in the workplace . efforts to curtail energy use include purchasing energy - efficient computer equipment and appliances , using information available from the environmental protection agency's energy star program or the federal energy management program ( femp ) .