pmis . in its response , ihs states that it is confident that implementation of its new property management system will eliminate “most , if not all , inventory currently unaccounted for.” this widespread property management problem will not simply be resolved as a result of implementing a new system . however , conducting and completing inventories are separate matters . further , ihs mentions that “performance will be monitored in fy 2009.” the proper use and enforcement of hand receipts is a critical issue for ihs and it remains to be seen whether ihs will effectively manage its hand receipt program . determination of lost , stolen or unaccounted for property . we provided ihs with three options for proving that property was not lost , stolen , or otherwise unaccounted for during our field tests ; these options were ( 1 ) direct physical observation ; ( 2 ) for items not readily available for inspection , photographs with a visible bar code and serial number , to be provided within 1 week ; and ( 3 ) for items represented as being disposed of , supporting documentation ( eg , disposal records ) . in response to our draft , hhs stated that these options were not sufficient because , “in many cases these items are temporarily unavailable to be inspected… because they are in use by employees who are out in the field.” we understand that ihs is a decentralized organization with numerous field locations . we believe that we provided a reasonable amount of time for a federal agency such as ihs to locate the items we selected , given its access to digital photography , mobile phones , and the internet . the fact that ihs was unable to readily identify and provide support for the location of numerous items during our audit is consistent with the results of its 2008 annual inventory . physical security of property . we have identified physical security of property as an ongoing issue for ihs . we disagree with the statement that “ihs continues to safeguard all property.” we understand that property security was addressed in a memorandum from the ihs director in november 2008 , but without an enforcement mechanism to ensure that a policy or procedure is implemented and operating effectively , ihs has no assurance that it is safeguarding property effectively . further , we did not systematically evaluate perimeter security , but we found examples where a lack of perimeter security facilitated a loss of property . for example , one report of survey indicated a trailer with an acquisition value of $7,300 was stolen from a nashville region office parking lot when the security gates were broken and remained open . in another report of survey , a laptop was stolen from an employee's workstation in portland . the workstation was accessible to the public and was not secured . further , we identified additional examples of unsecured equipment including an unsecured server room at one ihs area office . status of prior year recommendations . in its response , hhs includes a table showing the status of progress made in implementing our prior year recommendations .