b . contributions to water supply reliability ( 17 points ) : points will be awarded for projects that contribute to a more reliable water supply . environment and water quality ( 12 points ) : points will be awarded based on the extent to which the project will improve surface , groundwater , or effluent discharge quality ; will restore or enhance habitat for nonlisted species ; will address problems caused by invasive species ; or will provide water or habitat for federally listed threatened or endangered species . indirect benefits of the project will also be considered under this criterion . economic benefits ( 35 points ) a . cost effectiveness ( 10 points ) : points will be awarded based on the cost per acre - foot of water expected to be delivered upon completion of the project and how the cost of the project compares to a nonreclaimed water alternative . b . economic analysis and project benefits ( 25 points ) : points will be awarded based on the analysis of the project's benefits relative to the project's costs . department of interior priorities ( 10 points ) : points will be awarded based on the extent that the proposal demonstrates that the project supports the department of the interior priorities , such as utilizing natural resources and modernizing infrastructure . desalination . title xvi has provided grants for projects that treat brackish groundwater — water that has a salinity above freshwater but below seawater — and then feed it directly into potable water distribution systems or into a groundwater aquifer or surface water reservoir . for example , the mission basin groundwater purification facility in oceanside , california , desalinates brackish groundwater using reverse osmosis and other treatment methods . the reused water supplies about 15 percent of the city's water needs , according to the project sponsor . in addition to title xvi construction projects , reclamation's feasibility and research studies also vary in their planned uses of reused water . for example , one feasibility study project sponsor we interviewed was awarded a title xvi grant to investigate the feasibility and potential impacts of reusing produced water from oil and gas operations in oklahoma . the study plans to investigate possible dual benefits of reusing produced water , including ( 1 ) providing a new source of water for irrigation and other purposes and ( 2 ) reducing the disposal of produced water as a possible means for addressing increased seismic activity associated with oil and gas operations , according to the project sponsor . another feasibility study project sponsor we interviewed from a rural , landlocked community in washington state is investigating the feasibility of creating a virtual zero discharge system that would eliminate all wastewater disposal by reusing the wastewater . similar to feasibility studies , title xvi research studies address different topics . for example , one project sponsor we interviewed was researching how to optimize filtration of reused water using membrane filtration , which is a critical treatment process to reduce contaminants in water . another project sponsor was researching impediments and incentives to using reused water for agricultural irrigation .