these do not exist for the cmr role . subcontracting on federal contracts is a large and growing marketplace for small businesses . rather , total cmr ftes declined 28 percent from fiscal year 1992 through fiscal 2001 . sba's task force study identified some specific problems with the cmr role and recommended some specific solutions , and sba's efforts to implement some of these solutions can possibly lead to some incremental improvements . however , the task force study did not strategically assess or plan the cmr role , nor was it tied to any sba strategic - planning effort . in addition , the study did not use or establish measurable goals and objectives or outcome and impact measures for the cmr role . in other words , the study did not address the larger issues of cmr strategic role assessment and planning . in the absence of such planning , sba's approach to addressing challenges that cmrs face will continue to be ad hoc and piecemeal . delegating decisions about the focus of the cmr role to area directors may be appropriate . however , sba has not conducted any assessments or evaluations that address what area office factors and characteristics make such delegation essential or effective . furthermore , sba has not evaluated the effectiveness of local decisions regarding the balance between compliance monitoring and marketing . the resource pressures on the cmr role heighten our concern . it may be that local decisions about the focus of the cmr role are more influenced by the realities of local resource constraints than by local compliance monitoring and marketing needs . without sound assessment and evaluation , however , this and many other issues of role focus will remain clouded . the regulations and operating procedures that sba references do not constitute a strategic vision tied to measurable goals and objectives . rather , as we discuss in our report , they simply describe a variety of duties and responsibilities that cmrs are required to perform . since the regulations and guidance do not place a relative order of importance on these duties , and the small business act and the federal acquisition regulations do not mention cmrs , there is no law , regulation , or guidance requiring or suggesting that cmrs prioritize their work according to a strategic vision . in contrast , a strategic vision is broader and more comprehensive . it is expressed in an overall strategic plan that articulates a mission and specific plans to fulfill that mission , including measurable goals and objectives and associated outcome and impact measures . sba also appears to recognize at least to some degree the limitations of the regulations and operating procedures as a strategic vision because it agrees that it needs to rethink the cmr role and develop outcome or impact measures . sba recognizes that on - site reviews are both more effective than and preferable to desk reviews but asserts that they are “less cost - effective” and “not always necessary.” however , sba does not offer persuasive evidence to support these assertions . during our review , sba officials told us that they had not conducted assessments or evaluations of either of these compliance review methods or of their comparative effectiveness .