collected . munitions readiness ratings . baseline , characterize , and monitor the state of the industrial base supply chain . utilize joint munitions command production base readiness measurement scheme to characterize risk of industrial base to meet requirements . strategic outload capabilities ( facilitization , staffing , and skills ) . customer satisfaction survey . level and consolidate procurement buys to the maximum extent practicable . reduce ammunition life - cycle costs . maximize customer satisfaction . reduce response time in providing inefficiencies that have been corrected . ammunition to the joint warfighter . utilized capacity and footprint . identify operating inefficiencies and formulate corrective actions . ( this initiative was deleted in the november 2004 update of the plan. ) customer satisfaction survey ratings . munitions readiness ratings . incentivize the implementation of best business practices in single manager for conventional ammunition processes and at key government and commercial suppliers . number of self - help projects implemented by ammunition suppliers and associated value - engineering savings . pursue feasibility and overall business case for government - owned , contractor - operated army ammunition plants for sale , long - term lease , and / or consolidation options focusing on preserving critical capabilities and reducing costs . ( pending fiscal year 2005 base realignment and closure process outcome and army industrial base transformation guidance. ) meet combatant command operations planning requirements . correct positioning of ammunition stocks to meet peacetime and wartime requirements . promote / incentivize contractors to pursue state - based , self - help programs among ammo suppliers . promote commonality of components across / within ammo families . develop and implement an industrial base integrated data environment using a web - based assessment tool and report generating system that captures production data , stockpile condition , requirements and specific industrial base metrics . percentage of production base and processes . plan converted to integrated data environment . establishment and completion of a logistics industrial base plan . identify and benchmark best practices in production and facility management . understand condition and posture of 12 . percentage of baseline metrics the ammunition and logistics base . munitions readiness ratings . financial viability of suppliers of critical core capabilities . selectively promote initiatives from the armament retooling and manufacturing support act of 1992 authorizing the army to permit commercial firms to use facilities located at government - owned , contractor - operated ammunition plants for commercial purposes , and identify projects for production modernization and transformation . explore and implement indemnification on a selected basis . promote long - term relationships / partnerships with industry . increase industry investment in equipment and facilities . industry investment applied to modernizing manufacturing processes , equipment , and facilities . offer government - owned equipment and personnel for supplier use . initiate a manufacturing modernization loan program to provide low - interest rates to the ammo supply chain . facilitate use of science based production modeling and process controls . utilized capacity and footprint . unit cost trends for critical ammunition end items . sell non - value added , unutilized production equipment and utilize revenue for advancing manufacturing technology capability , environmental remediation , and reducing army ammunition plant operating costs .