cse beneficiary claims . under federal law , beginning in october 2019 , for claims for services to cse beneficiaries , states may choose to make payment within 30 days ( as opposed to implementing a 100- day wait - and - see period ) , if the state determines doing so is cost - effective and necessary to ensure access to care . if the state does not make such a determination , the statute would require the state to avoid making payment for such services for up to 100 days to allow third parties to make payment first . however , cms guidance does not identify this as an option for states . instead , cms guidance simply provides states with the option of implementing the wait - and - see period , omitting the option for states to make payment within 30 days . cms officials told us that the bipartisan budget act of 2018 did not change state responsibilities related to cost - effectiveness and access to care , and cms does not intend to issue additional guidance on this issue . however , prior to enactment of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 in february 2018 , federal third - party liability law did not authorize states to apply cost avoidance procedures to preventive pediatric claims or pediatric services provided to cse beneficiaries . furthermore , other cms guidance documents , such as the third - party liability handbook and cms regulations on third - party liability , are out of date and not a reliable source of information for states to use in implementing the new federal third - party liability requirements . in particular , the third - party liability handbook was last revised in 2016 and does not reflect the bipartisan budget act of 2018 changes . additionally , cms regulations implementing federal requirements for state payment of claims for prenatal care , labor and delivery services , postpartum care , preventive pediatric services , and services to cse beneficiaries were last amended in 1997 and , accordingly , do not reflect current statutory requirements , including the bipartisan budget act of 2018 requirement to cost avoid prenatal and other non - pediatric claims beginning february 2018 . cms officials told us the agency is in the process of updating its third - party liability handbook and anticipates issuing the updated document in september 2019 . agency officials also told us they plan to revise the agency's regulations regarding pay - and - chase and release the revised regulations in early 2020 . however , federal law requires state medicaid plans to provide for proper third - party liability procedures , which states often carry out through references to federal regulation , according to cms officials . without updated third - party liability guidance that is timely , complete , and consistent with federal law , states may lack the necessary information to update their state medicaid plans so that they comply with these requirements . coverage identification . to identify beneficiaries with third - party health coverage , states are required to request coverage information from potential medicaid beneficiaries at the time the agency makes any determination or redetermination of eligibility .