gao - 19-387 . washington , d.c.: june 2019 . missile defense: the warfighter and decision makers would benefit from better communication about the system's capabilities and limitations . gao - 18-324 . washington , d.c.: may 2018 . missile defense: some progress delivering capabilities , but challenges with testing transparency and requirements development need to be addressed . gao - 17-381 . washington , d.c.: may 2017 . mda has taken steps to mitigate this risk consistent with our recommendations . for example , as we found in may 2017 , mda took steps to reduce concurrency in the aegis bmd sm - 3 block ib by adding in tests and delaying the full - rate production decision until the tests were completed . figure 1 represents a highly concurrent acquisition schedule as compared to an approach based on gaining knowledge before proceeding to the next acquisition phase . improving bmds testing: mda has improved the accuracy of tools it uses to assess integrated bmds capabilities . the bmds is a system of systems that cannot be completely assessed using intercept flight tests because of the system's scope and complexity , and because of safety constraints . consequently , mda , independent dod testing organizations , and the warfighter must rely heavily on representations of the integrated bmds called models and simulations in ground testing . this approach is used , rather than live tests , to test the operational performance of the whole bmds against attacks with more threats represented . our preliminary observations for fiscal year 2019 are that the number of accredited models and simulations that are needed to assess the integrated performance of the bmds has steadily risen over the last 3 years . over the past several years , we have reported on mda's progress in delivering assets and capabilities to counter attacks as well as cyber threats . mda delivered important bmds capabilities for architectures in the united states as well as those defending u.s. troops and allies in europe , the middle east , and the eastern pacific . for example: homeland defense: in fiscal year 2017 and 2018 , mda delivered a significant integrated capability for defending the united states , including improvements in the ability to discriminate lethal objects in targets , and increased capacity . this was a key achievement in fulfilling a directive from the secretary of defense to increase inventory of ground - based interceptors by the end of 2017 . regional bmd: in fiscal year 2016 , mda delivered capabilities for the second phase of its effort in europe , called european phased adaptive approach ( epaa ) . this effort required coordinated development of a number of elements and their integration to provide integrated bmds - level integrated capabilities against short and medium range ballistic missiles . more recently , in fiscal years 2018 and 2019 , mda rapidly delivered capabilities for its effort to meet an urgent regional need . in addition , preliminary observations from our review covering fiscal year 2019 indicate that cybersecurity assessments in fiscal year 2019 informed the network defense posture in u.s. northern command and provided data on how to reduce mission risk for these elements operating in a cyber - contested environment .