she has custody of their children . she is likely eligible for the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) because she can file using the head of household status . however…..if the couple separated in november , she is likely not eligible for the eitc because she was not living apart from her husband for the last 6 months of the year and therefore cannot claim the head of household filing status . scenario 2: an 18-year old woman and her daughter moved home to her parents' house in november of last year . it would also assist taxpayers in self - correcting unintentional mistakes where they may have chosen an incorrect educational tax benefit since they exceeded the lifetime limit . as we recommended in 2011 , we continue to believe that congress should consider providing mea to be used with credits and deductions with lifetime limits . any rtcs that contain these limits such as the aotc should fall under this authority as well if it is granted by congress . irs has several efforts intended to educate taxpayers about eligibility requirements and improve compliance including social media messaging , webinars , and tax forum presentations . according to irs , these efforts are intended to promote participation among taxpayers eligible for these credits , ensure that taxpayers are aware of the eligibility requirements before filing a tax return , and prevent unintentional errors before they occur . additionally , irs designated an eitc awareness day to increase awareness among potentially eligible taxpayers at a time when most are filing their federal income tax returns . the 10th annual eitc awareness day was january 29 , 2016 . according to irs , it currently has limited ability to measure the effectiveness of its outreach efforts . as recently as 2011 , irs officials said they were able to measure the effectiveness of the efforts through a semi - annual survey where they tested , for example , the effect of concentrating messaging in certain areas on taxpayer awareness of the eitc . although irs reported it no longer has the funds for that survey , officials said irs still commissions an annual survey intended to improve services to volunteers and external stakeholders . the credit adjustment or error is the difference between the credit amount originally claimed by the taxpayer and the correct credit amount , as determined by the nrp audit . the net credit adjustments can be separated into audited returns that received negative and positive adjustments . negative adjustments , or credit overclaims , occur when the taxpayer claimed the credit , but either did not qualify for the credit or the credit amount originally claimed was adjusted downward . credit overclaim amounts represent a potential for revenue loss to the government , where taxpayers incorrectly claim a tax benefit . similarly , positive adjustments , or credit underclaims , occur when the taxpayer either failed to claim the credit or the credit amount originally claimed was adjusted upward . credit underclaim amounts represent a potential expense for the government , where taxpayers forego available tax benefits . using nrp data ( 2009 to 2011 ) , the annual average credit and credit adjustment amounts are shown in table 4 .