we clarified this in the final report . additionally , sba said the sbir policy directive contains guidance on what the written determination must include , and participating agencies have not requested more detailed guidance on the written determination . we maintain that our findings and recommendation on providing guidance on the written determination are appropriate . phase i awards normally do not exceed $150,000 . for sbir , work in phase i generally lasts 6 to 9 months . in phase ii , small businesses with phase i projects that demonstrate scientific and technical merit and feasibility , in addition to commercial potential , may compete for awards of up to $1 million to continue the r&d for an additional period , normally not to exceed 2 years . phase iii is for small businesses to pursue commercialization of technology developed in prior phases . phase iii work derives from , extends , or completes an effort made under prior phases , but it is funded by sources other than the sbir program . in this phase , small businesses are expected to raise additional funds from private investors , the capital markets , or from non - sbir funding sources within the government . while sbir funding cannot be used for phase iii , agencies can participate in phase iii by , for example , purchasing the technology developed in prior phases . sba's office of investment and innovation is responsible for overseeing and coordinating the participating agencies' efforts for the sbir program by setting overarching policy and issuing policy directives , collecting program data , reviewing agency progress , and reporting annually to congress , among other responsibilities . as part of its oversight and coordination role , sba issued an updated sbir policy directive in january 2014 . the directive explains and outlines requirements for agencies' implementation of the sbir program . the policy directive includes information on program eligibility , proposal requirements , terms of agreement for sbir awards , and responsibilities of sba and participating agencies for the program . each participating agency must manage its sbir program in accordance with program laws , regulations , and the policy directive . each participating agency has considerable flexibility to design and manage the specifics of the program , such as determining research topics , selecting award recipients , and administering funding agreements . all of the agencies follow the same general process to obtain proposals from and make awards to small businesses for the sbir program . at least annually , each participating agency issues a solicitation requesting proposals for projects in topic areas determined by the agency . each agency uses its own process to review proposals and determine which proposals should receive awards . also , each agency determines whether the funding for awards will be provided as grants or contracts . the ndaa amended the sbir program to permit agencies to allow participation by majority - owned portfolio companies , and the act imposes certain requirements on such companies and participating agencies . as discussed , before awarding sbir funds to majority - owned portfolio companies , agencies must submit to sba and congress a written determination .