table 2 . select academic subjects for which the united nations relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) reported reviewing content of palestinian authority and english language textbooks , 2016-2017 recitation ) legend: =unrwa reviewed textbook for this subject . n / a= not applicable because palestinian authority and unrwa schools do not use these textbooks for the grades listed . appendix iv: textbook content issues identified by the united nations relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) appendix iv: textbook content issues identified by the united nations relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) during its august 2017 review of textbooks for grades 1 through 10 for the first semester , unrwa identified 203 issues covering a total of 229 pages ( out of a total of 7,498 pages reviewed ) , the majority of which it identified as related to neutrality / bias . specific details about the percentage of pages with issues unrwa identified in relation to each of the three rapid review criteria subjects , as well as the types and percentages of neutrality / bias issues unrwa reported finding were omitted because the information is classified . of the 203 issues unrwa identified in the textbooks for the first semester of grades 1 through 10 for the 2017-2018 school year , unrwa officials reported that they identified the largest number of issues in social studies textbooks ( 105 issues ) , followed by arabic grammar ( 30 issues ) , islamic education ( 20 issues ) , mathematics ( 18 issues ) , science and life ( 15 issues ) , english language ( 14 issues ) , and vocational education ( 1 issue ) . the 14 issues that unrwa identified in the english language textbooks purchased by unrwa for the first semester of grades 1 through 10 cover a total of 22 pages out of 664 textbook pages ( 3.3 percent ) , according to unrwa officials . of the 14 issues , unrwa officials identified 10 of the 14 as neutrality / bias issues and 4 as gender issues . the neutrality / bias issues that unrwa identified include issues related to maps , jerusalem , and the islamic religion . details about the neutrality / bias and gender issues that unrwa identified and the complementary teaching materials it developed were omitted because the information is classified . unrwa officials identified four examples in the english language textbooks for the first semester of grades 1 through 10 that show a lack of gender balance in sports , hobbies , and professions . in response , they developed complementary classroom discussion questions to discuss gender bias with unrwa students . details about the gender issues that unrwa identified and the complementary teaching materials unrwa developed were omitted from this report because they included classified information . appendix vi: comments from the united nations relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) . thomas melito at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov .