increases in global markets . at the time of the arab oil embargo , price controls in the united states prevented the prices of oil and petroleum products from increasing as much as they otherwise might have , contributing to a physical oil shortage that caused long lines at gasoline stations throughout the united states . now that the oil market is global , the price of oil is determined in the world market , primarily on the basis of supply and demand . in the absence of price controls , scarcity is generally expressed in the form of higher prices , as purchasers are free to bid as high as they want to secure oil supply . in a global market , an oil supply disruption anywhere in the world raises prices everywhere . releasing oil reserves during a disruption provides a global benefit by reducing oil prices in the world market . increases in domestic oil production . reversing a decades - long decline , u.s. oil production has generally increased in recent years . according to eia data , u.s. production of oil reached its highest level in 1970 and generally declined through 2008 , reaching a level of almost one - half of its peak . during this time , the united states increasingly relied on imported oil to meet growing domestic energy needs . however , imports have declined since then and , according to eia's most recent forecast , are expected to remain well below 2005 import levels into the future . canada and mexico are the nation's major foreign sources for imported oil . furthermore , the united states has increased its exports of oil and refined petroleum products . historic releases from the spr are shown in figure 1 . our preliminary analysis also indicates that the six exchanges from doe to u.s. refineries in response to hurricanes totaled about 28 million barrels . however , recent improvements in technologies have allowed producers to extract oil from shale formations that were previously considered to be inaccessible because traditional techniques did not yield sufficient amounts for economically viable production . in particular , the application of horizontal drilling techniques and hydraulic fracturing — a process that injects a combination of water , sand , and chemical additives under high pressure to create and maintain fractures in underground rock formations that allow oil and natural gas to flow — have increased u.s. oil and natural gas production . declines in net petroleum imports . one measure of the economy's vulnerability to oil supply disruptions is to assess net petroleum imports — that is , imports minus exports . net petroleum imports have declined by over 60 percent from a peak of about 12.5 million barrels per day in 2005 to about 4.8 million barrels per day in 2016 . in 2006 , net imports were expected to increase in the future , increasing the country's reliance on foreign oil . to quantify how doe has used the spr to address domestic petroleum supply disruptions , we reviewed doe and eia documents . refinery operations largely depend on a supply of oil and feedstocks .