granite sentry . gao / imtec - 92-84r . washington , d.c.: september 21 , 1992 . attack warning: status of the cheyenne mountain upgrade program . gao / aimd - 94-175 . washington , d.c.: september 1 , 1994 . defense acquisitions: status of strategic c4 system modernization and plans to integrate additional mission capabilities . gao / nsiad - 00-212r . washington , d.c.: august 25 , 2000 . the ccic2s program has not been an exception to these factors . for example , prior to initiating the ccic2s program in 2000 , dod reduced the program's initial estimated resource requirements by a total of $75 million . in 2002 , dod decided not to increase requested program funding . according to dod , funding was limited to program baseline levels because the program was a lesser priority . furthermore , in 2005 , dod and congress reduced ccic2s program funding estimates over the next 6 years by about $135 million , citing higher priority funding needs and poor program performance . according to the acquisition strategy for the ccic2s program , annual rebaselines were to be conducted on the program to review and approve program implementation plans , including cost and schedule baselines . however , because the air force failed to make a match between requirements and resources , including not effectively assessing the impacts of adding unanticipated work to the program , the result of ccic2s's annual rebaselines has been to defer significant amounts of work to the future in order to address cost increases . as a result , the air force has implemented the program as a “level of effort” — that is , without solid expectations of what capabilities are to be delivered , when , and at what cost . currently , the ccic2s program is undergoing its fifth rebaseline . according to program officials , after this fifth rebaseline , ccic2s will no longer plan for annual rebaselinings , but would only rebaseline the program when necessary . figure 3 depicts the effects of each of the rebaselines on the program . the fifth and current rebaseline was prompted by efforts to complete development of the program's critical missile warning mission capabilities . to free up resources for the missile warning development efforts , the air force stopped work on many other aspects of the ccic2s program in late 2004 and subsequently began rebaselining the program in early 2005 . air force officials stated the rebaseline was to be finalized by august 2005 ; however , it has yet to be approved as of june 2006 . according to air force officials , pending changes in program oversight as well as recent dod and congressional funding estimate reductions are reasons for the delay in approving the rebaseline . as currently structured , the rebaseline would again significantly defer the amount of capability scheduled to be delivered . specifically , missile warning critical requirements would not be delivered until fiscal year 2007 , and the schedule for the work on the space portion is undetermined . the oversight and control mechanisms of the ccic2s program have been inadequate to prevent or mitigate many of the problems it has experienced .