assess them . the three agencies we selected all have closing critical skills gaps as one of their agency - wide human resource goals . based on our assessment of the hrstat reviews of our selected agencies ( using agency material from the third quarter of fiscal year 2014 ) , we identified those metrics most relevant to tracking progress on closing skills gaps . as illustrated in table 2 below , we found considerable variation in the number and types of metrics agencies were using to track skills gaps . as shown above , only doe was tracking retirement eligibility and projected retirements , which are key indicators of where agencies might be at risk for future skills gaps . telecommunications . in december 2013 , we found that a decline in telecommunication expertise across multiple agencies compounded the general services administration's ( gsa ) challenges in transitioning those agencies to a new network of telecommunications services , contributing to delays and cost overruns of 44 percent . moreover , according to gsa , customer agencies are concerned that the shortage of telecommunications specialists will get worse because there are not enough to replace experienced workers nearing retirement . gsa has yet to fully study the issue of addressing mission - critical skills gaps and agreed that understanding expertise shortfalls would be useful for future transition planning purposes . officials from gsa and opm agreed with our recommendation on the need to better examine potential government - wide telecommunications expertise shortfalls and have agreed to coordinate on efforts to do so . while this recommendation was still open at the time of our review , gsa's office of human resources management plans to take several actions such as identifying and validating technical competencies , developing competency models , and performing a workforce assessment against the models . working group officials observed that a lesson learned from their mco selection process was that they did not use workforce information and data analytics sufficiently early in the process . instead , to identify an initial list of mcos , the working group started with an environmental scan that consisted of our reports and academic studies . the working group used data analytics , such as the levels of attrition within an occupation , only after it had identified the initial set of mcos . this approach only supported the selection of mcos the working group already made and did not subject the full range of federal occupations to the same analytical criteria . as part of our development of our 2013 high - risk report , we discussed this approach with the working group's leadership , specifically questioning why the working group did not use workforce data as the starting point for its selection process.2013 discussion of lessons learned , working group officials concluded that the mco selection process would have benefitted from analyzing staffing gap data and associated trends prior to identifying an initial set of mcos . these officials determined that using these workforce data would have given the working group a better sense of which occupations had the biggest skills gaps .