we did not review the overall management of the program . we performed our initial work from october 1999 through april 2000 , and developed updated information in may 2005 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . atp , which began funding projects in fiscal year 1990 , was intended to fund high - risk research and development ( r&d ) projects with broad commercial and societal benefits that would not be undertaken by a single company or group of companies , either because the risk was too high or because the economic benefits of success would not accrue to the investors . atp is viewed as a mechanism for fostering investment in areas in which societal returns would exceed private returns . atp has addressed other opportunities to achieve broader societal goals , such as small business participation , as well as the establishment of joint ventures for high - risk technologies that would be difficult for any one company to justify because , for example , the benefits spread across the industry as a whole . thus , atp is seen by some as a means of addressing market failure in research areas that would otherwise not be funded , thereby facilitating the economic growth that comes from the commercialization and use of new technologies in the private sector . advocates of the program believe that the government should serve as a catalyst for companies to cooperate and undertake important new work that would not have been possible in the same time period without federal participation . critics of the program view atp as industrial policy , or the means by which government rather than the marketplace picks winners and losers . most of the private sector and university experts we consulted agreed that it can be very difficult to identify the specific research that private sector firms are conducting , especially considering the competitive nature of most industries . atp provides funding through cooperative agreements — a type of financial assistance in which the federal government is substantially involved in project management . if a competing firm could determine the nature and progress of another company's research , it could help the competitor to develop and commercialize an identical or higher - quality product before the other firm . atp offers these agreements through announced annual competitions . it provides multiyear funding to single companies and to industry - led joint ventures . the proposal review and selection process is a multistep process based on nist regulations . in general , these steps include a preliminary screening , technical and business reviews , semifinalist identification , oral reviews , ranking , and final selection . at the beginning of each round of atp competitions , nist establishes source evaluation boards ( sebs ) to ensure that all proposals receive careful consideration . each seb is comprised of nist technical experts as well as outside specialists with backgrounds in business and economics . atp supplements the sebs with outside technical reviewers , generally federal government experts in the specific industry of the proposal .