however , we do not agree . in some situations , spectroscopic portal monitors outperformed the current technology ; in other cases , they performed equally well . in the second test , pnnl concluded that the spectroscopic monitor's ability to detect the shielded threat sources was equal to , but no better than , those of the currently - fielded portal monitors . however , because spectroscopic portal monitors have the ability to identify isotopes , they produced fewer nuisance alarms than the current portal monitors . pnnl noted that because the studies were limited in scope , more testing is needed . in october 2005 , dndo completed the first round of comprehensive testing of spectroscopic portal monitors at its testbed at the nevada test site . dndo tested 10 spectroscopic portal monitors against 3 currently - fielded monitors in 7,000 test runs involving the portal monitors' ability to detect a variety of radiological materials under many different cargo configurations . according to senior dndo officials who supervised these tests , preliminary analysis of test data indicates that the spectroscopic portal monitors' performance demonstrated somewhat mixed results . spectroscopic portal monitors outperformed currently - fielded equipment in detecting numerous small , medium - sized , and threat - like radioactive objects , and were able to identify and dismiss most naturally occurring radioactive material . however , as the amount of source material declined in size , the detection capabilities of both types of portal monitors converged . because the data produced by the test runs is voluminous and complex , nist and another contractor are still in the process of analyzing the test data and plan to produce a report summarizing the results of the testing in 2006 . dndo received responses to the advanced spectroscopic portal request for proposal in february 2006 , and intends to use the data from the nevada test site to help evaluate these responses . in fiscal year 2006 , dndo also intends to award contracts to two or three manufacturers for further engineering development and production . the second new technology is “high - z detection,” which is designed to better detect high atomic number ( high - z ) materials — such as special nuclear material ( snm ) — and shielding materials — such as lead — that could be used to shield gamma radiation from portal monitors . the cargo advanced automated radiography system ( caars ) program within dndo is intended to develop the technologies necessary for automated detection of high - z material . dndo envisions using the advanced portal monitor technology for the detection of lightly shielded nuclear threats and radiological dispersal devices , and using caars technology for the detection of high - z materials . the third new technology is “active interrogation,” which is designed to better detect nuclear material , especially shielded sources , and dndo expects it to play a role further in the future than advanced portal monitors and caars . dhs and doe are supporting research at doe national laboratories , such as los alamos and lawrence livermore , to develop these systems . active interrogation systems probe or “interrogate” containers with neutron or gamma rays to induce additional radiation emissions from radioactive material within the container .