consolidation of amp operations and facilities . as shown in table 1 , usps has continued to initiate , review , and make decisions on amp proposals to consolidate its operations and facilities . on the basis of our analysis of 32 amp proposals that were implemented , approved , or not approved since october 2008 , usps has followed the key steps in the amp process . ( see app . i for a list of the amp proposals we reviewed. ) reorganization of bmc functions into ndc network . usps has reorganized the functions of its 21 bmcs into an ndc network with expanded functions that more efficiently use long - haul transportation and better align work hours with workload , according to the 2009 updated network plan . before the reorganization , all bmcs performed the same functions of processing local , destinating , and originating mail ( eg , standard mail® , periodicals , and package services ) . in fiscal year 2009 , usps reorganized the bmc network , including renaming the facilities as ndc , to reflect the type of operations that are occurring at the facilities , according to usps officials . the ndc network is divided into three tiers of facilities with different distribution and processing roles: tier 1 ndc facilities process local and destinating mail ; tier 2 facilities process local , destinating , and originating mail ; and tier 3 facilities handle tier 2 functions and consolidate less - than - truckload volumes of mail from tier 2 facilities . as a result of the reorganization , usps reduced the number of facilities processing originating mail from 21 to 10 ; the remaining 11 facilities continue to process local and destinating mail . according to officials , usps completed the reorganization of the bmc functions to ndc in march 2010 and plans to further integrate other mail processing operations to ndc . usps realized a cost savings of about $17.7 million for fiscal year 2009 , with a projected cost savings of about $233.8 million from additional reorganization in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 . according to officials , usps also plans to integrate its surface transfer center ( stc ) functions into the ndc network to further eliminate redundancy and move all mail traveling the same route through the same facilities . usps officials told us they are currently identifying and assessing opportunities for consolidating stc functions into the ndc network ; however , usps has not established a definitive timeline as to when the functions of the stc are to be integrated into the ndc network because such integration depends on future mail volumes , space requirements and space availability , and necessary equipment . amp proposals are intended to reduce costs and increase efficiency by making better use of excess capacity or underused resources , primarily at usps's p&dc facilities ; the amp proposals consist of consolidating all originating , destinating , or both types of operations , from one mail processing facility that downsizes its mail processing operations to other facilities nearby that gains the processing operations . while local and regional usps management is responsible for conducting a feasibility study and developing an amp proposal , usps headquarters approves or disapproves the amp proposal .