this concludes our testimony . we are pleased to answer any questions you might have . for further information on this testimony , please contact mark goldstein at 202-512-2834 or by email at goldsteinm@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include daniel cain , tammy conquest , colin fallon , katie hamer , daniel hoy , and susan michal - smith . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the measures have been eliminated in fiscal year 2008 . in addition , according to fps , these measures will not be necessary in fiscal year 2009 because the basic security fee was increased and staffing has decreased . fps's basic security fee does not account for risk and raises questions about equity fps's primary means of funding its operations is the fee it charges tenant agencies for basic security services , as shown in figure 4 . some of the basic security services covered by this fee include law enforcement activities at gsa facilities , preliminary investigations , the capture and detention of suspects , and bsas , among other services . the basic security fee does not include contract guard services . however , this fee does not fully account for the risk faced by particular buildings or the varying levels of basic security services provided , and does not reflect the actual cost of providing services . the fbi did not realize it was missing until three days later . only after the fbi started making inquiries did the guards report the theft to fps and the fbi . during another incident , fps officials reported contract guards — who were armed — taking no action as a shirtless suspect wearing handcuffs on one arm ran through the lobby of a major federal building while being chased by an fps inspector . in addition , one official reported that during an off - hours alarm call to a federal building , the official arrived to find the front guard post empty while the guard's loaded firearm was left unattended in the unlocked post . we also personally witnessed an incident in which an individual attempted to enter a level iv facility with illegal weapons . according to fps policies , contract guards are required to confiscate illegal weapons , detain and question the individual , and to notify fps . in this instance , the weapons were not confiscated , the individual was not detained or questioned , fps was not notified , and the individual was allowed to leave with the weapons . we will shortly begin a comprehensive review of fps's contract guard program for this subcommittee and other congressional committees . building security assessments , which are completed by both inspectors and physical security specialists , are the core component of fps's physical security mission . however , ensuring the quality and timeliness of them is an area in which fps continues to face challenges . the majority of inspectors in the seven regions we visited stated that they are not provided sufficient time to complete bsas .