we have incorporated this information into the report . in its written comments , hhs agreed with our seventh recommendation that it consider including in niosh's research agenda a proposal for examining the extent of peracetic acid's use in combination with other chemicals in meat and poultry plants , and any safety and health hazards these combinations may pose to workers . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the comments of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of labor , agriculture , and health and human services ; and the administrator of epa . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownbarnesc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . this report ( 1 ) describes the efforts the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) in the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) has made to help ensure meat and poultry workers' safety and health , and assesses what , if any , challenges osha faces in carrying out these efforts ; ( 2 ) examines how osha and the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) have collaborated to help ensure meat and poultry worker safety and health ; and ( 3 ) assesses any factors that may affect osha and fsis efforts to protect meat and poultry workers from chemical hazards . the estimated total employment for the animal slaughtering and processing industry in this report is an annual average calculated from household data collected by the current population survey ( cps ) in 2016 . the cps is a probability sample and estimates derived from its data have sampling errors associated with them . we followed the dol bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) technical guidance for estimating the standard error of annual average totals from cps data . we express our confidence in the precision of our estimate as a 95 percent confidence interval . this is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the cps samples that the u.s. census bureau could have drawn . to describe injury and illness rates in the meat and poultry industry , we analyzed and reported survey data from the bls survey of occupational injuries and illnesses ( soii ) for calendar years 2004 through 2015 ( the most recent year for which data were available ) .