subsidies . through interviews , two licensees and two experts said that using subsidies would be a more effective way to help promote service to rural areas . one example of a subsidy is the universal service fund , in which fcc establishes programmatic goals and distributes a subsidy to assist in efforts to increase nationwide access to advanced wireless services . two experts said that the buildout requirements are vague and represent a crude and untargeted approach to addressing a specific goal like promoting services to underserved and unserved areas in rural locations . for example , one expert said that while a specially designed buildout requirement may be effective in prompting a licensee to provide service to rural areas , using a subsidy to procure an entity that is willing to provide service would be a more direct and effective way to meet the goal . one licensee said that buildout requirements have a limited ability to promote service to rural areas since it is often not economical for a licensee to build a system in areas that are sparsely populated ; in these cases , subsidies can better encourage licensees to serve these areas . spectrum usage fees . a few licensees we interviewed said spectrum usage fees may be a good alternative to buildout requirements to help prevent spectrum warehousing , particularly for licenses not obtained through auctions . usage fees could help encourage licensees to use spectrum more efficiently or pursue sharing opportunities once they bear the opportunity cost of letting licensed spectrum sit idle . for example , one licensee said that if spectrum is made available for free , a licensee may have less incentive to put it to use or use it efficiently compared to a licensee that bought its spectrum at auction . for this reason , a few licensees noted that when fcc began using auctions to assign spectrum , there was a debate about whether buildout requirements were needed for auctioned licenses since those who paid to acquire spectrum have demonstrated their commitment to use the spectrum by paying for it . we provided a draft of this report to fcc for review and comment . fcc provided technical comments that we incorporated throughout the report as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the chairman of the federal communications commission and the appropriate congressional commitees . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . this report examines federal communications commission ( fcc ) buildout requirements for wireless services and the efficient use of spectrum .