while bsee has documented its policies , they are not clear . interior neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendations . the findings of our february 2016 report served as the basis for the inclusion of the restructuring of offshore oil and gas oversight in our february 2017 expansion of our high - risk list . simultaneous to our assessment of bsee's organizational restructuring , bureau leadership was developing its fiscal year 2016- 2019 strategic plan , which identifies key initiatives to improve bsee's safety and environmental oversight as well as its internal management . in this context , my testimony today discusses the findings from our report being issued today on bsee's leadership efforts in implementing key strategic initiatives to improve its ( 1 ) safety and environmental oversight and ( 2 ) internal management . to conduct our work , we reviewed bsee strategic planning and budget justification documentation as well as interviewed bsee leadership to identify key bureau strategic initiatives . for each initiative , we collected and analyzed bsee documentation of its purpose and history — including budget justifications , project plans , and contracts , among others — to determine its objectives , time frames , and status . we also interviewed bsee officials at headquarters responsible for bureau and program leadership as well as officials in the regional and district offices responsible for implementing bsee oversight activities . the report includes a detailed explanation of the scope and methodology we used to conduct our work . we conducted the work on which this testimony is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we found that bsee leadership has started several initiatives to improve its safety and environmental oversight capabilities , but its limited efforts to obtain and incorporate input from within the bureau have hindered its progress . since 2012 , bsee has sought to augment its annual inspection program with a risk - based inspection program , but limited efforts to obtain and incorporate input from experienced regional personnel have hindered bsee's ability to develop and implement the risk - based program . the two efforts were also fragmented because bsee leadership did not effectively coordinate their execution , which hindered information sharing between them that could have enhanced their value . moreover , because the efforts were uncoordinated , they resulted in the inefficient use of resources . in our report being released today , we recommended that the secretary of the interior direct the assistant secretary for land and minerals management , who oversees bsee , to establish a mechanism for bsee management to obtain and incorporate input from bureau personnel and any external parties , such as argonne national laboratory , that can affect the bureau's ability to achieve its objectives . in its written response to our report , interior neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendation .