technical activities . to date , epa has not requested authority to create a new position of deputy administrator for science and technology and continues to operate its laboratories under the direction of 15 different senior officials using 15 different organizational and management structures . as a result , epa has a limited ability to know if scientific activities are being unintentionally duplicated among the laboratories or if opportunities exist to collaborate and share scientific expertise , equipment , and facilities across epa's organizational boundaries . on the basis of our analysis of epa's facility master planning process , we found that epa manages its laboratory facilities on a site - by - site basis and does not evaluate each site in the context of all the agency's real property holdings — as recommended by the national research council report in 2004 . epa's facility master plans are intended to be the basis for justifying its building and facilities spending , which was $29.9 million in fiscal year 2010 , and allocating those funds to specific repair and improvement projects . master plans should contain , among other things , information on mission capabilities , use of space , and condition of individual laboratory sites . in addition , we found that most facility master plans were out of date . epa's real property asset management plan states that facility master plans are supposed to be updated every 5 years to reflect changes in facility condition and mission , but we found that 11 of 20 master plans were out of date and 2 of 20 had not been created yet . because epa makes capital improvement decisions on a site - by - site basis using master plans that are often outdated , it cannot be assured it is allocating its funds most appropriately . according to officials responsible for allocating capital improvement resources , they try to spread these funds across the agency's offices and regions equitably but capital improvement funds have not kept pace with requests . the pressure and need to effectively share and allocate limited resources among epa's many laboratories were also noted in a 1994 national academy of public administration report on epa's laboratory infrastructure , which found that epa has “too many labs in too many locations often without sufficient resources to sustain a coherent stable program.” in addition , because decisions regarding laboratory facilities are made independently of one another , opportunities to improve operating efficiencies can be lost . specifically , we found cases where laboratories that were previously colocated moved into separate space without considering the potential benefits of remaining colocated . in one case , we found that the relocation increased some operating costs because the laboratories then had two facility managers and two security contracts and associated personnel because of different requirements for the leased facility . in another case , when two laboratories that were previously colocated moved into separate new leased laboratories several miles apart , agency officials said that they did not know to what extent this move may have resulted in increased operating cost . epa also does not have sufficiently complete and reliable data to make informed decisions for managing its facilities .