doe has implemented both recommendations . in this context , you asked us to update information on the megaports initiative since our 2005 report . accordingly , we examined ( 1 ) the status of the megaports initiative and nnsa's plans for completing and sustaining it and ( 2 ) the benefits of the initiative and factors , if any , that reduce its effectiveness . for both objectives , we obtained and analyzed relevant nnsa documentation , including program plans and implementation strategies , memorandums of understanding , and cost - sharing arrangements between nnsa and partner countries , as well as sustainability plans . for example , the flow of commerce may be affected when a truck is diverted from its normal route to a secondary inspection area or because of the time that it takes to conduct a secondary inspection . as a result , nnsa trains partner countries to set priorities for selecting containers for secondary inspection by assessing a container's shipping information , including , among other things , the commodity being shipped , the shipper , and the country of origin and destination . in contrast , at u.s. ports of entry , 100 percent of containers that produce an initial alarm must be verified with more precise secondary scanning equipment , according to dhs guidance . dhs officials , who manage the domestic radiation detection program , told us that secondary scanning is important to reduce the risk that containers may be masking or shielding nuclear material . in addition , the megaports initiative 2011 program plan states that , although rpms are the most sensitive radiation detection technology deployed by the megaports initiative , they do not have the ability to unambiguously characterize the location , distribution , and identity of a radiation source in a container that triggers an alarm . the program plan also states that this type of information is determined by a secondary inspection . furthermore , a senior official for a global terminal operator told us that it is “very easy” for exporters to lie about the contents of a shipping container . according to this official , smugglers could also place materials into a container after it leaves an exporter's facilities , and the container's shipping information would still appear to be legitimate . some partner countries are not fully participating in the megaports initiative , which raises questions about their long - term commitment to the initiative and may compromise the security gains expected . for example , panamanian customs officials — who expressed support for the initiative — told us that the four megaports in panama currently scan less than 1 percent of their container traffic , but terminal operators at two megaports in panama stated that they are not willing to conduct additional scanning because they do not believe there are economic benefits to participating in the initiative . panamanian customs officials told us that about 85 percent of containers passing through the panama canal are transshipped containers . according to the initiative's program plan , it is difficult to scan transshipped containers because of space and operational constraints .