f . leder nd ff primrie re “cable” annotte totl ner of pge ttched to thi report . see supplementl intrction for required ctegorie . a level 1 nit iable of plnning , execting , nd susining conterinsurgency opertion . a level 2 nit iable of plnning , execting , nd susining conterinsurgency opertion with isf or colition support . a level nit irtilly cable of condcting conterinsurgency opertion in conjnction with colition nit . a level 4 nit i forming nd / or incable of condcting conterinsurgency opertion . this unit is currently assessed at level and will be ready to assume ial in _____ months . hsc is assessed at level _____________ overall . unclassified this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . embassy baghdad campaign plan . in our classified briefings to members and staff , we have discussed the campaign plan and conditions for drawing down u.s. forces . details of the plans are classified and can be discussed separately from this unclassified statement . the current version of mnf - i's security transition plan includes the following four phases . according to state and dod officials , mnf - i and the u.s. embassy baghdad are in the process of revising their april 2006 joint campaign plan , which includes the current security transition plan . partnership: during the first phase , which occurred from 2005 through 2006 , mnf - i expanded the use of military , police , and other transition teams to assist in the development of iraqi security forces and ministries . its major subordinate commands established partnerships with iraqi military units . iraqi army lead: in the second phase , currently ongoing , mnf - i is attempting to organize and develop iraqi army units so that they can assume the lead for counterinsurgency operations . units in the lead , however , still require mnf - i support because they need to develop additional capabilities , particularly in the logistics and combat support areas . provincial iraqi control: for the third phase , mnf - i and the iraqi government determine when the iraqi provinces can assume responsibility for security based on the threat level in the province , the capabilities of the iraqi security forces and the provincial government , and mnf - i's ability to respond to major threats , if needed . according to an mnf - i official , as these conditions are met , mnf - i forces will then move out of all urban areas and assume a supporting role . iraqi security self - reliance: the government of iraq is capable of planning , conducting , and sustaining security operations and forces through its security ministries . dod has asked for an additional $5.8 billion to develop the iraqi security forces in its fiscal year 2007 supplemental request and the fiscal year 2008 global war on terror budget request ( see table 1 ) .