dod . dod's comprehensive review documents generally documented each of the five elements in detail . seven of the nine dod comprehensive reviews contained supporting evidence on all five far elements , including a rationale for their determinations relating to each element . for example , regarding the far element to examine alternative sources , the nsec comprehensive review described the relative merits of using dod personnel , for - profit contractors , and other nonprofit contractors to complete the work currently done by nsec . the other two reviews were partially documented , including limited supporting evidence regarding the efficiency and effectiveness of the ffrdc . one of these reviews also included limited supporting evidence related to the cost - effectiveness of the ffrdc and no documentation or discussion related to compliance of the sponsoring agreement with the far requirements . nsf . the comprehensive review for nsf's science and technology policy institute — according to nsf officials , the only one of nsf's ffrdcs subject to the far requirement for a comprehensive review — included all five far elements and provided detailed information regarding the sponsor's needs and the efficiency and effectiveness of the ffrdc and a limited discussion on alternative sources and the ffrdc's cost - effectiveness . doe and dod officials have developed guidance on how to conduct comprehensive reviews , and nsf officials stated that the far informs their reviews of nsf - sponsored ffrdcs . doe's guidance calls for a review of the use and need for continued operation as an ffrdc in accordance with the far , without additional elaboration on these far requirements . this guidance states that the comprehensive review should be completed as part of the agency's process for deciding if it will extend or compete an ffrdc contract when the current contract's term has ended . this guidance also calls for the preparation of an alternatives package 24 months before the ffrdc's contract expires , consisting of an action memo for the secretary to approve and other documentation , for example a discussion of the incumbent ffrdc contractor's performance history , including technical , administrative , and cost performance . doe officials stated that ffrdc reviews are required every 5 years in accordance with the far requirements , regardless of award provisions and competitions for the ffrdc contract . dod has issued guidance on how to conduct comprehensive reviews in the form of a memorandum to dod offices and divisions on the management of ffrdcs . dod's guidance was issued to clarify the far requirements , assist dod officials with the oversight and management of the ffrdcs they sponsor , and ensure consistency across the department . it includes references to certain far elements relating to the execution of comprehensive reviews and adds additional requirements for dod sponsors . among other things , the guidance assigns responsibilities to the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics to establish and promulgate ffrdc procedures ; allocate the number of staff years and funding within the annual ceiling set by congress for all dod - sponsored ffrdcs ; and review and approve all comprehensive reviews for ffrdcs prior to a contract renewal decision .