medicare covers a variety of services . part a services include inpatient hospital , skilled nursing facilities ( snf ) , certain home health , and hospice care , while part b services include physician and outpatient hospital services , diagnostic tests , mental health services , and outpatient physical and occupational therapy , including speech - language therapy , ambulance and other medical services and supplies . conducting a sufficient number of these comparisons is important because of concerns that some state agencies may miss significant problems , but hcfa lacked sufficient staff and resources to perform these checks . in addition , limited resources affected hcfa's ability to oversee medicare contractors . in fiscal year 2001 , the agency requested and received funding for 100 additional positions to focus on key activities such as overseeing claims processing activities , monitoring payments to providers and suppliers , and using computer - based auditing techniques . resource issues have also affected hcfa's ability to make capital investments in its information systems for managing medicare . for example , partly because resources were funneled to y2k and other high - priority activities , hcfa has had to postpone much - needed it enhancements that could help the agency and its contractors conduct medicare program monitoring and policy development activities more efficiently . resource limitations have delayed hcfa from developing a database using modern technology that could help the agency monitor health care quality and the appropriateness of provider payments . some of medicare's vital information systems are decades old and operate on software no longer commonly used . a list of related products is included in this report . cms ( formerly hcfa ) , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for administering much of the federal government's multibillion dollar investment in health care — including the medicare program . medicare is a health insurance program for people aged 65 years and older , some disabled people under 65 years of age , and people with end - stage renal disease — which is permanent kidney failure treated with dialysis or a transplant . each year , medicare serves about 40 million elderly and disabled americans and processes about 900 million claims submitted by nearly 1 million hospitals , physicians , and other health care providers . in fiscal year 2000 , the program spent over $200 billion — about 11 percent of the federal budget . the medicare program has two components — the traditional fee - for - service program and medicare+choice — its managed care option . most medicare beneficiaries participate in the traditional program and receive their health care on a fee - for - service basis , in which providers are reimbursed for each covered service they deliver . cms contracts with about 50 insurance companies to process and pay these claims . the other principal component — medicare+choice — covers about 14 percent of beneficiaries who have enrolled in about 180 prepaid health plans that contract with the government to receive monthly payments in exchange for providing needed medicare services for enrollees . as the agency that administers medicare , cms performs a wide array of management activities .