reconciliation process . before transfers are finalized , fhwa and fta follow procedures to ensure the correct amounts are transferred . the fhwa office of budget reconciles transfer requests with a report generated by fmis that documents the amounts and the program codes to be transferred , then provides this and other supporting information to the fta office of budget . we assessed the reliability of the data and found it was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . these data included information about the funds transferred to fta for project administration , funds remaining at fhwa for use on transit projects , the overall federal - aid highway program apportionments , and apportionments for the cmaq and stp programs . we obtained information from fta's grants management system , called the transportation electronic award management ( team ) system , regarding the amount of stp and cmaq funds transferred to fta for project administration . these data were provided on an annual basis , from fiscal years 1992 through 2006 , allowing us to calculate the amounts transferred by year and the annual averages for each transportation authorization bill . additional information was provided about the population of jurisdictions using these funds ; the purpose for which funds were spent , such as vehicle purchases , busways , rail lines , or new service ; and the proportion of fta funding in each state that came from flexed funds . to identify transit spending remaining under fhwa administration , we requested that fhwa provide data from the fiscal management information system ( fmis ) — its project - tracking information system — for projects that state officials had coded as being transit related . we used additional documentation provided by fhwa officials to determine the source of federal funding ( i.e. , the appropriation bill ) and information about spending by individual urbanized areas for the fhwa - administered transit projects . using these data , we calculated the total amount of flexible funding spent on transit - related projects administered by fhwa during istea , tea - 21 , and safetea - lu . we did not independently verify that all projects that states coded as having a transit component in fmis in fact had a transit component . we also analyzed fhwa's spending for transit projects by the population of the area implementing the project . in order to determine the total amount of flexible funding used on transit projects since 1992 , we analyzed funding for transit projects administered by fhwa and funding transferred to fta for project administration . we also compared the unadjusted total amounts with the overall federal - aid highway apportionments for fiscal years 1992 through 2006 to calculate the proportion of highway funding spent for transit projects during this period . to calculate the proportion of flexible funding spent on transit projects under fta administration , we compared annual apportionment amounts for the programs to the amount transferred . comparisons were done both on the national level and by state . we also used information from our case - study interviews ( see below ) to provide context for differences in the use of flexible funding among states and to identify examples of types of projects commonly using these funds .