may work . sales - leaseback schemes: an ftc official , state officials from three of our five case - study states , and two recent nonprofit studies also cited another type of foreclosure rescue scheme . the names used to describe the schemes vary , and the methods vary as well . federal agencies and nonprofit sources explain that these schemes generally involve someone convincing a homeowner at risk of foreclosure to transfer the deed of their home to them as a means of saving the home from foreclosure . the person then has control of the property and can make money by either taking out a second loan on the home or selling the home . according to these sources , the original homeowner is permitted to lease the home from the person engaging in the scheme and told that he or she may buy the property back in the future . however , the person engaging in the scheme may have no intention of selling the property back to the original homeowner and may make the terms of the buy - back agreement too difficult for the original owner to comply with , thereby resulting in the homeowner losing the property . ftc and state officials believe that these schemes were more predominant before the decline in housing prices because higher housing prices provided more equity for persons engaging in the scheme to take from a homeowner , and the loans needed to refinance the homes were more readily available . information provided by federal and state officials indicates that newer schemes have been emerging . for example , a march 2010 ftc consumer alert warned consumers to watch out for a forensic mortgage loan audit scam , which it explained as a “new twist on foreclosure rescue fraud.” in this scheme , someone charges a fee to conduct an “audit” intended to find regulatory violations in the mortgage loan origination in order to allow the homeowner to use the “audit” results to avoid foreclosure , accelerate the loan modification process , reduce the loan principal , or even cancel the loan . according to the ftc consumer alert , there is no evidence that forensic mortgage loan audits will help borrowers obtain a loan modification or any other foreclosure relief , even if the audits are conducted by a licensed , legitimate , and trained auditor ; mortgage professional ; or lawyer . similarly , in may 2010 , based on information provided in suspicious activity reports ( sar ) , fincen described variations of advance - fee scams in which a person promises to eliminate a homeowner's mortgage or other debt on the premise that the debts were illegal or the government would assume responsibility . federal and state officials and representatives of nonprofit organizations told us that persons who have conducted foreclosure rescue schemes include former mortgage industry professionals who had been involved in the subprime market ; career scam - artists ; and licensed professionals , such as attorneys who allow their names or licenses to be used by those perpetrating schemes to add credibility to their promises to provide relief .