pub . 91-173 , § 202 ( b ) , 83 stat . the 1977 mine act did not change the 2.0 mg / m . 45 fed . reg . to what extent did msha use recent cwp trend data as a basis for its proposed exposure limit on coal mine dust ? what are experts' views on ways to lower the level of dust in coal mines , including their associated advantages , disadvantages , and cost ? any additional recent studies on the prevalence of coal worker respiratory diseases and reviewed additional information on the strengths and limitations of cwp trend data . to gather experts' views on the options that exist to lower the level of dust in coal mines and their associated advantages , disadvantages , and cost , we worked with the national academies to convene a group of experts that included mine operators , equipment manufacturers , researchers , and other stakeholders . for more details on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2013 to april 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . inhaling excessive amounts of coal mine dust can cause cwp and other debilitating lung diseases , including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , which encompasses chronic bronchitis and emphysema . according to niosh , it usually takes about 10 to 15 years of exposure to coal mine dust to develop cwp , although cases involving fewer years of exposure have been observed . once contracted , cwp cannot be cured , making it critical to prevent the development of this disease by limiting miners' exposure to coal mine dust . msha is responsible for protecting miners by enforcing the provisions of the federal mine safety and health act of 1977 ( mine act ) , as amended . under this law , msha has a number of responsibilities , including setting new safety and health standards and revising existing standards , approving training programs for mine workers , and developing regulations regarding training requirements for rescue teams , among other things . msha also conducts periodic inspections of coal mines and , along with coal mine operators , periodically collects samples of coal mine dust to determine compliance with the exposure limit . msha set the current exposure limit for coal mine dust at 2.0 mg / m . this limit applies to the overall level of dust in the mine environment ; specifically , it provides that each mine operator “shall continuously maintain the average concentration of respirable dust in the mine atmosphere during each shift to which each miner in the active workings of each mine is exposed” at or below that level . to measure the level of dust in the mine environment , msha requires that mine operators collect samples of dust in specific areas of the mine and for designated occupations .