this brought the estimate closer to available funding . one example of cost reduction involves the air force in europe , which told us that its cost estimate had fallen by about $6 million as a result of savings achieved from consolidating u - 2 aircraft operations and closing san vito air base in italy . in fiscal year 2002 , funds for southwest asia operations were also appropriated directly into the military services' accounts as part of their base programs , and traditionally any shortfall in funding would have to be absorbed by the services . the bulk of the costs have been incurred in combating terrorism . in the balkans , the united states was first engaged in bosnia and then in the yugoslavian province of kosovo . u.s. involvement in bosnia began in july 1992 as part of humanitarian relief efforts . then , in april 1993 , the united states began to participate in nato's enforcement of a no - fly zone over bosnia and herzegovina in support of united nations peacekeeping . the army in europe was directed by the u.s. european command to reduce troop levels in the balkans to levels slightly below those envisioned by our pro rata estimate of the u.s. share of the nato - directed reduction . however , on the basis of july 2002 information that we were provided with , the reduction does not appear to have lowered anticipated costs . as shown in table 2 , the overall reduction totals 1,160 troops ( from 7,300 to 6,140 troops ) and is to take place between september and november 2002 . it also includes a reduction in heavy equipment , such as tanks , bradley fighting vehicles , and helicopters . the army in europe's budget estimate for its balkan operations is $1.251 billion in fiscal year 2003 and is based on the reduced troop level . the decision to reduce force levels was made after submission of the president's budget for the fiscal year 2003 appropriation for dod . the budget estimate for fiscal year 2003 is slightly higher than the army in europe's july 2002 estimate of its fiscal year 2002 costs . however , the cost estimate for fiscal year 2002 is based on higher troop levels . in december 1995 , the united states deployed military personnel in and around bosnia to assist in implementing the general framework agreement ( also known as the “dayton agreement” ) . since then , the number of u.s. military personnel stationed in bosnia has steadily declined from about 18,000 troops in february 1996 to about 2,500 troops in july 2002 . in march 1999 , the united states provided military forces in support of nato's combat operations against yugoslavia following the failure of peace talks and escalating violence against ethnic albanians in kosovo . combat operations officially ended on june 20 , 1999 . with yugoslavia's acceptance of a peace plan and the united nations' endorsement of a plan , the united states began providing troops for the nato - led kosovo force , whose mission is peace enforcement in kosovo . the united states is currently providing 5,000 troops as part of the nato force .