omb no . 2502-0524 ( expires 2 / 28 / 2011 ) provision of this information is required to obtain benefits . hud may not collect this information , and you are not required to complete this form , unless the form has a currently valid omb control number . privacy act notice: the united states department of housing and urban development , federal housing administration , is authorized to solicit the information requested in the form by virtue of title 12 , united states code , section 1701 et seq. , and regulations promulgated at title 12 , code of federal regulations . while no assurance of confidentiality is pledged to respondents , hud generally discloses this data only in response to a freedom of information act request . the u. s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) requires that homeowner ( s ) interested in pursuing a home equity conversion mortgage ( hecm ) receive information about the implications of and alternatives to a reverse mortgage . the hecm counselor must adhere to all of fha's guidelines regarding information that must be provided to the potential hecm mortgagor and must tailor the session to address the unique financial circumstances of the household being counseled . counselor certification: in accordance with section 255 of the national housing act and 24cfr 206.41 , i have discussed in detail the following items with the above referenced homeowner ( s ) 1 . options other than a home equity conversion mortgage that are available to the homeowner ( s ) , including other housing , social service , health and financial options . other home equity conversion options that are or may become available to the homeowner ( s ) , such as other reverse mortgages , sale - leaseback financing , deferred payment loans , and property tax deferral . the financial implications of entering into a home equity conversion mortgage . a disclosure that a home equity conversion mortgage may have tax consequences , affect eligibility for assistance under federal and state programs , and have an impact on the estate and heirs of the homeowner ( s ) . whether the homeowner has signed a contract or agreement with an estate planning service firm that requires , or purports to require , the mortgagor to pay a fee on or after closing that may exceed amounts permitted by the secretary or in part 206 of the hud regulations at 24 cfr . if such a contract has been signed , the extent to which services under the contract may not be needed or may be available at nominal or no cost from other sources , including the mortgagee . the home equity conversion mortgage will be due and payable when no remaining borrower lives in the mortgaged property , or when any other covenants of the mortgage have been violated . ( borrowers are those parties who have signed the note and mortgage or deed of trust. ) i hereby certify that the homeowner ( s ) listed above have received counseling according to the requirements of this certificate and the standards of the u.s. department of housing and urban development , as described in mortgagee letters , handbooks , regulations , and statute .