gao - 07-574t . washington , d.c.: april 12 , 2007 . the 2010 luca program is now under way . the bureau also provided some technical comments and suggestions where additional context might be needed , and we revised the report to reflect these comments as appropriate . the bureau's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and members , the secretary of commerce , and the director of the u.s. census bureau . copies will be made available to others on request . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or sciremj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to assess the current status of the u.s. census bureau's ( bureau ) local update of census addresses ( luca ) program , we requested and obtained source documents from the bureau's headquarters in suitland , maryland , and the bureau's web site regarding the updated timelines of the 2010 luca program and the luca dress rehearsal . we also visited the bureau's regional office in charlotte , north carolina ; conducted a phone interview with the bureau's regional office in seattle , washington ; and obtained documents , including the bureau's timeline for headquarters and regional office activities associated with the 2010 census luca program . additionally , we analyzed the data to determine if the bureau's actual timelines met the planned timelines for the luca dress rehearsal and the 2010 luca program . additionally , we interviewed officials from the bureau headquarters in suitland , maryland , to determine the extent to which activities associated with the 2010 luca program and luca dress rehearsal ( held june through october 2006 ) met their timelines . we also visited and obtained documentation from localities associated with the luca dress rehearsal in california and north carolina . to assess how the bureau is addressing prior issues and new challenges associated with implementing the luca program , we performed a review of publications created by gao and other entities ( i.e. , the national research council , the department of commerce's office of the inspector general , and anteon corporation ) regarding the luca program to ascertain critiques of the program and recommendations for improving the program for the 2010 census . we also obtained source documents and interviewed officials from the bureau's headquarters in suitland , maryland , to determine how the bureau addressed prior issues and new challenges related to the luca program and what modifications the bureau has made to the 2010 luca program . to determine how the 2010 luca program is being implemented , we undertook fieldwork in 12 localities ( in california and north carolina ) that were eligible to participate in the luca dress rehearsal , which was held from june through october 2006 .