gao - 11-509t . washington , d.c.: april 6 , 2011 . this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions you may have . for further information on this testimony please contact george a. scott , director , education , workforce , and income security , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-7215 , or scottg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . this statement will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . opportunities to reduce fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication in federal teacher quality and employment and training programs . list of selected federal programs that have similar or overlapping objectives , provide similar services , or are fragmented across government missions . gao - 11-474r . washington , d.c.: march 18 , 2011 . opportunities to reduce potential duplication in government programs , save tax dollars , and enhance revenue . my testimony today draws upon the results of our recently issued report and our past work and addresses ( 1 ) what is known about fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication among teacher quality programs ; and ( 2 ) what are additional ways that congress could minimize fragmentation , overlap , and duplication among these programs ? the key points i will make today include the following: we identified 82 distinct programs designed to help improve teacher quality administered across 10 federal agencies , many of which share similar goals . however , there is no governmentwide strategy to minimize fragmentation , overlap , or potential duplication among these programs . the fragmentation and overlap of teacher quality programs can frustrate agency efforts to administer programs in a comprehensive manner , limit the ability to determine which programs are most cost effective , and ultimately increase program costs . in addition , our larger body of work on federal education programs has also found a wide array of programs with similar objectives , target populations , and services across multiple federal agencies . in past work , gao and education's inspector general have concluded that improved planning and coordination could help education better leverage expertise and limited resources ; however , given the large number of teacher quality programs and the extent of overlap , it is unlikely that improved coordination alone can fully mitigate the effects of the fragmented and overlapping federal effort . sustained congressional oversight can also play a key role in addressing these issues . congress could address these issues through legislation , particularly through the pending reauthorization of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) , and education has already proposed combining 38 programs into 11 programs in its reauthorization and fiscal year 2012 budget proposals . further , actions taken by congress in the past demonstrate ways this subcommittee can address these issues . however , effective oversight may be challenging as many of the programs we identified , especially smaller programs , have not been evaluated .