table 1 . examples of fort bragg soldier pay problems injury from vehicle accident involving an ied crater . knee injury , broken leg — undiagnosed for 6 weeks . depression – sent to mrpu at fort bragg and redeployed to iraq . stroke — medically evacuated to landstuhl and transferred to walter reed and fort bragg . kidney disease in iraq , hospitalized at landstuhl , and then sent to walter reed and fort bragg . experienced heart trouble in iraq ; sent to fort bragg . contracted legionnaire's disease in africa . days elapsed equals the number of days between the date the soldier visited finance and date ineligible pay was stopped . estimated overpayments equals hostile fire and hardship duty payments made to a soldier after arrival at fort bragg mrpu . soldier #6 in the table above , an army national guard soldier , suffered a stroke on june 26 , 2004 , while serving in iraq . he was medically evacuated and arrived at fort bragg in early july 2004 . our investigation revealed that the soldier visited the fort bragg finance battalion on july 30 , 2004 , as part of his mrpu processing . despite following mrpu procedures , this soldier's hostile fire and hardship duty pay continued until november 5 , 2004 — approximately 4 months after his initial visit to the finance battalion . by this time , the soldier's overpayments had resulted in debt of $1,300 . the fort bragg finance battalion eventually collected about $972 of this amount from a single paycheck , which was about 50 percent of the soldier's disposable pay . as a result , the soldier's wife told us that she had to defer paying some of their bills , including the monthly payment on their second mortgage . case studies related to our audit of separated battle - injured soldier debt showed that several of these soldiers also had gone without a paycheck for several months while they were in army medical facilities undergoing treatment for their war injuries because debt caused by overpayments of combat pay and other errors was offset against their military pay . one soldier said he had no money for food while several soldiers told us they received assistance from family members . when these soldiers leave the army , they generally do not have jobs and many of them face continuing medical treatment for battle injuries , making it difficult to hold a job . he was contacted by a private collection agency , and the government took his 2004 tax refund to offset the debt . erroneous annual leave payment , repayment of basic training program expense . also , erroneous sgli premium billings . the soldier separated from the army in october 2004 and said he received a check for about $1,800 for unused leave 10 months later in july 2005 . he told us he received his first debt letter in november 2005 but was unable to pay his debt . pay calculation errors . soldier said she was unable to obtain a loan to purchase a house because of military debt on her credit report .