( recommendation 3 ) . cms is responsible for oversight of state medicaid programs . to conduct this oversight , cms issues program requirements in the form of regulations and guidance , approves changes states make to their programs , provides technical assistance to states , collects and reviews required information and data from states and , in some cases , reviews individual state programs . states are responsible for the day - to - day administration of their medicaid programs , including monitoring and oversight of the different hcbs programs through which they cover assisted living services , within broad federal rules and requirements . each state is required to identify and designate a single state agency to administer or supervise the administration of its medicaid program . the state medicaid agency may partially or fully delegate the administration and oversight of the state's hcbs programs to another state agency or other entity , such as a state unit on aging , a mental health department , or other state departments or agencies with jurisdiction over a specific population or service . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at iritanik@gao.gov . in technical comments , hhs indicated that after the workgroup's review is complete it will consider annual reporting of critical incidents . gao staff that made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . our survey of state medicaid agencies regarding coverage , spending , enrollment , and oversight of assisted living services in 2014 , obtained information on challenges for medicaid beneficiaries to access assisted living services in their states . states provided information related to factors that create challenges for medicaid beneficiaries' ability to access and receive assisted living services and the extent states had policies to help beneficiaries with the cost of room and board . a number of states in our survey cited common factors as creating the greatest challenges to a beneficiary's ability to access assisted living services , including the number of assisted living facilities willing to accept medicaid beneficiaries ( 13 states or 27 percent of the 48 states ) program enrollment caps ( 9 states or 19 percent of the 48 states ) beneficiaries' inability to pay for assisted living facility room and board ( 9 states or 19 percent of the 48 states ) , which medicaid typically does not cover low rates the state medicaid program paid assisted living facilities ( 8 states or 17 percent of the 48 states ) . a number of states reported that they had policies to assist medicaid beneficiaries with the costs of room and board charged by assisted living facilities , which medicaid does not typically cover . two common policies , cited by at least half of the states , were aimed at limiting how much assisted living facilities could charge medicaid beneficiaries for room and board . for example , 30 of 48 states , limited the amount facilities could charge for room and board to the amount of income certain beneficiaries receive as supplemental security income . the other commonly cited policies focused on providing financial assistance to the beneficiaries to defray the room and board costs .