some of the benefits of green buildings are difficult to quantify . for example , the respondents noted that good measures exist for energy and cost savings , but that many green projects also improve employee productivity and well - being . further , they said that some higher - priced building materials are better for the environment , which is a benefit difficult to quantify . at a time when budget constraints will be pervasive , the higher up - front costs of energy efficient designs could prove to be an especially challenging obstacle . as a result , less costly approaches that are less energy efficient could “look cheaper” in a single year's appropriation because life cycle costs — including the savings that would result from energy efficient designs — generally occur in later years . in addition to efforts to make federal facilities more energy efficient , other initiatives have attempted to reduce the nation's consumption of petroleum fuels in transportation through the use of alternative fuels in the federal vehicle fleet . in particular , epact set broad goals for replacing the transportation sector's use of petroleum fuels by at least 10 percent by the year 2000 and at least 30 percent by the year 2010 . to help meet these goals , this act required that the federal government , as well as state governments and certain other fleet operators , purchase vehicles that run on alternative fuels , such as ethanol , methanol , natural gas , propane , and electricity , among others . further , the act specified that , in 1996 , 25 percent of the new vehicles purchased by the federal government should operate on alternative fuels , with the target percentage increasing to 33 percent in 1997 , 50 percent in 1998 , and 75 percent in 1999 and beyond . based on our assessment in 2000 , the federal government as a whole has made progress in acquiring alternative fuel vehicles , although it has not always met the act's annual targets , as shown in table 1 below . further , procurement of these vehicles has been inconsistent across federal agencies: some agencies have exceeded their purchase mandates in a year when others acquired very few or no alternative fuel vehicles . for example , in 1998 , usps acquired 10,000 ethanol alternative fuel vehicles to deliver the mail . this purchase was the major reason why the federal government collectively met the mandated acquisition target of 50 percent ( 12,362 alternative fuel vehicles ) for that year . the federal fleet's acquisition of alternative fuel vehicles has not reduced gasoline consumption as much as hoped for several reasons . for example , the act does not establish targets for use of alternative fuels — just the acquisition of vehicles that can run on them . however , some of the alternative fuel vehicles that federal agencies have purchased can also run on gasoline , and fleet officials told us individuals driving the vehicles often refuel with gasoline because it is much more convenient to find gasoline refueling stations than refueling stations that supply alternative fuels .