participation . participation in the program came from about 20 percent of the residences eligible for participation . in addition , participation was voluntary , which may suggest that the sample of apartments was not representative of all the residences eligible for the program . those who chose to participate may not have been at greatest risk . contaminants tested . epa's cleanup decisions were based only on tests for asbestos , rather than other contaminants , and the decisions focused on airborne contamination rather than contamination in dust inside residences . sampling protocol . epa took over 80 percent of the samples after professional cleaning was complete . therefore it is not surprising that epa found few samples exceeding its asbestos standard . epa also did not explain in its second program plan that its first program's test results excluded samples that were discarded because they were “not cleared” — that is , could not be analyzed because the filter had too many fibers to be analyzed under a microscope . instead , epa is implementing this program with the funding remaining after its first program — approximately $7 million . epa could not provide us with any basis for determining whether this funding level is appropriate . epa officials told us that they were unable to determine the cost of the program without knowing the number of participants . however , epa's final report on its first program stated that residences with more than one inconclusive result , such as filter overload , were encouraged to have their residences re - cleaned and re - tested . if demand had exceeded available resources , epa would have simply limited participation by ranking program applicants on the basis of their proximity to the wtc site . almost two - thirds of the panel members told us they did not believe the $7 million for the sampling and cleanup was sufficient . according to one of the expert panel's chairmen — a former epa assistant administrator — the $7 million was sufficient for initial sampling in the second program , but not for sampling and cleanup . shortcomings in epa's second program to test and clean residences for wtc contamination raise questions about the agency's preparedness for addressing indoor contamination resulting from future disasters . the effectiveness of this program may be limited because some important recommendations were not incorporated , and because program implementation will not begin until later this year — more than 5 years after the world trade center collapsed . furthermore , owing to these factors , the majority of panel members do not support epa's second program , noting that it was not responsive to the concerns of residents and workers harmed by the collapse of the wtc towers , it was scientifically and technically flawed , or it was unacceptable because it would not identify the extent of contamination . some panel members questioned the value of participating in epa's program , and even stated that they would discourage participation . madam chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have .