woody biomass can be used in many ways . small logs can be peeled and used as fence posts , or can be joined together with specialized hardware to construct pole - frame buildings . trees also can be milled into structural lumber or made into other wood products , such as furniture , flooring , and paneling . woody biomass also can be chipped for use in paper pulp production and for other uses — for example , a new mexico company combines juniper chips with plastic to create a composite material used to make road signs — and can be converted into other products such as ethanol and adhesives . finally , woody biomass can be chipped or ground for energy production in power plants and other applications . citing biomass's potential to serve as a source of electricity , fuel , chemicals , and other materials , the president and the congress have encouraged federal activities regarding biomass utilization — but until recently , woody biomass received relatively little emphasis . major congressional direction includes the biomass research and development act of 2000 , the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 , the healthy forests restoration act of 2003 , and the american jobs creation act of 2004 . utilization of woody biomass also is emphasized in the federal government's national fire plan , a strategy for planning and implementing agency activities related to wildland fire management . the forest service also has created a grant program in response to a provision in the consolidated appropriations act for fiscal year 2005 , which authorized up to $5 million for grants to create incentives for increased use of biomass from national forest lands . two other usda agencies — the cooperative state research , education and extension service ( csrees ) and usda rural development — maintain programs that could include woody biomass utilization activities . csrees oversees the biobased products and bioenergy production research grant program and the mcintyre - stennis grant program , which provides grants to states for research into forestry issues under the mcintyre - stennis act of 1962 . within usda rural development , the rural business - cooperative service oversees a grant program emphasizing renewable energy systems and energy efficiency among rural small businesses , farmers , and ranchers , and the rural utilities service maintains a loan program for renewable energy projects . forest service researchers are conducting research into a variety of woody biomass issues . researchers have conducted assessments of the woody biomass potentially available through land management projects and have developed models of the costs and revenues associated with thinning projects . researchers also are studying the economics of woody biomass use in other ways ; one researcher , for example , is beginning an assessment of the economic , environmental , and energy - related impacts of using woody biomass for power generation . the forest service also conducts extensive research , primarily at its forest products laboratory , into uses for woody biomass , including wood - plastic composites and water filtration systems that use woody biomass fibers , as well as less expensive ways of converting woody biomass to liquid fuels .