other logcap sites in kuwait . u.s. army corps of engineers — trans atlantic program center , winchester , va. u.s. army materiel command , ft. belvoir , va. army field support command , logcap program manager , alexandria , va. army field support command , logcap procurement contracting office , rock island , ill. army materiel command , europe . work is done under each of the contracts through task orders . the task order process begins when the customer , or the unit that is requesting support from the contractor , identifies a requirement . the requirement is generally documented in the form of a task order statement of work , which establishes the specific tasks to be accomplished by the contractor and the time frames of performance . if the decision is made to use the logistics support contract to satisfy the requirement , the unit contacts the contract program management office . the program management office , in coordination with the contracting officer , determines whether the task is within the scope of the contract . the program management office obtains an approximate cost estimate from the contractor and provides the customer with the information . from this information , the customer decides if it will use the contractor to fulfill the requirement . in response to a defense contract audit agency audit of dining facility billings , the contractor analyzed selected invoices from a number of dining facilities throughout iraq for a 4-month period and found that by billing the government for the base camp population instead of the actual personnel served , it had billed the government for food service for more than 15.9 million soldiers when only 12.5 million — more than 3.4 million fewer — had passed through the dining facilities . the contractor estimated the cost of serving the additional personnel who did not use the dining facilities at approximately $88 million . the contractor and the defense contract audit agency disagree over the appropriate billing procedures for this service . the defense contract audit agency's interpretation requires billings based on actual head counts while the contractor's interpretation authorizes billings based on the number of soldiers at each base camp as established in the task order statement of work . the parties are currently discussing the issue . we believe that this disagreement could have been avoided through better contract oversight . as discussed above , daily head counts sheets were being prepared at each facility . without this information , the contractor cannot determine how to meet the needs of the army and may take excessive steps to ensure customers' satisfaction . according to logcap guidance , statements of work must be specific in detail and to the point . afcap program managers expressed frustration that air force customers lacked institutional knowledge of the contract . afcap program managers stated that they have attempted to institutionalize training for the air force's major commands but have been unsuccessful to date in convincing the commands to send representatives for training . according to the program managers , the air force's major commands are not interested in the afcap contract until its services are needed ; whereupon the program managers are required to train the command personnel .