case files should be readily available for examination . however , irs does not know whether it locates all of the paper case files it requests . in the absence of data on irs's success in retrieving paper case files , several sources of anecdotal information give some indication of the potential extent of problems in locating case files . missing case files can result in lost revenue , create unnecessary taxpayer burden , make cases unavailable for other units such as quality review groups or advisory groups , and hinder congressional oversight . paper case files are crucial for cases scheduled for tax court or district court . ccp has 21 days to obtain the closed case files for review . in a report provided by quality review staff , for the first quarter of fiscal year 2007 , ccp was able to obtain only 45 percent of the cases requested for review within the 21- day period . detailed information on our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . in keeping with the fra , irs established a records management program . the program provides for the application of management practices in the creation , maintenance , retrieval , preservation , and disposition of records . although the mission of the records management program is to document , protect , and efficiently manage all irs records until final disposition , actual day - to - day management of case files is left to each irs program . according to an irs official , program managers establish policies and procedures for the management of paper and electronic case files and have overall responsibility for case file management in their program . in addition , each program develops its own policies and procedures , which are documented in irs's internal revenue manual ( irm ) . case files can be paper , automated , or a combination of both . for example , when irs examines a tax return , the documents completed by the examiner can be automated ( electronically maintained within their system ) or paper ( placed in physical case files ) . case files may include income tax returns , audits , investigations , or claims . according to w&i and sb / se officials , in fiscal year 2006 they closed over 13 million and 9 million cases , respectively . when cases are closed , irs units perform managerial and quality reviews to ensure cases were handled correctly and the case files are complete and meet their quality standards . for example , in fiscal year 2006 , the sb / se field collection quality review group found that over 96 percent of the case files they reviewed were complete . paper case files can be stored in the files area of submission processing center ( spc ) campuses or field offices which are spread throughout the country . these case files are then transferred to federal records centers ( frc ) by filing coordinators located at the spc or by information resource coordinators in the field . once the specified retention period has expired at the frc , the case files are destroyed . the locations of submission processing centers , area records managers , and federal records centers are illustrated in figure 1 .