( app . ii lists all agencies' employment and other exit rates. ) collectively , the separate state vr agencies for the blind , which exclusively serve blind or other visually impaired individuals , achieved an employment rate of 49 percent . this compared with a collective employment rate of 32 percent among the general agencies and 35 percent among the combined agencies . a study commissioned by education found that a wide range of agency and external factors may help explain state vr agencies' varied employment rates . specifically , variables found to help facilitate higher employment rates included an agency's emphasis on employment , access to ongoing support service programs , and an agency's proportion of individuals with mental retardation , visual impairments , or existing employment at the time of application to the vr program . conversely , poor labor market conditions , particularly high unemployment rates , were reported as being among the most influential hindrances to an agency's performance . the 39 state vr agencies using an order of selection process collectively achieved a slightly lower rate of employment in fiscal year 2003 than the group of 41 agencies not using an order of selection process . specifically , the collective employment rate was 32 percent among agencies with orders and 35 percent among agencies without orders . in addition , both groups had a wide range of employment rates among individual agencies . specifically , state vr agencies' rates of employment ranged from 20 to 62 percent among agencies with orders and from 21 to 74 percent among agencies without orders . state vr agencies with orders are required to give priority acceptance to the category of applicants with “most significant” disabilities , and accept categories of applicants with “significant” and “nonsignificant” disabilities with decreasing priority . as a result , while we expected the group of agencies with orders to experience more individuals exiting during the application phase , the rate of individuals exiting during the application phase was 21 percent among agencies with orders as opposed to 19 percent among agencies without orders . moreover , agencies with orders varied in how they administered their order of selection policies . for example , agencies with orders opened and closed their priority service categories at varying points during the year , depending on their available resources and population projections , thus affecting the proportion of individuals being accepted into their programs with most significant or significant disabilities . further , agencies with orders varied in how they defined a most significant disability and how many service categories they expected to serve during a particular fiscal year . specifically , according to the state plans submitted to education by state vr agencies for fiscal year 2003 , 2 of the 39 agencies with orders expected to serve only individuals with most significant disabilities . in contrast , 11 agencies had orders of selection in place for fiscal year 2003 , which indicated they could not serve all eligible individuals , yet they expected to serve all eligible individuals who applied to their program during fiscal year 2003 . state vr agencies' proportion of individuals in each impairment category varied significantly . ( app . iii shows the proportion of individuals in each impairment category by agency. )