( app . ii identifies the detailed fiar tasks and required deliverables for each of these phases. ) most of the audit readiness process occurs in the discovery and corrective action phases . in the discovery phase , entities document their processes and identify , test , and assess their controls and evaluate and confirm the existence of documentation supporting relevant financial statement assertions . in the corrective action phase , entities develop and execute plans to address identified deficiencies and verify implementation of corrective actions . in the last three phases , a reporting entity ( 1 ) asserts its audit readiness , ( 2 ) has its assertion independently validated , and ( 3 ) employs an ipa firm to perform a financial audit . the navy asserted audit readiness but did not complete the corrective action phase or validate the assertion because of time constraints and moved directly into an audit of its schedule of budgetary activity by an ipa firm . the navy's fbwt fip provides a framework for planning , executing , and tracking essential steps with supporting documentation to achieve audit readiness for its fbwt . figure 1 shows important milestones and events in navy's fbwt fip and overall audit readiness efforts . in april 2013 , the navy asserted that its fbwt process was audit ready . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the deputy chief management officer ; the under secretary of defense ( comptroller / chief financial officer ) ; the deputy chief financial officer ; the director , financial improvement and audit readiness ; the secretary of the navy ; the assistant secretary of the navy ; the chief management officer of the navy ; the directors of the defense finance and accounting service and defense finance and accounting service , cleveland ; the director of the office of management and budget ; and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9869 or khana@gao.gov . additional information on our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from april 2014 to august 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2010 requires that dod develop and maintain the fiar plan . the fiar plan must include specific actions to take and the costs associated with correcting the financial management deficiencies that impair dod's ability to prepare reliable and timely financial management information and ensure that its financial statements are validated as ready for audit by september 30 , 2017 .