bridges are not separately reported . acknowledging difficulties in obtaining data from local agencies , fhwa recommends that states use sampling and estimation to prepare this form , such as collecting data from a selection of local governments and then expanding the sample to generate statewide totals . form 534 , state highway capital outlay and maintenance expenditures — submitted annually , it requests bridge - specific and other highway outlays . this form is designed to complement the data in form 532 by classifying the highway expenditures of states into improvement types , such as new construction and rehabilitation , among other things . as part of its oversight role , fhwa collects information from states on bridge conditions and maintains this data in its nbi database . bridges that receive low inspection ratings on specific bridge elements are classified as deficient . bridges may be classified as deficient for one of two reasons: a structurally deficient bridge has one or more structural components , such as the deck that directly carries vehicles , in poor condition . structurally deficient bridges often require maintenance and repair to remain in service . a functionally obsolete bridge has a configuration or design that may no longer be adequate for the traffic it serves , such as being too narrow or having inadequate overhead clearance . functionally obsolete bridges do not necessarily require repair to remain in service . a bridge that is both structurally deficient and functionally obsolete is listed as structurally deficient in the nbi . in this report , we assess the conditions of bridges classified as structurally deficient by both the total deck area and number of bridges . appendix i contains more detailed information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from october 2015 to september 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . federal programs for bridge construction , reconstruction , and repair are authorized in surface transportation acts . in 2012 , map - 21 consolidated a number of existing highway formula programs , including the highway bridge program ( hbp ) . bridge projects are now generally funded through the national highway performance program ( nhpp ) and the surface transportation block grant program ( stbgp ) . map - 21 included a number of statutory requirements related to transforming the surface transportation system to a performance - based approach . for instance , map - 21 directed dot to establish performance measures related to highway safety , asset condition , and highway system performance , among other things . in some cases , map - 21 required dot to use the rulemaking process to implement performance - based requirements . in 2015 , the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ) , which reauthorized surface transportation programs , largely maintained current program structures , including map - 21's overall performance - management approach .