implement plan . this step is dependent on agencies developing action plans . however , opm and agencies have already started to develop staff in the absence of plans . for example , opm is working with agencies to identify program management training matching desired competencies to be placed in an online training repository that will be accessible to all agencies . opm staff told us that agencies would provide the trainings from their learning management systems and offer them for interagency access . career path . opm staff told us that they have developed a career path for program and project managers that is currently in internal review . they said that the value of the updated career path is that it will highlight training and skills needed to progress in a program management career . according to the presentation given by opm at the 2019 april pmpc meeting , the career path will contain: ( 1 ) a career progression outline for employees to move among and across jobs in program and project management , ( 2 ) help for employees and supervisors to plan and sequence appropriate career training and development for each general and technical competency , and ( 3 ) a list of common degrees and certifications completed by program and project managers , among other things . staff told us they plan to release the program and project management career path for agency comment by the end of calendar year 2019 . job identifier for program managers and project managers . because program and project managers are found in other job series outside the 0340 program management series , opm is developing a job identifier code that can be attached to any job series for the purposes of identifying program and project managers . opm staff told us that program managers classified to the 0340 series means that the position does not have a specialization . if the position requires specialized expertise , the position would be classified to a specialized occupational series but would also have a program management job identifier code . for example , since a grants managers is also a program manager , “grants manager ( program management ) ” would be his or her official title . project management positions will also use a job identifier to identify project managers in any occupational series . the job identifier will allow employees with a specialization to be designated program and project managers , while still maintaining their original career path . opm staff told us they plan to complete this project in 2020 . our analysis of opm enterprise human resources integration data shows that the 0340 job series included about 15,000 employees across all 24 cfo act agencies in fiscal year 2018 . however , opm reported that not all employees in this job series are actually program and project managers ; conversely , many program and project managers are working outside of the 0340 job series . selected agencies reported varying degrees of difficulty identifying program and project managers . for example , nasa staff reported that they were able to identify almost all their program and project managers .