labs with serious deficiencies may be sanctioned . finally , validation reviews — one of cms's most important oversight tools — do not provide an independent assessment of the extent to which surveys identify all serious deficiencies because many are performed simultaneously with such surveys . accordingly , in the report we released today , we made specific recommendations to the cms administrator to standardize survey findings across survey organizations in order to make meaningful comparisons ; strengthen survey , complaint , and enforcement processes ; and improve oversight of the clia program . in its comments on a draft of our report , cms endorsed our overall conclusion that quality assurance for the nation's clinical labs should be strengthened and said that it would take action in response to 11 of our 13 recommendations . cms provided an alternative assessment of lab quality , and disagreed with our recommendations concerning the frequency of proficiency testing and the extent of simultaneous accrediting organization validation reviews . cms also expressed concern about identifying and sanctioning labs with repeat condition level deficiencies . after considering cms's comments , we believe that implementing our recommendations is necessary to improve oversight of labs and accrediting organizations . a clinical lab is generally defined as a facility that examines specimens derived from humans for the purpose of disease diagnosis , prevention , and treatment , or health assessment of individuals . labs conduct a wide range of tests that are categorized as waived tests or as moderate - or high - complexity tests . approximately 81 percent of all labs ( about 157,000 ) are not subject to routine biennial surveys because they perform ( 1 ) “waived” tests , which are generally simple tests that have an insignificant risk of erroneous results , such as those approved for home use or ( 2 ) tests performed during the course of a patient visit with a microscope on specimens that are not easily transportable . clia establishes more stringent requirements for the 19 percent ( about 36,000 ) of labs performing moderate - or high - complexity testing , including the requirement for a survey and participation in routine proficiency testing . surveys examine lab compliance with clia program requirements in several areas including: personnel qualifications , proficiency testing , quality control , quality assurance , and recordkeeping . in general , labs have a choice of who conducts their surveys — state survey agencies using clia inspection requirements or other survey organizations that use requirements cms has determined to be at least equivalent to clia's . cms contracts with state survey agencies in most states to inspect labs against clia requirements . clia established an approval process to allow states and private accrediting organizations to use their own requirements to survey labs . cap experienced a significant increase in the number of complaints it received since october 2004 when it began requiring cap - inspected labs to display posters on how to file complaints . specifically , from october through december 2004 , cap received an average of 22 complaints per month , compared to an average of 11 complaints per month in the 9 months preceding the poster requirement . however , jcaho estimated that 33 percent of its validation reviews were conducted simultaneously .