we found shortfalls in each of these practices at vha . moreover , as shown in figure 5 , the twin challenges of weak internal controls and limited hr capacity have had a compounding effect , creating an environment that undermines vha's hr operations and impedes its ability to improve delivery of health care services to veterans . we reported that key areas for improvement include the following: strengthen oversight of hr offices . vha is structured so that the central hr offices at va and vha have inadequate oversight of medical center hr offices in order to hold them accountable . this lack of oversight contributes to issues with vha's capacity to provide hr functions and limits vha's ability to monitor hr improvement efforts and ensure that hr offices apply policies consistently . vha's hr functions are decentralized . each of vha's visns has an hr office that oversees the medical center - level hr offices within its network . in general , each va medical center has its own hr office led by an hr officer . individual hr offices are responsible for managing employee recruitment and staffing , employee benefits , compensation , employee and labor relations , and overseeing the annual employee performance appraisal process . medical center hr offices also provide hr services to employees at vha's community - based living centers , rehabilitation centers , and outpatient centers . vha's hr staff are classified as either an hr specialist , who manages , supervises , and delivers hr products and services ; or an hr assistant , who provides administrative support to hr specialists . federal standards for internal control require an agency to ensure that its workforce is competent to carry out assigned responsibilities in order to achieve the agency's mission . as part of efforts to replace paid , va is developing and implementing an enterprise - wide , modern web - based system called hr smart . va officials told us that hr smart will be implemented in phases across the department . according to agency documentation , hr smart will enable hr staff to better manage information on employee benefits and compensation ; electronically initiate , route , and receive approval for personnel actions ; monitor workforce planning efforts and vacancies by medical center and across the department ; and generate reports and queries . as va continues to develop and implement its new hr system , vha hr staff must rely on several separate enterprise - wide it systems to handle core hr activities such as managing personnel actions and hiring and recruiting efforts . hr staff with whom we spoke stated that the amount of time they spent entering duplicate data into four or more non - interoperable systems and reconciling data between the systems has made their jobs more difficult and has taken time away from performing other critical hr duties . according to va officials , once hr smart is fully implemented , it should reduce hr offices' reliance on multiple hr systems and local tools and help to streamline hr processes . for example , according to program documentation , va plans to implement functionality in hr smart that will allow managers to initiate , review , and approve basic personnel actions independently .