outcome goals . overall focus . justice believes that our report focuses heavily on what its performance report and plan do not discuss , on targets not established , or on targets not met . in addition , justice believes that our report does not focus on improvements the agency has made . for example , in addressing ins' goal for ensuring that immigration benefit services are timely , fair , and consistent , justice said that our report focused on the agency missing the naturalization case processing time by 2 months . justice believes that reaching an 8-month processing time is an incredible achievement , given that the processing time was 27 months just 2 years earlier . we addressed many of the improvements that justice made under the section comparing the performance report and plan with the previous year's report and plan . the sections discussing achieving outcomes are an assessment of progress toward achieving results on the basis of performance measures and targets , historical data , and our work related to program areas . we acknowledge that justice's performance report included historical data for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 for many of its measures . but other than the example justice cited in its comments , the historical data for the other measures did not clearly demonstrate improvements . furthermore , after meeting with justice to discuss the draft report , we revised the text to include the historical data regarding reported improvement to reduce the processing time of naturalization cases ( the example justice cited ) . justice acknowledged that the outcomes we used in our analysis were prescribed by the requestor , but believes that the outcome of reduced availability and / or use of illegal drugs is not part of its mission . instead , justice stated that its strategic goal relative to enforcing the nation's antidrug laws is to reduce the threat and trafficking of illegal drugs by identifying , disrupting , and dismantling drug trafficking organizations . thus , justice does not believe that any of its annual goals or measures will relate directly to the achievement of the outcome to reduce the availability and / or use of illegal drugs , giving the false impression that its report and plan are deficient . justice also believes that , while reducing drug - and gang - related violence is part of its mission , only four of its measures under this outcome , not nine , should have been used in our analysis . thus , justice believes that the other five measures in assessing this outcome should be deleted . in our opinion , reducing the threat and trafficking of illegal drugs by identifying , disrupting , and dismantling drug trafficking organizations is directly related to reducing the availability and / or use of drugs . if drug trafficking organizations are disrupted and dismantled , clearly this will affect the availability of drugs on the street . concerning justice's contention that five of the measures under the planned outcome to reduce drug - and gang - related violence should be deleted , we disagree .