we have highlighted some of the risks today . going forward , it will be important for the bureau to specify how it will ensure that planned dress rehearsal operations will be successfully carried out , and how it will provide assurance that the largest operation — nonresponse follow - up — will be tested in the absence of a full dress rehearsal . likewise , the bureau will need to establish plans for working around limitations in the technology to be used in address canvassing operations . it is critical that the bureau ensure that the technology for conducting address canvassing is a success . the bureau should implement prior recommendations in moving forward . contractor - developed it systems and deliverables need to be closely monitored to ensure that contractors are performing within budget . as we have stressed throughout this testimony and in our prior recommendations , the bureau needs to practice aggressive project management and governance over both the it and non - it components . further , it is essential that the bureau implement our recommendations related to information technology . the bureau must solidify the fdca program requirements , strengthen risk management activities , and plan and conduct critical testing of the decennial census systems . mr. chairman , census day is less than 2 years away and address canvassing is 1 year away . this has the potential to significantly increase costs . the bureau still needs to agree upon and finalize requirements for the fdca program . in march 2006 , we reported that the fdca project office had not implemented the full set of acquisition management capabilities ( such as project and acquisition planning and requirements development and management ) that were needed to effectively manage the program . for example , although the project office had developed baseline functional requirements for the acquisition , the bureau had not yet validated and approved them . subsequently , in october 2007 , we reported that changes to requirements had been a contributing factor to both cost increases and schedule delays experienced by the fdca program . in june 2007 , an assessment by an independent contractor of the fdca program reported on requirements management problems — much like those we reported in march 2006 . similar to our recommendation , the independent assessors recommended that the bureau immediately stabilize requirements by defining and refining them . the bureau has recently made efforts to further define requirements for the fdca program , and it has estimated that the revised requirements will result in significant cost increases . on january 16 , 2008 , the bureau provided the fdca contractor with a list of over 400 requirements for the fdca program to reconcile . although some of these new requirements will be dropped based on the secretary's recent decision , many will still need to be addressed to ensure that fdca will perform as needed . commerce and bureau officials need to address critical weaknesses in risk management practices . in october 2007 , we reported that the fdca project had weaknesses in identifying risks , establishing adequate mitigation plans , and reporting risk status to executive - level officials .