igs also identified fraudulent purchases . the transportation department's ig reported on two cases involving employees' fraudulent use of their purchase cards . in one case , a cardholder used a government purchase card to buy computer software and other items costing over $80,000 for a personal business . in the other case , a cardholder made numerous unauthorized charges totaling more than $58,000 , including a home stereo system and a new engine for his car . when we asked to inspect these items , the navy units could not provide conclusive evidence that 31 of them — including laptop computers , palm pilots , and digital cameras — were in the possession of the government . for example , for 4 items , the serial numbers of the property we were shown did not match purchase or manufacturer documentation . in addition , we were told that 5 items were at other navy locations throughout the world . navy officials were unable to conclusively demonstrate the existence and location of these 5 items . we were unable to conclude whether any of these 31 pieces of government property were stolen , lost , or being misused . we and the igs have made recommendations to the various agencies that , if fully implemented , will help improve internal controls over the purchase card programs so that fraudulent and improper payments can be prevented or detected in the future and vulnerable assets can be better protected . these recommendations include ( 1 ) emphasizing policies on appropriate use of the purchase card and cardholder and approving official responsibilities , ( 2 ) ensuring that approving officials are trained on how to perform their responsibilities , and ( 3 ) ensuring that approving officials review purchases and their supporting documentation before certifying the statements for payment . agencies have taken actions to respond to the recommendations made . however , during our follow - up work at education and the navy units , we found that weaknesses remain that continue to leave them vulnerable to fraudulent and improper payments and lost assets . the unapproved statements totaled about $1.8 million . further , we found that education employees purchased computers using their purchase cards , which was a violation of education's policy prohibiting the use of purchase cards for this purpose . as i will discuss later , several of the computers that were purchased with purchase cards were not entered in property records , and we could not locate them . if approving officials had been conducting a proper review of monthly statements , the computer purchases could have been identified and the practice halted , perhaps eliminating this computer accountability problem . education implemented a new approval process during our review . we assessed this new process and found that while approving officials were generally reviewing cardholder statements , those officials were not ensuring that adequate supporting documentation existed for all purchases . weaknesses in the approval process also existed at the two navy units we reviewed .