gao - 07-169 . washington , d.c.: december 15 , 2006 . ( see app . v for the letter from the under secretary for farm and foreign agricultural services and gao's point - by - point response. ) in particular , usda disagreed that it had thus far taken little action to prospectively assess potential increases in catastrophic risk associated with climate change . direct economic losses of global disasters have increased in recent decades with particularly large increases since the 1980s . the increases in disaster losses primarily result from weather related events , in particular storms and floods . climate change and variability are factors which influence trends in disasters . although there are peer reviewed papers indicating trends in storms and floods there is still scientific debate over the attribution to anthropogenic climate change or natural climate variability . there is also concern over geophysical data quality . ipcc ( 2001 ) did not achieve detection and attribution of trends in extreme events at the global level . high quality long - term disaster loss records exist , some of which are suitable for research purposes , such as to identify the effects of climate and / or climate change on the loss records . analyses of long - term records of disaster losses indicate that societal change and economic development are the principal factors responsible for the documented increasing losses to date . the vulnerability of communities to natural disasters is determined by their economic development and other social characteristics . there is evidence that changing patterns of extreme events are drivers for recent increases in global losses . because of issues related to data quality , the stochastic nature of extreme event impacts , length of time series , and various societal factors present in the disaster loss record , it is still not possible to determine the portion of the increase in damages that might be attributed to climate change due to greenhouse gas emissions . for future decades the ipcc ( 2001 ) expects increases in the occurrence and / or intensity of some extreme events as a result of anthropogenic climate change . such increases will further increase losses in the absence of disaster reduction measures . in the near future the quantitative link ( attribution ) of trends in storm and flood losses to climate changes related to greenhouse gas emissions is unlikely to be answered unequivocally . adaptation to extreme weather events should play a central role in reducing societal vulnerabilities to climate and climate change . mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions should also play a central role in response to anthropogenic climate change , though it does not have an effect for several decades on the hazard risk . we recommend further research on different combinations of adaptation and mitigation policies . we recommend the creation of an open - source disaster database according to agreed upon standards . in addition to fundamental research on climate , research priorities should consider needs of decision makers in areas related to both adaptation and mitigation . for improved understanding of loss trends , there is a need to continue to collect and improve long - term and homogenous data sets related to both climate parameters and disaster losses .