see table 1 . congress has set an annual government - wide goal of awarding not less than 23 percent of prime contract dollars to small disadvantaged businesses and sba negotiates specific goals with each agency to help ensure that the federal government collectively meets this statutory goal , including those for various socioeconomic categories of small businesses . specifically , dhs established ( 1 ) specific competition tracks for small businesses , including those with specific socioeconomic characteristics , ( 2 ) mechanisms to maintain a steady pool of eligible small businesses , and ( 3 ) opportunities for small businesses to participate as core team members . dhs's small business goal for fiscal year 2015 , as negotiated with sba , is that 32 percent of its prime contract dollars will be awarded to small businesses department wide with no less than 5 percent to small disadvantaged businesses , including section 8 ( a ) small businesses ; 5 percent to women - owned small businesses ; 3 percent to sdvosb small businesses ; and three percent to small businesses in hubzones . within dhs , the office of small and disadvantaged business utilization ( osdbu ) assists with negotiating dhs's small business goals with sba , participates in small business outreach events and hosts vendor outreach sessions . in addition , the osdbu director makes recommendations to contracting officers as to whether particular contract requirements should be set aside for small businesses . dhs cpo officials estimated that about 80 percent of eagle ii spending would go through this new category . dhs then established tracks to set aside competition for task orders for small businesses within each functional category , including those with specific socioeconomic characteristics . specifically , dhs created three individual socioeconomic tracks within functional category 1 for qualifying 8 ( a ) , hubzone , and sdvosb small businesses and a general small business track . an osdbu official told us that the creation of socioeconomic business tracks was the single most important step that dhs took to enhance small business participation . dhs has not set a specific goal for the percent of eagle ii contracts that should be awarded to small businesses . as explained by dhs cpo officials , however , the value of eagle ii task orders issued to small businesses contributes to dhs's department wide small business goals . federal regulations require agencies to perform acquisition planning activities , including market research , for all acquisitions to ensure that the government meets its needs in the most effective , economical , and timely manner possible . development of the eagle ii contract award was overseen by the dhs cpo . within the dhs cpo , the strategic sourcing program office is responsible for the dhs strategic sourcing program , including development and implementation of eagle ii . in 2009 , dhs cpo staff began acquisition planning for eagle ii which included publishing a request for information from small businesses to gain insight into how best to structure eagle to provide opportunities for small business participation and publishing an additional request to gain similar perspectives from larger businesses .