discovery . missions in the discovery program , which was started in 1992 , are also competed , have a development cost cap of $450 million to $500 million according to nasa officials and documentation , and have the goal of enhancing our understanding of the solar system . the discovery program utilizes many smaller missions with fewer resources and shorter development times . discovery missions have never been powered by rps . the atomic energy act of 1954 authorizes doe to provide systems that meet the special nuclear material needs of other federal agencies , and under an agreement with nasa , doe is responsible for maintaining our nation's capability to support the development , production , and safety of nasa's space exploration missions that use rps . according to doe officials , doe's office of nuclear energy , nuclear infrastructure programs , manages and oversees rps production and the supply project and coordinates with nasa to ensure doe can meet nasa's mission requirements . this includes designing , developing , fabricating , testing , and delivering rps to meet nasa's overall systems requirements , specifications , and schedules . doe also maintains rps production infrastructure to sustain capabilities between nasa missions and to support mission planning . doe restarted efforts to establish domestic pu - 238 production at the end of 2011 , under its supply project , to provide fuel for rps . doe's goal is to reach a full pu - 238 production rate of 1.5 kg per year by 2023 , at the earliest , with a late completion date of 2026 . before this full production rate is achieved , doe established an interim production rate of 300 to 500 grams per year by 2019 in order to ensure an adequate supply of pu - 238 for nasa's near - term missions . until march 2017 , doe divided work associated with the supply project into discrete segments . the segmented management approach associated with the supply project was a short - term , incremental approach to managing a program with uncertain funding levels , according to doe officials . according to doe officials , the segmented approach was intended to allow doe to establish and reach near - term supply project goals while maintaining a base level of trained staff as the project developed from its early stages to its full production rate . in march 2017 , doe officials changed how they manage the supply project , discontinuing the segmented approach . the new management approach for the supply project is to align with how doe expects to manage rps production , according to doe officials . doe's technical integration office , based at inl , coordinates with other doe laboratories on supply project work . as shown in figure 2 , the supply project involves a number of steps across several doe national laboratories , including inl and ornl . the production of new pu - 238 under the supply project begins with a shipment of neptunium - 237 ( neptunium ) isotope from inl to ornl .