app . macao bank ( banco delta asia sarl ) .facilitation of financial transactions conducted by north korean – related accounts that related to money laundering and illicit activities , including trade in counterfeit u.s. currency , counterfeit cigarettes , and narcotics , as grounds for its action . five unscrs target north korean – related activities that include wmd proliferation , cash transfers , and trade in luxury goods to north korea ( see table 2 ) . under the un charter , all 193 un member states are required to implement sanctions in the unscrs that include imposing an arms embargo , prohibiting travel , and freezing assets . state officials told us that un sanctions can amplify u.s. development of bilateral sanctions specific to north korea , and that the united states has imposed sanctions beyond those required by unscrs . according to state officials , the united states has implemented the sanctions within the unscrs , pursuant to authorities including the united nations participation act of 1945 . u.s. officials informed gao that obtaining information on north korean persons has hindered the u.s. interagency process for imposing sanctions , and that a recent eo has provided them with greater flexibility to sanction persons based on their status as government or party officials rather than evidence of specific conduct . eo 13687 allows state and treasury to sanction persons because they are officials of the north korean government or of the worker's party of korea , instead of based on specific conduct . state and treasury impose sanctions following an interagency process that involves reviewing intelligence and other information to develop evidence needed to meet standards set by u.s. laws and eos , vetting possible actions within the u.s. government , determining whether and when to sanction , and announcing sanctions decisions . since 2006 , the united states has imposed sanctions on 86 north korean persons , including 13 north korean government officials and entities , under eo 13687 . commerce is the u.s. government agency that controls exports by issuing licenses for shipping goods that are not prohibited to north korea . agency officials cited obtaining sufficient information about north korean persons to be their greatest challenge in making sanctions determinations . most north korea – specific sanctions authorities require a determination that a person engaged in a specific activity . officials said that for sanctions to be effective , financial institutions need a minimum set of identifying information so that they can ensure they are blocking the right person . however , officials said that gathering information on the activities of north korean persons and personal identifying information can be difficult because of the nature of north korean society , whose citizens are tightly controlled by the government . without sufficient information , the united states could mistakenly designate and therefore block the assets of the wrong person , particularly one with a common surname . state officials also cited obtaining sufficient information as a challenge to north korean sanctions implementation , especially if the sanctions authority requires information indicating that the foreign person knowingly engaged in sanctionable activities . officials in both agencies also said that they face challenges in obtaining information that can be made public in the federal register .