gao - 06-1121t . washington , d.c.: september 21 , 2006 . no child left behind act: education actions needed to improve local implementation and state evaluation of supplemental educational services . gao - 06-758 . washington , d.c.: august 4 , 2006 . districts also reported that contracting is a challenge . we estimate that negotiating contracts with providers was a moderate , great , or very great challenge in about 40 percent of districts nationwide . for example , district officials at three of the sites we visited expressed concern about their lack of authority to set parameters in provider contracts around costs and program design , such as tutor - to - student ratios and total hours of instruction . specifically , chicago , ill. , district officials expressed concern about the variation among providers in the hours of instruction and cost of services because the district does not have sufficient funds to serve all eligible students , and officials would like to maximize the number of students they can serve . coordination of service delivery has also been a challenge for providers and districts , and sometimes these coordination difficulties have resulted in service delays . for example , services were delayed or withdrawn in certain schools in three of the districts we visited because not enough students signed up to meet the providers' enrollment targets and districts were not aware of these targets . coordination difficulties also occurred during the enrollment process . though districts are responsible for arranging ses for eligible students , in two districts we visited , both the district and providers sent enrollment forms to parents , which caused confusion among parents as well as additional work for the district staff processing the forms . in part because ses is often delivered in school facilities , providers and officials in the districts and schools we visited reported that involvement of school administrators and teachers can improve ses delivery and coordination . although schools do not have federally defined responsibilities for administering ses , many officials said ses implementation is hindered when school officials are not involved . for example , some providers we interviewed said that a lack of involvement of school principals can make it difficult for them to coordinate with schools to encourage student participation . in addition , illinois and oregon school principals told us they found it difficult to manage afterschool activities because they didn't have sufficient authority to oversee ses tutors operating in their buildings at that time . while helping to administer the ses program adds additional administrative burden on schools , school officials in all four of the districts we visited said they welcomed a stronger or more clearly defined role . while monitoring of ses had been limited , more states reported taking steps to monitor both district and provider efforts to implement ses in 2005-2006 . for example , more states conducted or planned to conduct on - site reviews of districts and providers in 2005-2006 than had done so in 2004-2005 . in addition to state efforts to monitor providers , districts have also taken a direct oversight role , and their monitoring activities similarly increased during this time .