dhs concurred with the recommendation . in february 2010 , tsa officials indicated that the agency had met with other federal agencies that conduct security reviews of highway structures to identify existing data resources , establish a data - sharing system among key agencies , and discuss standards for future assessments . the administration's surface transportation security priority assessment also highlighted the need for federal entities to coordinate their assessment efforts . that report included a recommendation to establish an integrated federal approach that consolidates capabilities in a unified effort for security assessments , audits , and inspections to produce more thorough evaluations and effective follow - up actions for reducing risk , enhancing security , and minimizing burdens on assessed surface transportation entities . we also reported in february 2009 that tsa , which has the primary federal responsibility for ensuring the security of the commercial vehicle sector , had taken actions to improve coordination with federal , state , and industry stakeholders with respect to commercial vehicle security . these actions included signing joint agreements with dot and supporting the establishment of intergovernmental and industry councils . however , we also reported that additional opportunities exist to enhance security by more clearly defining stakeholder roles and responsibilities . for example , some state transportation officials stated that dhs and tsa had not clarified states' roles and responsibilities in securing the transportation sector or communicated to them tsa's strategy to secure commercial vehicles , which in some cases has caused delays in implementing state transportation security initiatives . industry stakeholders also expressed concerns with respect to tsa communicating its strategy , roles , and responsibilities ; leveraging industry expertise ; and collaborating with industry representatives . as a result , we recommended that tsa establish a process to strengthen coordination with the commercia vehicle industry , including ensuring that the roles and responsibilities of industry and government are fully defined and clearly communicated , and assess its coordination efforts . dhs concurred with this recommendatio n and in april 2010 reported that its ts - ssp highway modal annex is under s review and is expected to delineate methods to enhance communication and coordination with stakeholde rs . in accordance with executive order 13416 and requirements of the 9 / 11 commission act , dhs , through tsa , has developed national strategies for each surface transportation mode . however , we have previously reported the need for tsa to strengthen its evaluation of the results of its efforts through the use of targeted , measurable , and outcome - based performance measures . our prior work has shown that long - term , action - oriented goals and a timeline with milestones can help track an organization's progress toward its goals . the nipp also provides that dhs should work with its security partners , including other federal agencies , state and local government representatives , and the private sector , to develop sector - specific metrics . using performance measures and an evaluation of the effectiveness of surface transportation security initiatives can help provide tsa with more meaningful information from which to determine whether its strategies are achieving their intended results , and to target any needed improvements .