changes to hmgp . sria authorized three key changes to hmgp . first , it authorizes fema to expedite implementation of the program . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . fema has issued guidance for streamlining the program and is planning actions to continue to refine the changes and measure their effectiveness . second , sria allows fema to provide up to 25 percent of the estimated costs for eligible hazard mitigation measures to a state or tribal grantee before eligible costs are incurred . as part of the revised , streamlined hmgp guidance , fema has informed states of this provision . third , sria allows fema to waive notice and comment rulemaking procedures for hmgp administration by states and authorizes fema to carry out the program as a pilot . fema is currently carrying out a pilot program and issued a notice in the federal register in march 2014 seeking comments from the public to help inform the development of this new method of program delivery . to develop the program , fema is exploring the extent to which its determinations regarding cost - effectiveness , technical feasibility and engineering , and final eligibility and funding can be made at the state level . national strategy to reduce costs on future disasters . sria required fema to make recommendations for the development of a national strategy to reduce costs on future disasters . in september 2013 fema issued the required report , recommending that the following elements be considered in the development of a national strategy: 1 ) engage in a whole community dialogue and build upon public - private partnerships , 2 ) enhance data - driven decisions , 3 ) align incentives promoting disaster cost reduction and resilience , 4 ) enable resilient recovery , and 5 ) support disaster risk reduction nationally . as we have previously reported , most responsibility and authority for resilience activities rests largely outside the federal government ; therefore , nonfederal incentives are also a critical piece of the overall strategy to reduce future losses . the federal government , by providing incentives through programs like the five discussed earlier in this statement , can help to promote and facilitate mitigation before and after disasters . however , ultimately , nonfederal entities inside and outside the government make the decisions that lead ( or do not lead ) to resilience activities . several examples of mitigation efforts at the state and local levels help illustrate the variety of ways that incentives help drive communities to be more resilient — with a range of activities from shoring up building codes to facilitating buyouts of repetitive loss properties . as part of our ongoing work , we are reviewing studies about efforts to build resilience to extreme weather events and climate change .