retaining minority and women candidates that are hired for key management positions . many industry officials said that financial services firms lack a critical mass of minority men and women , particularly in senior - level positions , to serve as role models . without a critical mass , the officials said that minority or women employees might lack the personal connections and access to informal networks that are often necessary to navigate an organization's culture and advance their careers . for example , an official from a commercial bank we contacted said he learned from staff interviews that african - americans believed that they were not considered for promotion as often as others partly because they were excluded from informal employee networks needed for promotion or to promote advancement . some of these officials also said that this level of involvement was critical to success of a program . for example , according to an official from an investment bank , the head of the firm meets with all minority and female senior executives to discuss their career development . officials from a few commercial banks said that the banks had established diversity “councils” of senior leaders to set the vision , strategy , and direction of diversity initiatives . a 2007 industry trade group study and some officials also noted that some companies were linking managers' compensation to their progress in hiring , promoting , and retaining minority and women employees . however , the study found that most companies reported that they still did not offer managers financial rewards for improving diversity performance . this study also found that firms , overall , have significantly increased accountability for driving diversity results . some firms noted that they had stepped up efforts to help ensure a diverse workforce . however , the recent financial crisis has raised questions about their ongoing commitment to initiatives and programs that are designed to promote workforce diversity . minorities' rapid growth as a percentage of the overall u.s. population , as well as increased global competition , convinced some financial services firms that workforce diversity was a critical business strategy . since the mid - 1990s , some financial services firms have implemented a variety of initiatives designed to recruit and retain minority and women candidates to fill key positions . officials from several banks said that they had developed scholarship and internship programs to encourage minority students to consider careers in banking . some firms and trade organizations had also developed partnerships with groups that represent minority professionals and with local communities to recruit candidates through events such as conferences and career fairs . to help retain minorities and women , firms have established employee networks , mentoring programs , diversity training , and leadership and career development programs . industry studies have noted , and officials from some financial services firms we contacted confirmed , that senior managers were involved in diversity initiatives . for example , more firms reported that they were holding managers accountable for improving diversity . performance reviews and management - by - objectives were the top two methods for measuring managers' diversity performance .