the other instruments are earlier in their development . since none has yet been demonstrated in a lab or test environment , the risk remains that the technologies are not sufficiently mature . the program plans to continue efforts to demonstrate technologies before key decision milestones on each instrument . in 2007 , we reported that cost - estimating organizations throughout the federal government and industry use 12 key practices — related to planning , conducting , and reporting the estimate — to ensure a sound estimate . table 7 lists these practices . the goes - r program's cost estimate fully implemented 11 and partially implemented 1 of the 12 best practices for developing a credible cost estimate ( see table 8 ) . the practices that were fully implemented include clearly defining the purpose of the estimate and the program's characteristics , establishing and implementing a sound estimating approach , and appropriately assessing the risk and sensitivity of its estimate . the practice that was partially implemented involved ground rules and assumptions . the program defined and documented all of the ground rules and assumptions used in the estimate . however , an independent review team found that the assumed inflation rates used for the ground segment were overly optimistic and could lead to a shortfall of hundreds of millions of dollars . specifically , the agency used the department of defense's inflation rates rather than nasa's historical experiences , which are more conservative . program officials responded that the agency's long experience in developing ground systems would balance the optimistic inflation rates and that they could adjust the inflation rates , if warranted , in later years . in the past , we have reported on poor performance in program management . the key drivers of poor management often include ineffective risk management , insufficient staff to implement earned value management , and inadequate levels of management reserve . in 2006 and 2007 , we reported that , while noaa had taken steps to restructure its management approach on the goes - r procurement in an effort to improve performance and to avoid past mistakes , key program management areas needed additional attention . we recommended that noaa improve the consistency of its risk management process , assess and obtain the resources it needed for overseeing the earned value of its contracts , and provide sufficient management reserves to address unexpected issues in instrument development . noaa subsequently implemented these recommendations by streamlining its risk management processes , supplementing oversight resources , and reassessing its management reserves . since we last reported on this issue , the program office has made additional progress in earned value management , but more remains to be done . earned value management provides a proven means for measuring progress against cost and schedule commitments and thereby identifying potential cost overruns and schedule delays early , when the impact can be minimized . two key aspects of this process are conducting comprehensive integrated baseline reviews and using monthly variance reports to manage the program . an integrated baseline review is a process used by stakeholders to obtain agreement on the value of planned work and to validate the baseline against which the variances are calculated .