this work focuses on the field collection program . our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe the field collection program's automated and manual processes for prioritizing and selecting cases and ( 2 ) assess how well field collection case selection processes support the collection program's mission , including applying tax laws “with integrity and fairness to all.” to describe the field collection program selection processes , we reviewed irs documents and interviewed knowledgeable irs officials on the role of field collection systems and staff in prioritizing and selecting cases to assign to revenue officers for collection . we also analyzed data in irs's field collection inventory management system from march 10 , 2016 . these data allowed us to compare assigned and unassigned field collection cases at the time . to assess the selection process's support of the collection program's mission , including applying tax laws with integrity and fairness to all , we evaluated how well the process adhered to selected federal standards for internal control , which are among the most relevant to ensuring mission achievement . these standards include defining program objectives in clear and measurable terms . irs implemented erm in february 2014 to alert irs management to irs - wide risks and to serve as an early - warning system to identify emerging challenges and address them before they affect operations . however , in order to use both of these approaches effectively to identify , analyze , and manage risk , irs needs to have clearly defined , measurable objectives . federal internal control standards state that effectively managing a program to achieve its mission involves comprehensively considering and assessing potential risks in the program's internal and external operating environments and establishing risk tolerances ( the acceptable level of variation in performance relative to the achievement of objectives ) . such tolerances are often stated in terms of performance measures , which allow performance assessment toward achieving objectives . lacking clearly defined and associated performance measures therefore hinders the field collection program's ability to effectively assess , identify , and address risks to the achievement of its mission . without clearly defined objectives , risks to achieving those objectives cannot be identified and analyzed , nor can risk tolerances be determined . as stated in irs's fiscal year 2016 collection program letter , the collection program's mission is to collect delinquent taxes and secure delinquent tax returns through the fair and equitable application of the tax laws , including the use of enforcement tools when appropriate and providing education to taxpayers to facilitate future compliance . as we have previously reported , irs's collection program largely uses automated processes to categorize unpaid tax or unfiled tax return cases and send them to a collection phase to be potentially selected for collection activities . the automated inventory delivery system ( ids ) categorizes and routes cases based on many factors , such as type of tax and amount owed .