accountability considerations . monitoring the expenditure of block grant funds to achieve stated national objectives — a theme throughout the block grant reports — has been ( and is ) a central federal accountability function under past and present block grant legislation . what statutory or regulatory changes are needed to support the consolidation ? if the proposed consolidation approach does not include all programs with similar activities or that address similar goals , how will the new structure interact with those programs not included in the consolidation ? we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to the administrator of the environmental protection agency , the secretaries of the departments of housing and urban development and transportation , and the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) . omb did not comment on the recommendation but provided technical comments , as did each of the other agencies . we incorporated these technical comments as appropriate . additionally , we provided excerpts of the draft report to state and local officials in the four states we interviewed for this study and incorporated their technical comments as appropriate . we are sending this report to relevant agencies and congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions or wish to discuss the material in this report further , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or irvings@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff making key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . appendix i: summary of grant program consolidations , fiscal year 1990 through 2012 ( text for interactive fig . 3 ) table 4 lists the 15 consolidated grants we identified during the time period of fiscal years 1990 through 2012 along with selected characteristics for each . there is no single resource that maintains a list of grant consolidations ; therefore , this list may not be exhaustive . as part of our ongoing body of work associated with improving grant design and management across the federal government , we were asked to identify what federal grant programs have been consolidated in the past and asked to examine whether overlap and duplication may be reduced by consolidating several federal grant programs , and to identify outcomes that have occurred from prior consolidations in terms of savings or improved performance . to accomplish this , we answered the following objectives: 1 . describe approaches taken to grant programs that have been consolidated from fiscal year 1990 through 2012 . examine federal , state , and local actions taken to administer the selected case study consolidated grant programs . analyze the lessons learned for future consideration of grant program consolidations . for our first reporting objective , we conducted a literature review which consisted of reviewing the federal government websites usaspending.govgrants.gov , the catalog of federal domestic and assistance ( cfda ) , and prior presidential budget submissions and conference reports .