ethanol also needs to become more cost competitive . even with the recent spikes in gasoline prices , ethanol producers rely on federal tax incentives to compete . in october 2006 , consumer reports estimated that drivers paying $2.91 per gallon for e85 actually paid about $3.99 for the energy equivalent amount of a gallon of gasoline because the distance vehicles traveled per gallon declined by 27 percent . finally , congressional earmarks of doe's biomass r&d funding rose from 14 percent of the fiscal year 2000 funds to 57 percent ( $52 million ) of the fiscal year 2006 funds , according to a doe program official . both wind and solar technologies have experienced substantial growth in recent years , but both wind and solar technologies face important challenges for future growth . in particular , wind investors pay substantial upfront capital costs to build a wind farm and connect the farm to the power transmission grid , which can cost $100,000 or more per mile on average , according to doe officials . because both wind energy and solar energy are intermittent , utilities have been skeptical about using them , relying instead on large baseload power plants that operate full time and are more accessible to the transmission grid . in contrast , wind turbines operate the equivalent of less than 40 percent of the hours in a year because of the intermittency of wind . in addition , the electricity that is generated must be immediately used or transmitted to the grid because it cannot be cost effectively stored . for the wind industry to expand from high - wind sites to low - wind and offshore locations , doe needs to also develop bigger wind turbines with longer blades mounted on taller towers , requiring improved designs and materials for blade and drive train components . in addition , offshore wind development faces such technical challenges as understanding the effects of wave and ocean current loads on the base of the structures . the wind industry also faces concerns about environmental impacts , including bird and bat fatalities caused by wind turbines . finally , investors interested in developing wind energy have relied on the federal production tax credit as a financial incentive to construct wind farms . the credit has periodically expired , resulting in a boom - and - bust cycle for the wind power industry . solar energy also faces a challenge of developing inexpensive photovoltaic solar cells . as a result of r&d efforts , photovoltaic cells , consisting mostly of crystalline - silicone materials , are becoming increasingly efficient , converting nearly 40 percent of sunlight into electricity for some applications , but the cells are expensive for the typical homeowner . doe is exploring how to reduce manufacturing costs through thin - film technologies , but at a cost of efficiency . doe's challenge is to increase efficiency and reduce costs in the thin - film technologies . reducing emissions from coal - fired power plants continues to be the priority for doe's fossil energy r&d . having significantly reduced sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide , doe is now focusing on reducing mercury and carbon dioxide emissions .