gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 2009 . epa agreed with our recommendation . our july 2010 report on dod - related superfund sites identified several obstacles — including poor coordination , lack of interagency agreements , contract management , and legal limitations — that have delayed cleanups . first , poor coordination with regulators and incomplete record reviews have resulted in poor decision making , such as placing military personnel in housing at risk of contamination , ultimately leading to their evacuation . second , because dod had not signed interagency agreements at some of its national priorities list sites , epa lacked the mechanisms to ensure that cleanup proceeds expeditiously , is properly done , and has public input as required by law . third , dod's use of performance - based contracts to clean up installations has affected how the cleanup work was scoped and conducted and has created pressure on contractors to operate within price caps and meet deadlines , which may conflict with regulatory review times and encourage the department to take shortcuts . finally , epa has virtually no enforcement tools available to compel agency compliance with the law at installations without an interagency agreement , unless epa has concurrence from the department of justice , whose policy generally precludes one agency from bringing suit against another . as one of the most complicated interdisciplinary environmental issues currently facing the federal government , climate change poses particular management challenges for epa . we have previously reported that , in addition to its environmental implications , climate change has implications for the fiscal health of the federal government , affecting federal crop and flood insurance programs and placing new stresses on infrastructure and natural resources . we have also analyzed and reported on recent legislative and regulatory efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions . recent gao work has also identified a range of climate change management challenges for the federal government at large , including a broad array of departments with diverse missions . for epa , particular challenges relate to the agency's ongoing efforts to reduce carbon emissions ; to coordinate activities with other agencies ; and to account for and manage data on greenhouse gas emissions . several bills that would have established comprehensive emissions reduction programs were introduced and debated during the 111th congress , although none became law . to provide the congress with relevant information during these deliberations , however , we reported on the economic implications of different policy options and on lessons learned from the european union's own efforts to implement mandatory carbon reductions . we found , for example , that the european union set its overall emissions limit , or “cap,” too high ( i.e. , at a level that was higher than actual emissions ) because of uncertainty surrounding the emissions data used to set the cap . we also reported on carbon offsets — reductions of greenhouse gas emissions from an activity on one place to compensate for emissions elsewhere — noting that the credibility of offsets could compromise the environmental integrity of a system to reduce emissions .