conf . 108-774 ) allocated appropriations of $2.424 billion to cover personnel , compensation , and benefits for passenger and checked baggage screeners and to cover screeners at the five pilot airports . this allocation represents an increase of more than $200 million over the fiscal year 2004 enacted level of $2.2 billion . according to tsa , this increase is necessary to fully fund compensation and benefits at the identified staffing levels . the requested level of funding will support screener salaries and management at all commercial airports , whether federalized or privatized . also , the conference report allocated just under $130 million for the five pilot airports , an increase from $119 million in fiscal year 2004 . this funding is based on an estimate of resources necessary to maintain screening at the current five pilot airports . tsa issued its first written guidance for the opt - out program in june 2004 , in an effort to provide airport operators and the aviation community with information to gauge their level of interest in applying to participate in the program . the guidance , posted on tsa's web site and distributed to airport associations , provides information in three broad areas: legislative requirements , program planning approach , and guidance on key issues . a summary of the guidance follows . tsa's guidance addresses atsa legislative requirements , including how applications from qualified private screening contractors would be approved by applying the statutory standards of atsa , including the level of screening services and protection provided at the airport , and that private contractor companies be owned and controlled by u.s. citizens . tsa's guidance also included information for airports on how tsa's screening pilot program was conducted , how the pilot program was evaluated by a private consulting organization , and suggested program improvements made by the consultants . the guidance discussed program structure , including costs . the guidance notes , for instance , that federal and contract screeners would be funded from the same pool of money and that costs for airports enrolled in the program would be determined based on current federal screener operations and tsa's activity - based cost studies that estimate costs of running an airport's screening operations . tsa's guidance states that these cost studies would ensure that proposed costs by potential contractors are in line with federal estimates . the guidance also states that airport security screeners do not have the right to strike , whether tsa or a private contractor employs them . atsa directs tsa to receive applications from airports intending to apply to opt out beginning november 19 , 2004 . the guidance states that tsa intends to close the application period within 3 weeks of that time and will re - open the application cycle in november 2005 . the guidance states that because atsa does not identify specific criteria by which tsa is to evaluate the airport application , tsa is currently developing and reviewing potential specific criteria for determining which airports will be approved and the sequence for their transition from federal to private screeners . the guidance notes that tsa reserves the right to consider participation in the program in light of an airport's record of compliance on security regulations and requirements .