, research implementation ) . according to dot and aashto officials and shrp 2 staff , early results of the shrp 2 research have been promising but likely would be enhanced with additional funding to restore some of the eliminated research . dot officials and shrp 2 staff explained that initial research results often require additional research and development in real - world trials before a usable product is ready for implementation . because of time constraints , we did not assess the appropriateness of funding decisions or projects selected for shrp 2 funding . to address all three objectives , we also interviewed agency officials from the department of transportation ( dot ) , the federal highway administration , and the national highway traffic safety administration , and representatives from the national research council , trb , shrp 2 staff , and the american association of state highway and transportation officials ( aashto ) . we conducted this performance audit from june 2009 through february 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the shrp 2 oversight committee funded many of the safety projects identified in the 2003 detailed research plans based on the recommendations of the shrp 2 safety technical coordinating committee . as a result , 9 of the 15 safety projects identified in 2003 either evolved or were partially merged into the currently funded safety projects and 6 were eliminated . table 6 provides information on the safety projects identified in 2003 and how they were reprioritized for funding . table 7 provides information on the 16 currently funded shrp 2 safety projects . the shrp 2 oversight committee funded many of the renewal projects identified in the 2003 detailed research plans based on the recommendations of the shrp 2 renewal technical coordinating committee . as a result , 21 of the 38 renewal projects identified in 2003 either evolved or were partially merged into the currently funded renewal projects and 17 were eliminated . table 8 provides information on the renewal projects identified in 2003 and how they were reprioritized for funding . table 9 provides information on the 28 currently funded shrp 2 renewal projects . the shrp 2 oversight committee funded many of the reliability projects identified in the 2003 detailed research plans based on the recommendations of the shrp 2 reliability technical coordinating committee . as a result , 13 of the 33 reliability projects identified in 2003 either evolved or were partially merged into the currently funded reliability projects and 20 were eliminated . table 10 provides information on the reliability projects identified in 2003 and how they were reprioritized for funding . in addition , 4 funded projects , which had not been identified in 2003 , were developed to fill research gaps or provide more affordable research alternatives . table 11 provides information on the 21 currently funded shrp 2 reliability projects .