of the 10 requirements , tsa plans no further action for 4 requirements . tsa and airport operators have oversight responsibilities for the identification badges that are issued . for example , airport operators must account for all badges through control procedures , such as audits , specified in tsa's security directives and in an airport's security program . tsa assesses airports' compliance with its security directives and federal regulations through inspections conducted in alternating years of , among other things , the airport operator's documents related to issuing and controlling identification badges and by randomly screening aviation workers . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact jennifer grover at ( 202 ) 512-7141 or groverj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . because many of tsa's actions taken in response to the 2016 asa were recently implemented or are still ongoing and not fully implemented , we did not assess the effectiveness of the actions taken by tsa . the tables below present the details of each requirement , the progress made by tsa , and the status of tsa's plans for further action . section 3402 of the 2016 asa requires tsa to , among other things , conduct a threat assessment and submit a report regarding the threat assessment to the appropriate congressional committees . tsa made progress in implementing these requirements and has plans for further action , as shown in table 1 . section 3403 of the 2016 asa required tsa to take actions related to enhancing its oversight activities of aviation workers . tsa made progress in implementing the requirements and has further actions planned , as shown in table 2 . section 3404 of the 2016 asa requires tsa to take action on actions related to updating employee credential guidance . tsa made progress in implementing the requirements in this section and plans further actions , as shown in table 3 . section 3405 of the 2016 asa required tsa to take action on requirements related to vetting aviation workers . tsa made progress in implementing these requirements and plans further action on certain requirements , as shown in table 4 . tsa inspects airports , air carriers , and other regulated entities to ensure that they are in compliance with federal aviation security regulations , tsa - approved airport security programs , and other requirements , including requirements related to controlling airport employee access to secure areas of an airport . airport operators have direct responsibility for implementing security requirements in accordance with their tsa - approved airport security programs .