this is known as balance billing . high rates of assignment may serve as an indicator of physicians' willingness to serve medicare beneficiaries . in april 2004 , 99.4 percent of the anesthesia services provided by anesthesiologists to medicare beneficiaries were provided by anesthesiologists who accepted medicare payment as payment in full . the anesthesiologists' assignment rate for anesthesia services was comparable to rates for other hospital - based specialists , such as pathologists ( 99.4 percent ) and radiologists ( 99.6 percent ) , and was higher than the rate for all other physicians ( 98.8 percent ) . in addition to anesthesia services , anesthesiologists and crnas can also provide other nonanesthesia types of physician services covered by medicare . payments for these other physician services — which can include medical services such as office visits , and procedures such as pain management services — represented approximately 31 percent of anesthesiologists' and 2 percent of crnas' revenue from medicare in 2004 . because payment for these services is determined by a different formula than anesthesia services , a significant portion of these medicare payments are closer to private payments levels for the same services , in contrast to the difference in payments for anesthesia services . according to a medpac - sponsored analysis , the average difference between medicare and private payments for medical services such as office visits and for procedures provided in 2001 was 5 percent and 25 percent , respectively . most private payers , like medicare , determine payments for anesthesia services using base units , time units , and anesthesia - specific conversion factors . unlike the medicare program , however , private payers can set their fees in response to market forces such as managed care prevalence and the extent of competition among providers . for example , private anesthesia conversion factors are generally negotiated between payers and anesthesia practitioners . in addition , some private payers use different methods to determine time units , such as rounding up fractional time units to the next whole number or using 10-minute increments for each time unit , which can result in higher anesthesia payments . when setting payment rates , some private payers also allow higher payments for certain patient - related factors such as extremes in age . in our prior work we found that private payments for physician services , excluding anesthesia and some other services , differed by about 100 percent between the lowest - and the highest - priced metropolitan areas and were responsive to market forces , such as regional differences in the extent of competition among hospitals and health maintenance organizations' ( hmos ) ability to leverage prices . for example , we found that areas with less competition and lower levels of hmo price leverage had higher payments than areas with more competition and greater levels of hmo price leverage . we have also reported that because private payers can adjust their payment levels to account for market forces , their payment levels vary more than medicare payments across geographic areas .