we disagree . this report does show regions of the country that would be more affected by a limit on premium subsidies . on page 19 , we state that many of the participating farmers who received more than $40,000 in premium subsidies were in the northern and southern plains . additional information on the locations of participating farmers who received more than $40,000 in premium subsidies for 2011 is presented in appendix iii . an assessment of the availability of credit to the agricultural sector was not the focus of our work , but our review of data from usda's agricultural resource management survey shows that larger farms , which are more likely to be affected by a limit on premium subsidies , generally have stronger financial ratios and credit worthiness than other farms participating in the crop insurance program . ( see pages 21 and 22 of this report. ) furthermore , since we sent our draft report to usda for comment , we identified two federal reserve bank reports — one from the federal reserve bank of chicago , and one from the federal reserve bank of kansas city — that reported that credit conditions for farmers are favorable . in addition , if premium subsidies were limited , an affected farmer could still purchase crop insurance , although the premiums might not be subsidized or subsidized less than currently . thus , an affected farmer would not lose access to credit . usda did not adjust its estimate of affected crop insurance participants and savings in premium subsidies to reflect how a limit on premium subsidies might actually be implemented . that is , we assume that any subsidy limit would be administered as usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) administers payment limits for other farm programs — allocating the benefits according to the interest holders in the farming operation . most participants in the crop insurance program also participate in other farm programs that fsa administers , and many of these other farm programs have payment limits based on benefits that are attributed to each interest holder in a farming operation . as explained in our methodology , in developing our estimate for a potential $40,000 subsidy limit , we used the payment share of each interest holder as recorded in fsa's validated permitted entity database , which fsa uses to ensure compliance with payment limit rules for farm programs . using fsa's information on the payment share of each interest holder , we attributed subsidies for each crop insurance policy to the interest holders in the policy . therefore , we estimated that up to 33,690 participating farmers would have been affected in 2011 by a reduced subsidy , for a savings of up to $1 billion if a $40,000 subsidy limit were applied . we believe our analysis provides a reasonable estimate of the number of participating farmers who might be affected by a limit on premium subsidies and the dollars that might be saved . ( see app . i for more information on our methodology. ) as we note in this report , a limit on crop insurance premium subsidies would affect more farmers in some areas of the country than in other areas .