gao - 06-228t . washington , d.c.: november 1 , 2005 . regulatory reform: prior reviews of federal regulatory process initiatives reveal opportunities for improvements . gao - 05-939t . should agencies count the impact of the underlying statutes when determining whether their rules have a significant impact ? what should be considered a “rule” for purposes of the requirement in rfa that agencies review rules with a significant impact within 10 years of their promulgation ? should agencies review rules that had a significant impact at the time they were originally published , or only those that currently have that effect ? should agencies conduct regulatory flexibility analyses for rules that have a positive economic impact on small entities , or only for rules with a negative impact ? it is worth noting that the office of advocacy's 2003 rfa compliance guide , while reiterating that rfa does not define certain key terms , nevertheless provides some suggestions on the subject . citing parts of rfa's legislative history , the guidance indicates that exact standards for such definitions may not be possible or desirable , and that the definitions should vary depending on the context of each rule and preliminary assessments of the rule's impact . for example , the guidance points out that “significance” can be seen as relative to the size of a business and its competitors , among other things . however , the guidance does identify factors that agencies might want to consider when making rfa determinations . in some ways , this mirrors other aspects of rfa , such as section 610 , where congress did not explicitly define a threshold for an agency to determine whether an existing regulation should be maintained , amended , or eliminated but rather identified the factors that an agency must consider in its reviews . we do not yet know whether or to what extent the guidance and associated training has helped agencies to clarify some of the long - standing confusion about rfa requirements and terms . additional monitoring of rfa compliance may help to answer that question . congress might also want to consider whether the factors that the office of advocacy suggested to help agencies define key terms and requirements are consistent with congressional intent or would benefit from having a statutory basis . i also want to point out the potential domino effect of agencies' determinations of whether or not rfa applies to their rules . this is related to the lack of clarity on key terms mentioned above , the potential for agencies to waive or delay analysis under rfa , and the limitation of rfa's applicability to only rules for which there was a notice of proposed rulemaking . the impact of an agency head's determination that rfa is not applicable is not only that the initial and final regulatory flexibility analyses envisioned by the act would not be done , but also that other related requirements would not apply . these requirements include , for example , the need for agencies to prepare small entity compliance guides , convene sbrefa advocacy panels , and conduct periodic reviews of certain existing regulations .