grant closeout . establish a standard for the timely closeout of grants and ensure that epa's monitoring and other policies are consistent with that standard . develop a performance measure and target for the grant closeout standard . we received oral comments from epa officials , including the director of the office of grants and debarment . overall , epa officials agreed with our recommendations , and they stated that the agency has begun to take steps to implement them and will incorporate them into the agency's and grants management plan , policies , and procedures . in addition , epa officials provided some clarifying language for our recommendations , which we incorporated as appropriate . ( app . i provides a more detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) we performed our work between february 2005 and april 2006 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . epa administers and oversees grants primarily through the office of grants and debarment in the office of administration and resources management , 10 program offices in headquarters , and program offices and grants management offices in epa's 10 regional offices . figure 1 shows the key epa offices involved in grants activities for headquarters and regions , and figure 2 shows the states covered by the 10 regional offices . the office of grants and debarment develops national grant policy and guidance . this office also carries out certain types of administrative and financial functions for the grants approved by program offices , such as awarding headquarter grants and overseeing the financial management of program office and regional grants . on the programmatic side , national program managers are responsible for establishing and implementing national policies for their grant programs , for setting funding priorities , and for identifying specific environmental results from grant programs . they are also responsible for technical and programmatic oversight of headquarter grants . regional grants management offices provide administrative management for regional grants , while regional program offices provide technical and programmatic oversight . both headquarters and regional program offices conduct grant competitions . epa has designated officials — referred to as senior resource officials — who are typically deputy assistant administrators in program offices and assistant regional administrators . these senior resource officials are in charge of strengthening agencywide fiscal resource management while also ensuring compliance with laws and regulations and are responsible for effective grants management within their units . as of september 30 , 2005 , 119 grant specialists in the office of grants and debarment , and the regional grants management offices , were largely responsible for administrative and financial grant functions . furthermore , 2,064 project officers were actively managing grants in headquarters and regional program offices . these project officers are responsible for the technical and programmatic management of grants . unlike grant specialists , however , project officers also have nongrant responsibilities , such as using the scientific and technical expertise for which they were hired . in fiscal year 2005 , epa took 6,728 grant actions involving funds totaling about $4 billion . these awards were made to six main categories of recipients , as shown in figure 3 .