gao - 05-474 . june 17 , 2005 . u.s. - china trade: opportunities to improve u.s. government efforts to ensure open and fair markets . gao - 05-554t . april 14 , 2005 . the results of such a challenge would be uncertain . the court of appeals upheld commerce's position , but the court also appeared to make its own findings . the court emphasized that trade legislation showed that congress had intended that any selling by nme countries at unreasonably low prices should be dealt with under the antidumping law and that there was no indication that congress had intended or understood that the cvd law would also apply . the court stated , in addition , that “f is inadequate to protect american industry from such foreign competition ( resulting from sales in the united states of merchandise that is priced below its fair value ) . it is up to congress to provide any additional remedies it deems appropriate.” the uruguay round agreements act , adopted in 1994 , made important changes in u.s. cvd law but did not add any language authorizing cvd actions against nme countries . moreover , the statement of administrative action accompanying the act acknowledged that the georgetown steel ruling stood for “the reasonable proposition that the cvd law cannot be applied to imports from nonmarket economy countries. although commerce could proceed with cvd actions against china , it would continue to face substantial practical challenges in identifying chinese subsidies and determining appropriate cvd levels . commerce could employ third - country information or “facts available” to complete china cvd actions . however , these approaches would not eliminate the challenges that such actions would present . moreover , commerce lacks explicit legal authority to implement china's wto commitment allowing other members to employ third - country information in cvd actions against china . several trade experts stated that , even in the best of circumstances , it can be quite difficult to identify and quantify subsidy benefits . in joining the wto , china specifically agreed to provide the organization with information on all of its subsidies as called for in the wto subsidies agreement . some trade experts we spoke with believed that sufficient information could be obtained to understand and estimate the benefits derived through chinese subsidies . however , u.s. government officials and other trade experts said that it remains particularly difficult to obtain substantive information about chinese subsidies . commerce officials told us that despite substantial reform in china , underlying features of the chinese economy continue to make it difficult to identify appropriate benchmarks for measuring subsidies . for example , according to ustr , most chinese subsidies are believed to be provided through the country's financial system . however , some trade experts stated that government control over the banking system in china makes it difficult to identify market - determined rates of interest that could be used as benchmarks to determine whether , or to what extent , particular companies or industries are benefiting from credit subsidies .