other collaborative forums . the usmc - socom board , army - marine corps board , and the power source technical working group , all provide a means to coordinate and communicate on initiatives such as fuel demand management efforts . according to dod officials , these collaborative forums take place at least twice a year and help the services discuss and share information related to issues such as fuel demand management and other programs of mutual interest . dod has established multiple organizations and forums to facilitate coordination and collaboration , but does not have a mechanism to systematically identify and track information on the numerous fuel demand management initiatives that have been fielded , or are in the research and development phase throughout dod . for instance , in an attempt to identify a list of fuel demand management initiatives , we sent a request to oep&p asking for a comprehensive list of initiatives that had been fielded or were expected to be fielded to forward - deployed locations in afghanistan within the next 12 months . oep&p officials could not provide us with a comprehensive list of initiatives at the time of our request , and told us they did not have a mechanism in place to track or catalog all ongoing fuel demand management initiatives . in order for us to obtain a comprehensive list of initiatives an oep&p official told us they would have to query all of the services and agencies involved to obtain this type of information . both dod's experience and our prior work have shown the benefits of enhanced information sharing for increasing coordination and collaboration , especially when multiple entities are involved in similar efforts . tracking specific detailed program information can enhance visibility and oversight efforts , and provide decision makers with timely and comprehensive information needed to determine management priorities . moreover , oep&p's directive outlining its roles and responsibilities states that oep&p will recommend appropriate funding levels for operational energy programs relating to the operational energy strategy . gao , warfighter support: actions needed to improve visibility and coordination of dod's counter - improvised explosive device efforts , gao - 10-95 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 29 , 2009 ) ; and defense acquisitions: opportunities exists to improve dod's oversight of power source investments , gao - 11-113 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 30 , 2010 ) . improve program management , visibility , and avoid investing in duplicative efforts . according to an oep&p official , the number of initiatives and organizations involved in dod's efforts to reduce its reliance on fuel has increased , and oversight and continued efforts to coordinate and collaborate across dod are necessary . during our visit to forward - deployed locations in afghanistan , army officials also reiterated that frequently the various dod organizations involved in developing fuel demand management solutions are unaware of ongoing efforts and establishing a mechanism to increase dod's visibility to identify all ongoing fuel demand management efforts would be useful . since oep&p did not have a mechanism in place to catalog fuel demand management initiatives underway within dod , we queried the services and various dod organizations to collect data on the initiatives being pursued within dod .