some states use their federal funds for staffing costs . however , a maryland program official pointed out that the size of the annual federal grants to states has not kept pace with the salary and other costs they must cover for staff . an indiana program official attributed a backlog of 4,000 cleanups at one point in the state's program to a lack of federal funding that could be used to pay for additional staff . states may be using their federal trust fund grants to pay for staff because the use of these funds is more restrictive than the state funds , which can be used to reimburse tank owners for their cleanup costs , among other things . a recent news report illustrates the problem . a school in roselawn , indiana , discovered that the children had been using and drinking water with nearly 10 times the epa - recommended safe level of mtbe . i understand that an investigation is trying to determine whether the mtbe came from a nearby tank and whether it is a factor contributing to the children's nosebleeds and other reported health problems . when there is a gasoline overflow , spill , or tank leak — referred to as releases — the tank owners and operators are to report the incident to epa if the release is on tribal lands , or otherwise to the state agency implementing the tank program , and to initiate cleanup . most releases are not discovered , however , until the tanks are taken out of service , when they must be permanently closed to eliminate future leaks . to help states cover their program costs , the congress annually provides the states with grants from a trust fund it created in 1986 . in fiscal year 2001 , states each received from $252,000 to $4.5 million , depending primarily on their cleanup workload , for a total of $58.7 million . states can use these resources for , among other things , cleaning up releases when the owner or operator is unable or unwilling to perform the cleanup , or cannot be identified . the fund is replenished primarily through a $.001 / gallon federal tax on gasoline and other fuels and had a balance of $1.7 billion at the end of fiscal year 2001 . because of rising concerns about continuing releases and the resulting contamination , especially from mtbe , we determined the ( 1 ) extent to which these releases may contain mtbe , and whether the contaminant poses health risks or affects cleanups , ( 2 ) progress states have made in cleaning up releases , and ( 3 ) the party responsible for the cleanup costs . in summary , we found the following: a majority of the 50 states have reported finding mtbe when they discover gasoline contamination at their tank sites and , increasingly , in their groundwater , surface water , and drinking water . this widespread contamination occurs , even though currently only certain communities in only about one - third of the states use gasoline with mtbe as a fuel additive .