grant programs . we reported that dhs generally achieved this performance expectation . more specifically , dhs has developed and administered grant programs for various surface transportation modes . however , some industry stakeholders have raised concerns regarding dhs's current grant process , such as time delays and other barriers in the provision of grant funding . we have not yet assessed dhs's provision of grant funding or the extent to which dhs monitors the use of the funds . in march 2007 , we reported that the dhs office of grants and training , now called the grant programs directorate , has used various programs to fund passenger rail security since 2003 . through the urban area security initiative grant program , the grant programs directorate has provided grants to urban areas to help enhance their overall security and preparedness level to prevent , respond to , and recover from acts of terrorism . the grant programs directorate used fiscal year 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 appropriations to build on the work under way through the urban area security initiative program , and create and administer new programs focused specifically on transportation security , including the transit security grant program and the intercity passenger rail security grant program . passenger prescreening . we reported that dhs has generally achieved one , and has not generally achieved two , of the performance expectations in this area . for example , tsa established policies and procedures to ensure that individuals known to pose , or suspected of posing , a risk or threat to security are identified and subjected to appropriate action . specifically , tsa requires that air carriers check all passengers against the selectee list , which identifies individuals that represent a higher than normal security risk and therefore require additional security screening , and the no fly list , which identifies individuals who are not allowed to fly . however , some mass transit and passenger rail operators have expressed confusion and concern about the role of tsa inspectors and the potential that these inspections could duplicate other federal and state rail inspections . in march and april 2007 , with respect to freight rail , tsa reported visiting terminal and railroad yards to measure implementation of 7 of 24 dhs recommended security action items for the transportation of toxic inhalation hazard materials . through its surface transportation security inspection program , tsa reported that its inspectors conduct inspections of key facilities for rail and transit systems to assess transit systems' implementation of core transit security fundamentals and comprehensive security action items ; conduct examinations of stakeholder operations , including compliance with security directives ; identify security gaps ; and develop effective practices . although tsa has deployed inspectors to conduct compliance inspections and carry out other security activities in the mass transit , passenger rail , and freight rail modes , tsa did not provide us with evidence that it has conducted compliance inspections for other surface transportation modes or information on whether the department believes compliance inspections are needed for other modes .