dod had no comments . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact william t. woods at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or woodsw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . this report addresses ( 1 ) federal agencies' use of indefinite delivery / indefinite quantity ( idiq ) contracts from fiscal years 2011 through 2015 , the latest year for which complete data were available ; ( 2 ) the role of competition when awarding and using selected idiq contracts and orders at the department of defense ( dod ) ; and ( 3 ) when and how dod contracting officials established prices for these contracts and orders . to examine the use of idiq contracts by federal agencies , we analyzed government - wide federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) data on idiq obligations from fiscal year 2011 through 2015 to identify information such as overall agency obligations on idiq contracts , obligations for products and services , obligations for single - and multiple - award idiq contracts , and extent of competition for single - award idiq contracts and multiple - award orders . data that were adjusted for inflation were adjusted to fiscal year 2015 dollars using the fiscal year gross domestic product price index . to assess the reliability of the fpds - ng data we used , we electronically tested for missing data , outliers , and inconsistent coding , and we compared data on selected idiq contracts to contract documentation we obtained . based on these steps , we determined the data were sufficiently reliable to present idiq contract obligations for fiscal years 2011 through 2015 . to provide context on agency use of idiq contracts , we also interviewed dod contracting officials . for our second and third objectives , we focused our review on dod since dod was the largest user of idiq contracts . within dod , we focused on the four dod components with the highest obligations on idiq contracts — the army , navy , air force , and defense logistics agency . from these components , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of 31 idiq contracts , 53 single - award idiq orders , and 23 multiple - award idiq orders . the 53 single award idiq orders were placed under 18 single - award idiq contracts , while the 23 multiple - award idiq orders were placed under 13 multiple - award idiq contracts ( see table 1 ) . only one offer was received on each of the 23 multiple - award orders selected , either because dod only solicited one contractor or because only one contractor submitted an offer . we selected orders where only one offer was received so as to understand reasons why competition did not take place .