( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the department of transportation ( dot ) for comment . table 4 describes these goals . our prior work illustrates that four key design elements — namely how fees are ( 1 ) set , ( 2 ) collected , ( 3 ) used , and ( 4 ) reviewed — require careful consideration and planning to achieve the desired goals . based on the prospective nature of user fees to recover faa's uas - related costs , we will focus on how user fees are set and collected . it is important to note that given the tradeoffs involved in establishing user fees , different users and stakeholders may have varying perspectives and opinions on what would be an appropriate fee structure . as these are policy decisions , this report does not recommend any specific fee mechanism . instead , the considerations and examples we present are intended to inform decision - making by laying out issues to take into account when designing user fees . as discussed in our user fee design guide , determining how uas user fees should be set and collected involves a number of steps . these steps include: identifying the costs associated with each activity and which costs should be recovered , identifying the beneficiaries of each activity , determining how to set fees for various types of beneficiaries , determining how fees should be collected , and determining when it is appropriate to begin collecting fees . omb instructions on designing user fees state that user fees should be sufficient to recover the full cost of providing each service or resource , including indirect costs , except to the extent that agencies determine that exceptions should be made . identifying the full costs of providing a uas service or resource — such as providing access to maps and air - traffic management services like laanc — could enable policy makers to determine , consistent with their policy goals , which of those costs should be recovered through user fees . identify the costs of each activity: our prior work has found that , to set fees so that total collections cover the intended share of program costs , a reliable accounting of total program cost is important . as previously discussed , while the costs of some current regulatory and operational activities related to uas are known , some current and most future costs are unclear . recognizing that generating and maintaining reliable cost data can be expensive , omb instructions note that program cost should be determined or estimated from the best available records of the agency . accordingly , policy makers could opt to implement fees to recover the estimated costs of each activity as regulations , services , and systems are established , and adjust fees periodically based on actual costs . determine which costs to recover: the next step is to determine the extent of the costs for each activity that should be recovered through user fees based on policy goals . for example , as discussed , many of faa's current costs relate to the “setup” or integration of uas into the national airspace , including the costs to develop and promulgate uas operational rules .