epa . in 1983 , the united states and mexico signed the agreement on cooperation for the protection and improvement of the environment in the border area ( the la paz agreement ) . in the agreement , the united states and mexico agreed to coordinate their efforts to address problems of air , land , and water pollution in the border area , defined as the area situated within 100 kilometers ( approximately 62 miles ) of either side of the border . the agreement names epa as the national coordinator responsible for its implementation and provides epa with a formal means of working with its federal counterpart in mexico on binational programs . in addition , epa and its mexican counterpart created a binational program to fund environmental improvement projects for communities along the border , called the u.s. - mexico border water infrastructure program . the most recent plan developed under the agreement — u.s. - mexico border 2020 — is an 8-year cooperative program initiated in 2013 that identified five goals to protect the environment and public health in both countries . the second goal — to improve access to clean and safe water — includes protecting and restoring binational watersheds by addressing the inadequate collection and treatment of wastewater . under the program , epa works with federal agencies — including usibwc — and state and local agencies to build grant - funded projects to improve water quality in the border area , including wastewater infrastructure projects that connect to or are related to usibwc's two international wastewater treatment plants in arizona and california . north american development bank ( nadb ) . in 1993 , another agreement between the united states and mexico led to the creation of two entities — nadb and the border environmental cooperation commission — to develop the environmental infrastructure of the u.s. - mexico border region . nadb's supervisory board includes representatives from epa and the departments of state and treasury . nadb also established the border environment infrastructure fund to administer grant funds provided by epa , for the implementation of high - priority municipal water and wastewater infrastructure projects located within 62 miles north of the u.s. - mexico border , as well as 187 miles south of the border . nadb funds wastewater and sewer projects in communities along the border , including projects at usibwc's two international wastewater treatment plants . ibwc's two wastewater treatment plants are required to meet water quality standards under the clean water act . the act establishes the basic structure for regulating surface water quality , including regulation of discharges of such pollutants as e. coli bacteria and heavy metals , such as arsenic and lead , into the waters of the united states . the act requires states to establish water quality standards that protect public health and the environment and consider aquatic wildlife and human consumption and recreation , among other uses . the act also requires epa to maintain and improve water quality by assisting and overseeing states' efforts , among other responsibilities . the states are required to monitor and assess the conditions of water bodies , and those that do not meet state water quality standards are considered impaired .