( see fig . as of september 30 , 2017 , there were 617 staff — a slight decrease in the number of staff from the end of the prior fiscal year . for certain categories , the innovation center assigns primary responsibility for developing and implementing models to a single model group ; for some other categories , the responsibility is shared across different groups . for example , the center assigned responsibility for models in the aco and the primary care transformation categories to the seamless care model group , whereas the responsibility for models in the initiatives to accelerate the development and testing of new payment and service delivery models categories were assigned across all four model groups . appendix ii provides a summary of the number of models organized under each category and a description of each model . as of march 1 , 2018 , the innovation center had implemented 37 models under section 1115a of the social security act . as a result , officials decided that no adjustments were required to the medicare shared savings program or other aco models to help improve performance . however , as shown in table 3 , the innovation center set a target for 2016 that was lower than the 2015 target . initiatives to accelerate the development and testing of new payment and service delivery models . this category includes models where the innovation center works with participants to test state - based and locally developed models , covering medicare beneficiaries , medicaid beneficiaries , or both . initiatives to speed the adoption of best practices . this category includes models in which the innovation center collaborates with health care providers , federal agencies , and other stakeholders to test ways of disseminating evidence - based best practices that improve medicare spending and quality of care for beneficiaries . we determined these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our objectives . to determine how the innovation center used evaluations of models , we interviewed officials from the center , cms's office of the actuary , evaluation contractors , and subject matter experts to discuss the use of evaluations , in general , as well as for five selected models specifically . we selected models based on a nonprobability sample that included both medicare and medicaid models ; ongoing and completed models ; models that fell under the responsibility of different innovation center staffing groups ; and one model evaluated for expansion . because we used a nonprobability sample , our results are not generalizable beyond the models we reviewed ; however , they provide insight into how cms uses the evaluations of its models . we also analyzed publicly available evaluation reports and other model documentation publicly available from the innovation center and the office of the actuary . to describe the innovation center's assessment of its performance , we reviewed information reported on the center's targeted and actual performance available in cms's congressional budget justifications for fiscal years 2012 through 2018 . information on the center's targets was available for performance years 2014 through 2018 . complete information on the center's actual performance was available for 2015 .