we did not make such a statement . rather , our report provides that omb needs to enhance its reporting guidance to the agencies so that the annual fisma reports provide more information essential for effective oversight . similarly , omb commented that our report included the suggestion that , unless it asked a specific question in a particular way and agencies answered those questions once each year , agencies would not implement fisma nor provide adequate cost - effective security for their information and systems . this characterization of our report is incorrect . we noted that specific recommendations were previously made to the agencies to remedy identified information security weaknesses . our recommendations in this report address the need for omb to enhance its fisma reporting guidance to increase the effectiveness and reliability of annual reporting . our report also emphasized the need to improve fisma data for oversight purposes . we believe that omb can achieve this by implementing our recommendations . we are sending copies of this report to the director of omb and to interested congressional committees . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in accordance with the fisma requirement that the comptroller general report periodically to the congress , our objectives were to evaluate ( 1 ) the adequacy and effectiveness of agencies' information security policies and practices and ( 2 ) implementation of fisma requirements . to assess the adequacy and effectiveness of agencies' information security policies and practices , we analyzed our related reports issued from the beginning of fiscal year 2003 through may of 2005 . we also reviewed and analyzed the information security work and products of the igs . both our reports and the igs' products used the methodology contained in the federal information system controls audit manual . further , we reviewed and analyzed data on information security in federal agencies' performance and accountability reports . to assess implementation of fisma requirements , we reviewed and analyzed the federal information security management act ( public law 107-347 ) ; the 24 major federal agencies' and office of inspector general fisma reports for fiscal years 2003 and 2004 , as well as the performance and accountability reports for those agencies ; the office of management and budget's fisma guidance and mandated annual reports to congress ; and the national institute of standards and technology's standards , guidance , and annual reports . we also held discussions with agency officials and the agency inspectors general to further assess the implementation of fisma requirements . we did not include systems categorized as national security systems in our review , nor did we review the adequacy or effectiveness of the security policies and practices for those systems . our work was conducted in washington , d.c. , from september 2004 through may 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the following are gao's comments on omb's letter dated june 29 , 2005 .