security operations . security operations tracks individual airport progress toward meeting tsa's annual 90 percent compliance target . security operations officials said they receive and review monthly training compliance reports from t&d . they are responsible for analyzing the data to monitor whether airports are on pace toward meeting the annual tso training compliance target . for example , tsa has set the required training completion pace goal at 8.3 percent per month for each commercial airport — - so that by maintaining the pace , by the end of the fiscal year , tsos at each airport will have completed their required annual training . officials told us that if they identify instances where an airport's overall tso training compliance rate for a given month is below this goal during the course of a fiscal year , they will reach out to the fsd responsible . they will provide the fsd a point of contact at a comparable airport with higher compliance rates to share best practices for addressing the issue . executive directors . executive directors oversee the fsds who work within their respective portfolios and discuss training compliance with the fsds during their annual performance review . to monitor fsds' efforts , executive directors also review data from tsa's online learning center database on tso training compliance for airports within their area of responsibility . according to an executive director we spoke with , if an executive director notices that tso training compliance rates for an airport whose fsd they oversee are lower than the 90 percent compliance target , he or she may reach out to the fsd to obtain information on the causes and discuss an action plan to improve training compliance . tsa personnel at headquarters also have various responsibilities for overseeing training compliance: t&d . t&d officials said that on a monthly basis they analyze tso training compliance data from tsa's online learning center database to identify how tsos nationwide are meeting requirements and whether there may be trends that indicate a need for changes to training during the fiscal year . for example , officials told us that in fiscal year 2019 they noticed that airports were generally behind in meeting annual training requirements and determined this was due to the effects of the federal government shutdown . in response , they stated they adjusted the duration of some training courses to shorten the amount of time it would take tsos to complete the training within the remainder of the fiscal year . while tsa headquarters officials from security operations and t&d are responsible for analyzing and addressing tso training compliance , they focus on monthly airport progress toward the 90 percent tso training target , rather than annual changes in compliance rates . in particular , they do not look back at prior year airport compliance data to assess whether airports did not meet the compliance target across fiscal years , and whether they require corrective action at the headquarters level . however , we reviewed annual tso training compliance data across fiscal years for each of the 435 commercial airports that reported data from fiscal years 2016 through 2018 .