reducing hazardous fuels . reducing hazardous fuels — to keep wildland fires from spreading into the wildland - urban interface and to help protect important resources by lessening a fire's intensity — is one of the primary objectives of the national fire plan . the agencies reported reducing fuels on more than 29 million acres from 2001 through 2008 . the agencies have also improved the data they use to help identify lands where fuels need to be reduced and have taken steps to improve their processes for allocating fuel reduction funds and setting priorities for fuels projects . the agencies have nearly completed their geospatial data and modeling system , landfire , as we recommended in 2003 . landfire is intended to produce consistent and comprehensive maps and data describing vegetation , wildland fuels , and fire regimes across the united states . such data are critical to helping the agencies ( 1 ) identify the extent , severity , and location of wildland fire threats to the nation's communities and resources ; ( 2 ) predict fire intensity and rate of spread under particular weather conditions ; and ( 3 ) evaluate the effect that reducing fuels may have on future fire behavior . landfire data are already complete for the contiguous united states , and the agencies have reported they expect to complete the data for alaska and hawaii in 2009 . because vegetative conditions change over time for a variety of reasons , including landscape - altering events such as hurricanes , disease , or wildland fires themselves , the agencies also plan several processes for updating the data , including selective updates every 2 years to reflect changes due to fires , fuel treatments , and other disturbances and a comprehensive update every 10 years . in addition , the agencies have begun to improve their processes for allocating fuel reduction funds to different areas of the country and for selecting fuel reduction projects , as we recommended in 2007 . the agencies have started moving away from “allocation by tradition” toward a more consistent , systematic allocation process . that is , rather than relying on historical funding patterns and professional judgment , the agencies are developing a process that also considers risk , effectiveness of fuel reduction treatments , and other factors . the forest service uses this process to allocate funds to its nine regions and has directed the regions to use it to allocate funds to their respective national forests . interior uses a similar process to allocate funds to its four agencies , and the agencies in turn use it to allocate funds to their respective state or regional offices . the agencies have been increasing their use of this process , in fiscal year 2009 applying the results to help them determine how to allocate their fuel reduction dollars . interior , however , kept its agencies and regions from gaining or losing more than 10 percent in funds relative to fiscal year 2008 . agency officials told us they expect to continue to improve their processes and to increasingly rely on them to allocate fuel reduction funds .