we determined the data were reliable for our purposes . in addition , we conducted a web - based survey of 330 lptv and translator station representatives for whom we were able to obtain e - mail addresses . after preparing draft survey questions and response categories , we spoke with representatives from three broadcast industry associations and a translator station representative chosen for their broad industry perspective and expertise in particular segments of the industry to determine whether selected questions were answerable by station representatives and whether the answer choices provided were appropriate , and updated our survey accordingly . we then pre - tested our survey with four representatives of lptv and / or translator stations — selected to provide for variety in type of station ( lptv and translator ) , number of stations represented , and geography — to ensure that our survey questions and skip pattern were clear and logical and that respondents could answer the questions without undue burden . in the course of pre - testing our survey we also obtained information that we present in this report . through our survey , we obtained information on: ( 1 ) lptv station programming , ( 2 ) ownership of lptv and translator stations , and ( 3 ) station representatives' views on actions that fcc has proposed or taken and actions congress or others could take to mitigate the effects of the incentive auction on lptv and translator stations . we administered the survey from june 2016 through august 2016 and received 115 responses . these responses represent 535 of the 2,063 lptv stations and 1,515 of the 3,660 translator stations in the u.s. and its territories . in our report , we generally provide survey results based on the number of respondents to each question . because not all respondents answered every question of the survey , the total number of respondents may be fewer than 115 for some results . the results of our survey are not generalizable , and we did not verify respondents' answers . we also interviewed officials from fcc and additional stakeholders that we selected to represent a range of views from various types of organizations . we selected stakeholders based on our review of comments filed in fcc's incentive auction and vacant channel proposal proceedings , as well as based on the recommendations of other organizations we interviewed . we interviewed six broadcast industry associations and three station ownership groups that own lptv and / or translator stations chosen to represent entities with a variety of programming types . additionally , we interviewed two technology companies , a technology industry association , and a public interest group chosen to present additional views on fcc's vacant channel proposal . more details about our scope and methodology , including a complete list of stakeholders we interviewed , can be found in appendix i . a copy of our survey and selected results can be found in appendix ii . we conducted this performance audit from january 2016 to december 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .