we identified no other noacs . we included only those legal authorities with not - to - exceed ( nte ) dates , and we excluded those legal authorities where we could not determine if they were for permanent or temporary appointments and the authorities were not listed in the questionnaire responses . we analyzed the temporary limited employment data contained in the cpdf from fiscal year 1991 through 2000 , and included those employees hired throughout the year . we defined hires to include appointments ( i.e. , when the person is not already an employee of an agency ) and conversions ( i.e. , appointments when a person is employed by an agency in a different position or under a different hiring authority ) . we did not analyze employees on - board as of a specific date ( eg , september 30 ) because such employees may work for short periods of time , and the end of the fiscal year would only capture a moment in time , according to agency human resources officials we interviewed . to identify the job characteristics of temporary limited employees governmentwide , we reviewed data available in the cpdf on work schedules and grade levels for fiscal years 1991 through 2000 and occupations for fiscal year 2000 . to identify the benefits available to these employees , we interviewed opm officials and reviewed studies from opm and mspb and applicable laws and regulations . to identify the primary reasons agencies give for using temporary limited employees , we designed and pretested with 2 agencies a questionnaire that we later sent to the 10 agencies that we identified as being the predominant users of such employees based on data provided by an opm official . ( see app . i for a copy of the questionnaire. ) in designing the questionnaire , we discussed the questionnaire contents with opm officials and reviewed reports and studies on temporary employees in the federal government . for 7 of the 10 agencies , we asked their five components that were the largest users of temporary limited employees to respond to the questionnaire . for the remaining three agencies , including the four components of defense , the questionnaire responses covered the entire agency . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to daily e - mail alert for newly released products” under the gao reports heading . web site: www.gao.gov / fraudnet / fraudnet.htm , e - mail: fraudnet@gao.gov , or 1-800-424-5454 or ( 202 ) 512-7470 ( automated answering system ) . this occurred in a very few instances . we also reviewed opm's guide to processing personnel actions to identify any additional noacs or legal authorities to include . table 5 lists the 41 agencies and components to which we sent the questionnaire . during the pretests , agency human resource officials told us that they could not provide the information we were requesting on an agencywide basis . we identified the components that were the largest users of temporary limited employees based on information provided by opm officials and cpdf data as of september 30 , 1999 .