we provided a draft of this report to hud for review . in response , hud provided a letter , signed by the acting chief information officer , which included a chart containing the department's written comments on the draft report . in the chart , the department outlined its views related to our four recommendations , and provided other comments and technical corrections on information in specific sections of the draft report , including the background and appendix i , our discussion of the findings on the development and use of hud's project management framework , and the report title page . the department's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix iv . in commenting on our recommendations , the department discussed actions it was taking on various aspects of the first recommendation , but did not state whether or not it concurred with the entirety of the recommendation ; stated that our conclusion leading to the second recommendation did not follow from the premises established in the draft report ; and concurred with our third and fourth recommendations . summaries of hud's comments for each recommendation , along with our responses , follow . with regard to the first recommendation — which called for the deputy secretary to establish a plan of action that identifies specific time frames for correcting the deficiencies highlighted in this report for both of its ongoing projects , as applicable , and its planned projects — the department noted activities that fha transformation expects to undertake in addressing the deficiencies for the six specific items listed as part of this recommendation . in this regard , the department stated that fha transformation acknowledged the need to update project charters and project management plans , develop deliverable - oriented work breakdown structures , examine and correct the requirements management plans and traceability matrixes , and work with support offices to ensure acquisition planning occurs at the earliest possible opportunity in the project's life cycle . the department added that fha transformation had recognized the need to update its charters and project management plans well ahead of our draft report . nonetheless , updated artifacts for fha transformation were not provided during our review . moreover , the department did not address whether or how it intends to address deficiencies for its ongoing or planned projects , including those associated with the ngms modernization effort . this was particularly evident in the development of work breakdown structures . for example , the ppm guidance included specific details regarding the importance of developing work breakdown structures as the basis for defining project work and establishing reliable cost and schedule baselines . however , as noted earlier , only 1 of the 14 projects in our study had drafted a work breakdown structure . further , the project management plan template and guidance call for incorporation of cost and schedule baselines and approaches for how those will be managed for any given project . however , the project management plans we examined did not clearly incorporate such baselines or how they would be managed . additionally , as we noted , the officials acknowledged that a lack of project management maturity was the cause of many of the deficiencies identified .