we also summarized proposed legislation on the credit . the work upon which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . claims of the small employer health tax credit have continued to be lower than thought eligible by government agency and small business group estimates , limiting the effect of the credit on expanding health insurance coverage through small employers . in 2014 , about 181,000 employers claimed the credit , down somewhat from 2010 ( see figure 1 ) . these numbers are relatively low compared to the number of employers thought eligible for the credit . in 2012 , we reported that selected estimates of the number of employers eligible ranged from about 1.4 million to 4 million . the council of economic advisors estimated 4 million and the small business administration ( sba ) estimated 2.6 million . estimates made by small business groups included the small business majority and the national federation of independent businesses . receipt of the credit for any years between 2010 and 2013 does not disqualify an employer from receiving the credit in 2014 and in subsequent years . small employers have not viewed the credit as a sufficient incentive to begin offering health insurance because the credit amount may not offset costs enough to justify the cost for health insurance premiums . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we also reviewed academic and government studies about the tax credit , including reports from the congressional research service and the treasury inspector general for tax administration , and a web page about the credit from the taxpayer advocate service . their estimates were 4 million and 1.4 million , respectively . a similar outcome is seen when the dollar value of credits claimed is compared to initial estimates . in 2010 , claims totaled $468 million compared to initial estimates of $2 billion by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) . in march 2012 , cbo and jct estimated that the credit would cost $1 billion in 2012 and $21 billion from 2012 to 2021 , down considerably from the original estimate of $5 billion and $40 billion , respectively . the revised estimates appear overstated as well given that actual claims for the credit in 2013 and 2014 were about $511 million and $541 million , respectively . based on our interviews , discussion groups , and literature review conducted for the 2012 report , we found the small employer health tax credit has not provided a strong enough incentive for employers to begin to offer health insurance for various reasons , as discussed below . the maximum amount of the credit does not appear to be a large enough incentive to get employers to offer or maintain insurance .