ii ) . recently , the commerce department published a notice indicating that except for environmental representation in the three committees where representation has been successfully challenged , “non - government organizations and academic institutions do not qualify for representation on a committee.” nevertheless , without further clarification by u.s. appellate courts or amendments to the current legislation about what fair balance means for trade advisory committees , some ambiguity about this issue will remain . negotiators , agency officials , and committee members have suggested the need for congress to clarify its intent for representation in the committee system . the current legal uncertainty also raises several practical issues . first , the lack of clarity in what fair balance means for these committees makes the system more vulnerable to court challenges . q19 ) in your opinion , what effect have the following recent actions had on the effectiveness of your committee operations ? section vi: benefits of committee membership q20 ) in your opinion , to what extent do you obtain the following benefits as a result of being a committee member ? to examine how well the committee structure reflects the current economy , we identified the range of goods or services represented by individual third tier committees and the export and import shares of those goods and services in total u.s. exports and imports . we then compared this data to membership data for each committee obtained from the gsa , which maintains annual reports covering each fiscal year covered by our review . based on these calculations , table 5 shows the export and import shares as well as the relative percentage of membership for each committee in 2000 . the following is gao's comment on the department of agriculture letter dated august 5 , 2002 . regarding our findings that the nomination and appointment process is slow and cumbersome , usda indicated that it took steps to streamline the process during the most recent rechartering period . we appreciate that the rechartering was completed within 4 months of being started . however , we note that it did not begin until may 2001- - - more than a month after the apac and atac charters had expired in march 2001 . as a result , as our report indicates , none of the six agricultural advisory committees met during the april to october 2001 period . moreover , we note that usda indicated in a july 2002 meeting with us that many advisers appointed to the current charter term have yet to receive final security clearances . the following are gao's comments on the department of commerce's letter dated august 5 , 2002 . the department of commerce stated that our draft report understated member satisfaction with the timeliness of consultations , arguing that 62 percent of the respondents to our survey reported that consultations were held on a timely basis to a moderate or great extent . ❒ 9hu\vlplodu 6rphzkdwvlplodu ❒ 0l[hgylhzv ❒ 6rphzkdwgliihuhqw ❒ ❒ q14 ) in your opinion , did the dissimilarity of views on your committee make it easier or more difficult for your committee to provide advice to the executive branch ?