ยง 1001 note . to conduct analysis across all objectives , we analyzed defined benefit pension plans for the 10 largest contractors based on dod contract obligations for fiscal year 2011 , selecting for deeper analysis the 35 defined benefit plans that together covered at least 90 percent of each contractor's pension liabilities . at the 10 largest contractors , we interviewed officials whose responsibilities included benefits management and government accounting , as well as defense contract management agency ( dcma ) and defense contract audit agency ( dcaa ) officials . we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and dod policy documents , in addition to reports written by the dcma contractor insurance / pension review ( cipr ) center and dcaa that address contractor pension costs . further , to understand how dod oversees pension costs at smaller contractors , we reviewed seven publicly traded contractors that met criteria we set for dod contract obligations , level of defined benefit pension plan assets , and amount of dod business relative to non - dod sales . to compare the pension plans of contractors to those sponsored by similar companies , we selected a peer group of 15 companies not among the largest dod contractors and analyzed the peers' and contractors' audited financial statements for 2011 . to identify trends in cas pension costs , for the nine largest contractors we reviewed pension plan documents such as cas valuation reports ( generally certified by qualified and credentialed actuaries ) and collected contractor data on incurred cas pension costs from 2002 to 2011 . to understand how pension costs make their way onto dod contracts , we selected divisions at the five largest contractors and at each division selected a weapon system program , which together represent a mix of military services and platform types . for the five divisions and programs we collected contractor data on incurred pension costs from 2005 to 2011 . to demonstrate the potential impact on cas pension costs of cas / erisa harmonization and changing economic assumptions , we developed a model of an illustrative contractor defined benefit plan , based on a review of the model dod uses , and reviewed by the chief actuary of the gao for actuarial soundness . we also gathered contractor projections of cas pension costs for 2012 to 2016 . see appendix i for additional details on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from december 2011 to january 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dod frequently purchases products that are not available in the commercial marketplace . for example , dod awards contracts for the development or production of weapon systems including fighter aircraft , submarines , and radars . in these situations , dod typically negotiates the price it will pay based on the cost to deliver the desired product .