topic summaries . officials told us that ncps may issue an rca topic summary if they identify a trend in adverse events or rcas in webspot . an rca topic summary provides background context for the relevant adverse event , discusses root causes that were identified through the rcas conducted , and describes corrective actions taken by vamcs . for example , ncps officials told us that after their review of rcas identified a trend in adverse events caused by the misidentification of patients , they determined that system - wide improvements were needed . ncps prepared topic summaries on misidentification related to specimens and transporting patients , as well as a guidance document on patient wristbands , which included best practices for vamcs . ncps officials told us topic summaries are distributed to vamcs as part of the agenda for monthly conference calls that ncps conducts with patient safety staff at vamcs and visns , and that they are also made available through ncps's internal website and via e - mail . from fiscal year 2010 through fiscal year 2014 , ncps has issued 12 topic summaries . ncps may also determine the need for a topic summary on the basis of requests for webspot searches from vamc and visn patient safety staff interested in knowing whether rcas have been conducted for similar adverse events at other vamcs . ncps officials estimated that they conduct about 200 such searches annually , and that these searches provide vamc and visn staff with information on similar adverse events , such as the corrective actions identified at other locations to address the adverse event . according to officials , ncps may determine through these searches that several locations are encountering similar patient safety issues , prompting the preparation of a topic summary . clinical team training . ncps implemented clinical team training for surgical teams in 2007 following analysis of rca information in webspot that found communication failure to be a root cause or contributing factor in 75 percent of the more than 7,000 rcas reviewed . the objective of clinical team training is to enhance teamwork and overcome obstacles to effective communication across professional boundaries . the training curriculum includes 2 months of preparation by the vamc ; a day - long onsite learning session consisting of lectures , group interaction , and videos ; and quarterly interviews of the clinical team to assess training implementation . one study found that surgical mortality decreased 11 percent more in vamcs that received clinical team training compared to those that had not ncps officials told us they have expanded clinical received it . team training beyond surgical teams , and have provided this training , for example , to teams in emergency departments , intensive care units , and inpatient behavioral health units . julia neily et al. , “association between implementation of a medical team training program and surgical mortality,” journal of the american medical association , vol . rcas are an important tool for vamcs to identify the systems or processes that contributed to an adverse event , and implement actions to address them . they are also an important contributor to ncps initiatives to improve patient safety across va's health care system .