gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january . ( see fig . epa also seeks to enhance the quality and credibility of its highly specialized scientific and technical products by using independent , expert peer reviews . the 24 federal advisory committees epa has established can be important vehicles for such peer review . for example , the epa science advisory board convenes panels to review many of the agency's scientific assessments and proposals . because the work of fully competent peer review panels can be undermined by allegations of conflict of interest and bias , the best interests of federal advisory committees are served by effective policies and procedures regarding potential conflicts of interest , impartiality , and overall committee balance . in this context , my testimony today discusses scientific integrity and transparency issues and , where applicable , epa reforms of the iris assessment program and federal advisory committee policies and procedures . my statement is based on findings from a number of reports and testimonies we have issued since 2001 involving scientific integrity and transparency issues at epa . we have supplemented this testimony with a preliminary review of epa's may 21 , 2009 , revisions to the iris assessment process and of the current appointment mechanisms for epa's 24 federal advisory committees . our preliminary analysis of iris reforms focuses primarily on issues related to scientific integrity and transparency and does not include iris productivity issues . we conducted our work from may 26 to june 9 , 2009 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform our work to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in march 2008 , we reported that the iris database — a critical component of epa's capacity to support scientifically sound risk management decisions , policies , and regulations — was at serious risk of becoming obsolete because the agency had not been able to complete timely , transparent , and credible chemical assessments or decrease its backlog of ongoing assessments . in addition , assessment process changes epa had recently made , as well as other changes epa was considering at the time of our review , would have further reduced the credibility , transparency , and timeliness of iris assessments . among other things , we concluded the following: epa's efforts to finalize iris assessments have been impeded by a combination of factors . these factors include ( 1 ) the office of management and budget's ( omb ) requiring two additional reviews of iris assessments by omb and other federal agencies with an interest in the assessments , such as the department of defense , and ( 2 ) epa management decisions , such as delaying some assessments to await the results of new research . the two new omb / interagency reviews of draft assessments involve other federal agencies in epa's iris assessment process in a manner that limits the credibility of iris assessments and hinders epa's ability to manage them .