if no reduction is selected , the coverage does not reduce . fegli insurance is provided through a contract opm has established with metlife . metlife's office of federal employees' group life insurance ( ofegli ) adjudicates claims under the fegli program and makes payments to fegli beneficiaries . most federal employees , including part - time employees , are eligible for insurance under fegli , and approximately 85 percent purchase fegli coverage . upon starting their federal employment , federal employees are automatically enrolled in fegli's basic life insurance coverage unless they file appropriate paperwork with their employing agency to opt out of the program .  option b offers additional optional insurance coverage in an amount of one to five multiples of the employee's annual salary , after rounding the salary up to the next even thousand . for option b coverage , age group designations also apply but begin with “under age 35,” continue in 5-year age increments until age 79 , and end with an “80 and over” age group . bi - weekly and monthly costs for each $1,000 in insurance can range from a low of $0.03 and $0.065 , respectively , for employees under 35 to a high of $2.40 and $5.20 , respectively , for employees 80 and older .  option c covers eligible family members of an employee or retiree , including the enrollee's spouse and eligible dependent children . the employee selects one to five times an amount ( a “multiple” ) — $5,000 for a spouse and $2,500 for each eligible dependent child . according to opm officials , the fegli program is adequately funded if fegli revenues meet or slightly exceed program costs and the program's assets meet or exceed its liabilities . figure 3 shows opm data on fegli's assets and liabilities from 2000 to 2010 , and appendix ii provides additional information on fegli's annual premiums , claims , and investment income . in particular , opm reported in its 2010 annual report that the program's liabilities as of september 30 , 2010 , were approximately $43.9 billion and that its assets totaled $39.2 billion . according to opm officials , while the reported data would appear to indicate that the program was underfunded , they believe fegli's financing is adequate because the overall liability amount reported above does not take into account employee contributions for optional insurance coverage , which has the effect of making the liability appear to be larger than it actually is . according to opm , they take these funds into account in other internal analyses , and these analyses show that the program's assets sufficiently meet the program's liability when employee contributions are considered . the legislation that created fegli intended the program to offer a low - cost insurance benefit to federal employees and their families . specifically , the statute that created fegli described the program as an insurance benefit for federal employees that provides insurance at rates opm determines are generally consistent with the lowest basic premium rates for new policies issued to large employers . further , fegli's legislative history suggests that the program's purpose is to provide low - cost group life insurance to federal employees .