standards . tgdc and nist have been working on behalf of eac to improve the 2002 federal election commission voluntary voting system standards and their impact on the acquisition , testing , operations , and management processes of the voting system life cycle . tgdc approved 41 resolutions between july 2004 and april 2005 , many of which directed nist to research and develop recommendations for changing various voting system capabilities and assurance processes . of the 41 resolutions , 24 relate to the security and reliability of voting systems . appendix iv contains the relevant resolutions and their status . tgdc's initial priorities have been to correct errors and fill gaps in the 2002 standards and to supplement them with provisions that address hava requirements . in may 2005 , tgdc approved a first set of recommended changes and delivered them to eac . subsequently , eac published these changes as proposed voluntary voting system guidelines and requested public comment by september 30 , 2005 . eac plans to review and address the comments it receives from the public and its standards and advisory boards during october 2005 , and to issue the 2005 voluntary voting system guidelines shortly thereafter , depending on the nature and volume of comments . eac is proposing that the 2005 voluntary voting system guidelines will become effective 24 months after they are adopted by the eac , although individual states will be free to adopt the standards at any time during the 24 month period . according to the eac , the 24 month period is intended to give vendors the time to design and develop systems that comply with the new guidelines ; to give testing laboratories the opportunity to develop testing protocols , train laboratory staff , and be prepared to test the systems against the new guidelines ; and to allow states time to adopt the standards , adjust their certification and acceptance testing processes , and acquire systems in plenty of time for future election cycles . key security and reliability standards of the proposed 2005 guidelines include a method for distributing voting system software , protocols for generating and distributing software reference data for the nist repository of certified voting system software , a method for validating the proper setup of voting systems , controls for the use of wireless communications by voting systems , and optional specifications for a voter - verified paper audit trail . however , nist reported that several of the topics listed in the proposed guidelines ( including software distribution , validation of system setup , and wireless communications ) will not be fully addressed in the 2005 update , and will need to be updated in a future version of the guidelines . furthermore , key security and reliability improvements to the existing standards ( including guidance for the security of cots software ; ensuring the correctness of software , testing , and documentation for system security ; enhancements to the precision and testability of the standards ; and the usability of error messages ) have been deferred until the subsequent set of guidelines is developed .