( see fig . retirees aged 65 or older typically rely on medicare as their primary source of coverage . benefit consultants we interviewed stated that employers typically set their cap prospectively at a level higher than current spending , and if spending approaches the cap , they can either reduce benefits to stay within the cap or raise the cap . some employers are considering , but few have implemented , a more fundamental change that would shift retiree health benefits to a defined contribution plan . under a defined contribution plan , an employer directly provides each retiree with a fixed amount of money to purchase insurance coverage , either in the individual market or through a choice of plans offered by the employer . the individual is then responsible for the difference between the employer's contribution and the selected plan's total premium . benefit consultants have reported that many employers would prefer to move toward a defined contribution approach . however , several issues , such as retirees' readiness to assume responsibility for managing their own health benefits and contractual bargaining agreements with union plans , could limit employers' ability to make such a fundamental change . increasing economic pressures and evolving demographic trends could lead employers to reevaluate their provision of retiree health benefits and could result in further erosion of benefits . the following are contributing factors: health insurance premium increases , which were less than the general inflation rate from 1995 to 1997 , began to rise faster than general inflation in 1998 and were about 6 or 8 percentage points above the general inflation rate in 2001 . the weakening economy may lead employers to reevaluate employee salary and benefit levels . specifically , the nation's gross domestic product increased at an annual rate of 2.4 percent in the second quarter of 2001 , slower than the 4.2 percent and 5.0 percent growth in 1999 and 2000 . also , the nation's unemployment rate has gradually but steadily increased to 4.9 percent as of september 2001 after reaching a historic low of 3.9 percent 1 year earlier . many economists expect a further weakening of the economy , at least in the short term , as a result of the september 11 terrorist attacks . the aging of the baby boom generation will increase the proportion and number of americans of retirement age , leading some employers to have a larger number of retirees for whom they provide coverage but comparatively fewer active workers to subsidize these benefits . other factors have increased employers' uncertainty about their future role in providing retiree health benefits , but their implications are less clear . for example , if a proposed outpatient prescription drug benefit was added to medicare , some employers could redesign their coverage to supplement the medicare benefit , while others could choose to reduce or eliminate drug coverage . general workforce trends could also affect the availability of retiree health benefits . while some anecdotal information suggests increasing mobility of the workforce with fewer long - term job attachments , the data on this trend are mixed .