we disagree . our methodology called for analyzing commission documents , pertinent legislation and guidance , and various reports by opm and gao . although at the beginning of our project , we envisioned interviewing key managers and all of the commissioners as part of possible work on the commission's organizational structure , these interviews became unnecessary when we decided to focus on the commission's gpra plans and reports , oversight of the commission , and the agency's response to our previous report recommendations . as noted in our report , to obtain information for these objectives , we conducted interviews with the staff director , special assistant to the staff director , human resources director , and budget chief . we also followed up with e - mails and telephone calls as needed . finally , in our exit conference , we presented all of our findings and provided an opportunity for commission staff to comment on our findings and provide technical corrections . at that meeting , commission officials provided a few comments , but no technical corrections ; with few exceptions , they did not disagree with the facts or conclusions we presented . the commission asserted that it cooperated with us fully , at all times . however , while our working relationships were professional and commission officials were usually responsive in providing documents as requested , we do not agree that commission staff cooperated fully with us throughout our work . obtaining interviews with the commission and key staff was frequently difficult , with each one requiring a minimum of 3 weeks to schedule . for example , although we notified the commission on april 19 , 2004 , about our planned work and called shortly thereafter to schedule an initial meeting , it took numerous calls to set up our entrance conference on may 20 , 2004 . this delay in scheduling the initial meeting occurred despite our reference to the need for a rapid response . in addition , since it was difficult for commission officials to find the time to meet with us , we combined our entrance conference with that of another gao team that was examining the commission's financial transactions so that they would not also experience a delay in starting their work . we had similar difficulties scheduling other meetings as well . annual performance plan . this document sets forth the agency's annual performance goals , which should be linked to its strategic goals . an agency's annual goals provide the intermediary steps needed to reach its long - term strategic goals . annual goals should be objective , quantifiable , and measurable . omb guidance now directs agencies to include budget information in their performance plans and encourages agencies to align resources with annual goals . prior to their submissions for fiscal year 2005 , agencies were not directed to associate program costs in this way . annual performance report . this document provides information on an agency's actual performance for the previous fiscal year . this report should provide information on the results of its progress in meeting annual goals .