roll - your - own and pipe tobacco are taxed by weight . before chipra , the federal excise tax rate on cigarettes was higher than the rates on roll - your - own tobacco , pipe tobacco , and small cigars . in 2009 , chipra significantly raised the tax rates on these four products . the act equalized the rates for cigarettes , roll - your - own tobacco , and small cigars , but not for pipe tobacco ( see fig . prior to chipra , roll - your - own and pipe tobacco were taxed at the same rate ( $1.10 per pound ) . however , chipra raised the federal excise tax rates for roll - your - own tobacco and pipe tobacco by different amounts , resulting in a $21.95 per pound difference between the higher - taxed roll - your - own tobacco ( $24.78 per pound ) and the lower - taxed pipe tobacco ( $2.83 per pound ) . as a result , of the three cigarette products shown in figure 1 , the cigarette made with pipe tobacco ( marked as number 2 ) is taxed at a much lower rate than either the factory - made cigarette ( number 3 ) or the cigarette made with roll - your - own tobacco ( number 1 ) . chipra also significantly changed the federal excise tax rate on large cigars . large cigars are unique among tobacco products in that the tax rate is ad valorem — calculated as a percentage of the manufacturer's or importer's sale price — up to a maximum tax per thousand sticks . figure 1 shows a sample of different smoking tobacco products . the federal excise tax rates on different tobacco products are calculated in different ways . cigarettes and small cigars are taxed on a per unit basis — the number of sticks . we assessed the reliability of the data by performing data checks for inconsistency errors and completeness and by interviewing cognizant officials . we determined that the treasury , cbp , and bls data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we estimated what the effect on tax revenue collection would have been if the sales trends for roll - your - own and pipe tobacco and for small and large cigars had not been affected by substitution between the products but had been affected by the increase in price due to the tax — in other words , if the market shifts resulting from the substitution of higher - taxed products with lower - taxed products had not occurred . our analysis takes into account the expected fall in quantity demanded due to the price increases resulting from higher federal excise tax rates that chipra imposed on all four of these smoking tobacco products . to update some of our previous observations of marketing practices , we returned to tobacco stores and some of the internet retailers that we had visited for our april 2012 report .