some gpos are jointly owned . for example , both novation and healthcare purchasing partners international ( hppi ) are owned by the same two networks of hospitals and physicians . network members purchase using novation contracts . however , non - network members purchase using hppi contracts , which are negotiated by novation . some gpos , such as healthtrust , require that members do not belong to other gpos . in addition , some gpos , such as novation and amerinet , contract with manufacturers to supply products sold under the gpo's own “private - label” brand name . ( see appendix i for a summary of characteristics of gpos in our pilot. ) price savings differed by size of hospital . in order to sell to hospitals through gpo contracts , vendors generally submit proposals to a gpo — in response to requests for proposals ( rfp ) — that are then evaluated . based on these evaluations , the gpo enters into negotiations with select vendors to determine prices and , in some cases , administrative fees that vendors pay to the gpo . hospitals then buy directly from the manufacturer for a price specified in a gpo contract . often prices through a gpo - negotiated contract vary based on each hospital's volume of purchases and the extent to which the member hospital delivers on its “commitment” to buy an agreed - upon share of its purchases of a certain product from a particular manufacturer . the more of a product that a hospital purchases , the lower the price per unit it may pay the manufacturer . a hospital's price may also vary depending upon the share of a product it purchases from a manufacturer . for example , a hospital that buys only 25 percent of its cardiac stents from one manufacturer may pay nearly three times more per stent than one that purchases all its stents from that manufacturer . member hospitals may have an additional financial incentive to use the gpo contract . however , the guideline states that a purchasing arrangement is not necessarily in violation of the antitrust laws simply because it falls outside the safety zone . likewise , the guideline suggests that even a purchasing arrangement that falls within the safety zone might still raise antitrust concerns under “extraordinary circumstances.” each arrangement has to be examined according to its particular facts . in this regard , the guideline also describes factors that reduce antitrust concerns with purchasing arrangements that fall outside the safety zone . gpos did not always obtain better prices for member hospitals . the advantage or disadvantage of gpo prices varied by the model purchased and size of hospital — but lacked a clear relationship to size of gpo . in our pilot study , we compared median gpo and median non - gpo prices for purchases by hospitals and found the following: among hospitals of all sizes , hospitals using gpo - negotiated contracts to buy pacemakers and safety needles often paid more than hospitals negotiating on their own . this finding also held for hospitals using large gpos , compared to hospitals negotiating on their own .