additional points . reservists can earn additional points for such things as completion of accredited correspondence courses or participation in funeral honors duty . reservists , however , cannot apply more than 90 inactive duty points toward retirement in any given year . in addition , reservists receive 1 point for any day served on active duty prior to separating from active duty and affiliating with a reserve component . when called to active duty , reservists also earn active duty points — 1 point for each day served . reservists can earn a maximum of 365 active duty points in any calendar year and a career maximum of 10,950 points or 30 years of creditable service . reservists who are called to active duty will accumulate more points and , therefore , will receive larger retirement annuities , should they stay until retirement , than their reserve counterparts who are not called to active duty . we analyzed data contained in dod's reserve components common personnel data system and developed overall workforce profiles — by years of service , age , and pay grade — for each reserve component , and for officer and enlisted personnel , to identify trends that might suggest that changes to dod's reserve retirement system are warranted from a workforce management perspective . we selected three points in time — calendar years 1991 , 1997 , and 2003 — because they represent key periods when reservists were called to active duty . these included operations desert shield / desert storm , military operations in the balkans and in southwest asia , and current operations in iraq and afghanistan . we did not find significant variations in overall years of service , age , or pay grade that would suggest that changes to dod's reserve retirement system are currently needed from a workforce management perspective . the average years of service of reserve enlisted personnel was 1 to 3 years higher , for all components , in calendar year 1997 than it was in calendar year 1991 . with the exception of the marine corps reserve , the average years of service was the same at the end of calendar year 2003 as it was at the end of calendar year 1997 . in the marine corps reserve , the average years of service was 1 year lower at the end of calendar year 2003 than it was at the end of calendar year 1997 , but the same as it was at the end of calendar year 1991 . figure 4 shows the average years of service by reserve enlisted personnel for all components for calendar years 1991 , 1993 , and 2003 . similarly , reserve enlisted personnel were , on average , 1 to 3 years older , across all components , in calendar year 1997 than they were in calendar year 1991 . reserve enlisted personnel in four of the components were , on average , the same age or 1 year older in calendar year 2003 as they were in calendar year 1997 .