business priorities . to ensure business priorities are a focus , a project starts with a vision that contains , among other things , a purpose , goals , metrics , and constraints . in addition , he or she is responsible for removing project obstacles that may impede the team's performance . additionally , best practices state that it is essential for a systems development team to have involvement from other stakeholders , such as executive level management and senior management . such involvement helps to minimize project risk by ensuring that key requirements are identified and developed , problems or issues are resolved , and decisions and commitments are made in a timely manner . titte of electricnd electronic engineer ( ieee ) , stem nd oftwre engineering – oftwre life cycle process , ieee std . for agile development , progress and the amount of work remaining can be reflected in a burn - down chart , which depicts how factors such as the rate at which work is completed ( velocity ) and changes in overall product scope affect the project over time . while va had an oversight tool that showed the percentage of work completed to reflect project status at the end of each iteration , it did not depict the velocity of the work completed and the changes to scope over time . program officials stated that their current reporting did not show the changes in project scope because their focus was on metrics that are forward looking rather than showing past statistics for historical comparison . however , without this level of visibility in its reporting , management may not have all the information it needs to fully understand project status . va deployed the first two of four releases of its long - term system solution by its planned dates , therefore providing improved claims - processing functionality to all regional processing offices , such as the ability to calculate original and amended benefit claims . in addition , the agile process allowed the department the flexibility to accommodate legislative changes and provide functionality according to business priorities , such as housing rate adjustments . however , key features of the solution were not completed as intended in the second release because the department found some functionality to be more complex than anticipated . specifically , interfaces to legacy systems and the conversion of data from systems in the interim solution were not completed as intended in the second release . due to these delays , va planned to reprioritize what functionality would be included in its third release . analysts , database engineers , usability experts , technical writers , architects , and designers . the team members are responsible for developing high - quality functionality as prioritized by the product owner . project manager . the project manager focuses more on leadership than on management and is a facilitator for the team working together . 12207-2008 , ( piy , n.j. , juary 2008 ) nd crnegie mellon softwre engineering intitte , cmmi for development , verion 1.2 , cmu / sei - 2006-tr - 008 ( pittsburgh , penn. , aust 2006 ) . of implementing agile v scrm .