the comments are presented and evaluated in appendix i . to determine what plans were in place to determine where and how to deploy combat aircraft for operation allied force and how combat aircraft basing decisions were coordinated among the services and allied nations , we visited the u.s. european command in stuttgart , germany , and interviewed officials who had participated in the operation . we also visited the u.s. air forces , europe , at ramstein air base , germany , and interviewed officials in the offices of strategy and deliberate plans / engagements , plans and doctrine , logistics , civil engineering , financial management , and the air operations squadron plans division . in addition , we reviewed documentation on operation allied force planning and coordination efforts at these locations . to determine whether the united states had the necessary international agreements in force to enable it to quickly execute plans for operation allied force , we interviewed officials in the operations law division of the judge advocate general's office at the u.s. air forces , europe . we also interviewed officials in the office of foreign military affairs , assistant secretary of defense ( international security affairs ) . to discuss issues involving who may be granted the authority to negotiate supplemental international agreements , we interviewed officials in the office of treaty affairs in the u.s. department of state . we also reviewed documentation on supplemental international agreements . we conducted our review between september 2000 and june 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the honorable donald h. rumsfeld , secretary of defense ; the honorable joseph w. westphal , acting secretary of the army ; the honorable robert b. pirie , jr. , acting secretary of the navy ; the honorable lawrence j. delaney , acting secretary of the air force ; general james l. jones , commandant of the marine corps ; the honorable colin l. powell , secretary of state ; and the honorable mitchell e. daniels , jr. , director of the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 757 ) 552-8111 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . key staff who contributed to this report were william cawood , donna rogers , beverly schladt , and nancy ragsdale . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's ( dod ) letter dated may 10 , 2001 . we were aware that the military services used acquisition and cross servicing agreements during operation allied force to purchase host nation goods and services , and we discuss this usage in the body of our report ( see p. 14 ) . however , as we state there , u.s. air forces in europe officials told us that the use of such agreements made hastily during operation allied force resulted in inconsistencies in agreements with different countries , some of which were favorable to the united states and some of which were not .