this has been a standard practice for some time . if the requirement is for build - to - suit space , then the term of the lease may have to be longer than 10 years to accommodate the lessor's ability to finance the building . it is these build - to - suit leases that are most likely to be affected by scoring because the lessor must have a longer term lease to get financing for a new structure . the lease term to which the agency is willing to commit is another important factor . gsa officials stated that some agencies told gsa that the agency only has authority to commit to a maximum of a 10-year lease . other agencies only want leases of 10 years or less because of the changes occurring within the agency , such as downsizing or consolidation . an example , according to gsa officials , is the internal revenue service ; because of downsizing it does not want to sign a lease longer than 10 years . the rental market conditions also affect a lease's term . gsa does not want to commit to a long - term lease when the market rent is considered high . conversely , if market rent is low , gsa will consider a longer term lease , according to officials . an example is a lease for the customs service in seattle , wa , for which gsa did not want a long - term lease because the current rental rates were high . location becomes an important factor because gsa is required to take space back from an agency with only 120 days notice . so in areas with a limited federal presence , gsa does not want to commit to leases where the space cannot be easily back filled with other federal agency employees , according to gsa officials . for example , in small towns , gsa would not want to commit to a lease term longer than an agency wanted when it is the only federal agency in the location . gsa would not be able to find another federal tenant for this space . although efforts to address budget - scoring rules did result in shorter term leases in some cases , we could not determine the total number of leases where the term was actually affected by budget scoring because of gsa's documentation process for scoring leases . further , while a shorter term lease can be more costly than a longer term lease , we could not determine the actual overall monetary impact of shorter lease terms because gsa does not generally seek comparisons of short - and long - term lease costs in the solicitation process . in addition to having some effect on the lease term , our previous work has shown that budget scoring can affect the government's decision whether to construct or lease a facility . also , we have previously reported that the budget - scoring rules have the effect of favoring leasing and that one option for scorekeeping that could be considered would be to recognize that many operating leases are used for long - term needs and should be treated on the same basis as purchases or construction .