gao - 04-1069 . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2004 . ( see fig . at this point , the military generally begins to assess whether the servicemember will be able to remain in the military , a process that could take months to complete . the process can take even longer if the servicemember appeals the military's initial disability decision . in response to recommendations made by the va vocational rehabilitation and employment task force , va is beginning to change its approach to vr&e to better reflect contemporary views of disability . the secretary of veterans affairs established this external task force in 2003 to conduct a comprehensive review of va's vr&e program . in addition , faced with the immediate need to provide benefits and services to a new generation of veterans with disabilities , va in august 2003 formed an internal task force to develop and implement policies to improve the transition of injured servicemembers back to civilian life . known as the seamless transition task force , it included ad hoc participation from dod . although this task force's initial priority was to ensure the continuity of medical care for injured servicemembers as they transition from military to va health care , it has also coordinated efforts to ensure access to all other va benefits , including vr&e services . we have previously reported on the importance of early intervention to maximize the work potential of individuals with disabilities . we have also reported , however , that current federal disability programs offer little opportunity for early intervention with individuals who apply for compensation . these programs require lengthy assessments in which applicants must focus on demonstrating their work limitations rather than their abilities and potential to work . consequently , vocational rehabilitation is typically introduced late in the process . furthermore , we have designated federal disability programs , including va's , as high - risk programs because they lack emphasis on the potential for vocational rehabilitation to return people to work and also rely on outmoded assumptions about the relationship between impairment and work . va has instructed its regional offices to make seriously injured servicemembers a high priority for all va assistance and asked dod to provide data that would ensure va's ability to identify and monitor this population . because many seriously injured servicemembers are initially treated at major military treatment facilities , va has deployed staff to these sites to provide information on all veterans' benefits , including vr&e services . to ensure the identification and monitoring of all seriously injured servicemembers , va initiated a memorandum of agreement proposing that dod share a range of information , including the names of those with serious injuries , their medical condition , and their military status . as of december 2004 , a formal agreement with dod had not been reached . in the meantime , va has instructed its regional offices to develop local liaison with dod in order to identify and assist seriously injured servicemembers . the 12 regional offices we reviewed have developed information of varying completeness and reliability .