gsa is responsible for managing the frpp . as we have reported , despite the implementation of the executive order , nationwide data collection efforts , and various reform efforts and proposals , data problems have continued and agencies continue to face persistent challenges with managing real property . my statement today summarizes our recent work as it pertains to data problems affecting federal real property management by civilian agencies . it highlights our work on data guidance and reliability issues related to the management of: ( 1 ) excess and underutilized property , ( 2 ) structures , ( 3 ) maintenance and repair backlogs , and ( 4 ) cost saving estimates . for this statement , we drew primarily from gao reports on federal real property issued from june 2012 through january 2014 including some updates on the status of recommendations made in those reports . to obtain these updates , we monitored agency actions taken and performed follow - up with agency officials . see appendix i for a list of these gao reports . for those reports , we obtained and analyzed frpp data submissions and other real property data from the agencies we selected , reviewed frpc and agency guidance documents , and interviewed federal agency officials . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact david wise at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . our reports contain more detailed explanations of the methods used to conduct our work . the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . federal excess and underutilized property is an ongoing challenge facing the government due in part to unreliable data . in june 2012 , we found that the frpc did not ensure that key data elements — including buildings' utilization , condition , annual operating costs , mission dependency , and value — were defined and reported consistently and accurately . for example , the frpp data did not accurately describe the properties at 23 of the 26 locations we visited , often overstating the condition and annual operating costs of buildings . the types of inconsistencies and inaccuracies we identified in these five key data elements suggest that the frpp database is not a useful decision - making tool for managing federal real property . our review focused on five civilian federal real property - holding agencies — gsa and the departments of energy ( doe ) , the interior ( interior ) , veterans affairs ( va ) , and agriculture ( usda ) . we reviewed key agency - reported frpp data elements including utilization , condition index , annual operating costs , and value , and we found inconsistencies and inaccuracies for each of these data elements .