we provided sba a draft of this report for review and comment . in comments provided to us in an email , sba generally agreed with our recommendations and stated the agency's plan to incorporate them into its ongoing efforts to implement the act and improve the application process . specifically , sba said that the agency has plans to expand its outreach efforts to ensure the public in all regions of the country are more aware of sba disaster assistance programs before a disaster strikes . sba is also planning to submit both the required annual report , and the 2009 revision to its drp to congress by november 15 , 2009 . additionally , sba officials said the agency has plans to develop an implementation plan for completion of the remaining provisions . notices of presidential declarations of major disasters were issued in each state . flooding continued into july 2008 in some areas , with cedar rapids , iowa , being hardest hit , in terms of suffering the most physical damage and business losses . the floods left 13 dead and damage region - wide was estimated in the tens of billions of dollars . they must also apply within certain time frames . second , in early september 2008 , a major disaster struck the gulf coast states when hurricane ike made its way through texas and louisiana . hurricane ike made landfall as a category 2 hurricane near galveston , texas , on september 7 , 2008 , and was declared a major disaster by the president on september 13 , 2008 . ike was the third most destructive hurricane to make landfall in the united states and the third major hurricane of the 2008 atlantic hurricane season ; it caused widespread damage to some gulf coast areas already trying to recover from hurricane gustav , which hit louisiana on september 1 , 2008 . appendix i contains a detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from october 2008 through july 2009 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . sba's disaster loan program , which has been a part of the agency since its inception in 1953 , is the primary federal program for funding long - term recovery assistance . applications that are not declined are assigned to an sba loss verifier , who is responsible for contacting each applicant to make an appointment to verify the physical losses and estimate a dollar value for damaged real estate and personal property . next , staff underwrite the application and review in greater depth the applicant's credit history , repayment ability , and eligibility . unless the application is withdrawn , sba processes each loan application to an approved or declined status .