each is discussed below . first , omb plans to develop a formalized management and maintenance plan that it says will provide explicit instructions to agencies on the roles , responsibilities , standards , and expectations for the management and upkeep of the fea . second , according to omb , another planned activity is annually revising the reference models and consolidating all five reference models into one document . to be meaningful , these models should be inherently consistent with one another , in view of the many interrelationships and interdependencies among , for example , business functions , the information flows among the functions , the security needs of this information , and the services and applications that support these functions . our reading of the four available reference models does not demonstrate to us that this kind of content exists in the fea , and thus we believe that the fea is more akin to a point - in - time framework or classification scheme for federal government operations . our discussions with omb officials confirmed our reading of the fea . accordingly , if agencies use the fea as a model for defining the depth and detail for their own architectures , the agencies' enterprise architectures may not provide sufficient content for driving the implementation of systems . is the expected relationship between agencies' enterprise architectures and the fea clearly articulated ? further , we reported that when the state of enterprise architecture is considered in relation to a more recent and demanding benchmark , this percentage dropped to about 20 percent ( in round terms ) , even though some agencies fared favorably against this benchmark and were role models for others to follow . this composite picture of immature enterprise architecture management can be attributed to several long - standing challenges , which were the basis for the recommendations that we made to omb in 2002 and reiterated in 2003 . recently , omb and the federal cio council began to take steps that are consistent with many of our recommendations . between 2001 and 2003 , little substantial change was revealed in agencies' collective enterprise architecture maturity , when this is compared against version 1.0 of our framework . of the 93 agencies that we reported on in 2001 and 2003 , ● 22 agencies ( 24 percent ) increased their maturity , ● 24 agencies ( 26 percent ) decreased their maturity , and ● 47 agencies ( 51 percent ) remained the same . agencies' progress between 2001 and 2003 is similarly limited when we consider the total number of eammf core elements satisfied . specifically , the 93 agencies satisfied about 57 percent of all possible framework elements in 2001 and about 60 percent in 2003 . upon further inspection , these data show that agencies improved in satisfying certain core elements , but these improvements were offset by declines in satisfaction of other core elements . the following are examples of elements where agency satisfaction significantly improved: ● “metrics exist for measuring enterprise architecture benefits” ( about a 38 percent increase ) , ● “chief architect exists” ( about a 23 percent increase ) , and ● “enterprise architecture products are under configuration management” ( about an 18 percent increase ) .