substantially met . the estimate was based on the mox facility construction project's technical baseline and on the methodology and costs in the 2013 independent cost estimate conducted by the u.s. army corps of engineers . doe used updated installation rates for this estimate that were different than the rates used in the contractor's technical baseline . for example , the contractor counted that 11 percent of the pipes had been installed , while doe's 2016 estimate used an updated contractor validation report that stated that only 1 percent of the pipe had actually been installed , inspected , and accepted . the cost estimate work breakdown structure is product - oriented , traceable to the statement of work / objective , and at an appropriate level of detail to ensure that cost elements are neither omitted nor double - counted . partially met . the entire mox work breakdown structure was taken from the 2013 independent cost estimate . it shows five levels of detail . this structure is the contractor's work breakdown structure , which was decertified by doe in october 2016 . the decertification report stated that one deficiency of the contractor's work breakdown structure was that the contractor did not implement a single product - oriented work breakdown structure to provide direct representation of the project work scope and document the hierarchy and description of tasks to be performed and their relationship to the product deliverables . the estimate documents all cost - influencing ground rules and assumptions . fully met . the estimate was based on well - described ground rules and assumptions that were identified in doe's revised cost estimate report , as well as the 2013 independent cost estimate . the assumptions were developed by cost estimators who consulted the technical community . best practice the documentation captures the source data used , the reliability of the data , and how the data were normalized . detailed assessment substantially met . doe's documentation captures all data sources used for this update , which are all primary sources . for example , in most cases , the source data for the estimate are the contractor's performance data , the 2013 independent cost estimate , and the contractor's estimate at completion . doe normalized the estimate at completion data used in the 2013 independent cost estimate by adding escalation , obsolescence , level of effort adjustments , and construction adjustments to bring it up to date to 2016 . the documentation describes in sufficient detail the calculations performed and the estimating methodology used to derive each element's cost . fully met . each level 4 work breakdown structure has a description of the methodology used to estimate it . while the 2013 independent cost estimate was a better class 2 estimate , doe's 2016 estimate was a class 3 estimate with a range of minus 10 percent to plus 10 . the documentation describes , step by step , how the estimate was developed so that a cost analyst unfamiliar with the program could understand what was done and replicate it . substantially met . the documentation was mathematically sensible and logical . some but not all of the supporting data was available in the back up documentation provided by doe .