guides . guides provide information on acceptable means for complying with requirements contained in orders . they are a voluntary means for complying with these requirements and cannot be made mandatory by reference in other doe directives . under the national nuclear security administration act , the secretary of energy is responsible for establishing policy for nnsa . the nnsa administrator , however , has authority over , and is responsible for , programs and activities of nnsa , including policy development and guidance , as well as program management and direction . the act further provides that the nnsa administrator has the authority to establish nnsa - specific policies , unless disapproved by the secretary of energy . nnsa establishes its policies through the issuance of policy letters . these policy letters take the form of nnsa policies , supplemental directives , and business operating procedures . the program manager plays an important role in implementing an effective internal control system . according to federal standards for internal control , management should take a number of actions targeting key roles such as program managers . for example , management should assign responsibility and delegate authority to key roles to achieve the entity's objectives . specifically , management considers the overall responsibilities assigned to each unit , determines what key roles are needed to fulfill the assigned responsibilities , and establishes the key roles . management also determines what level of authority each key role needs to fulfill a responsibility . federal standards for internal control also state that management should demonstrate a commitment to develop competent individuals . important attributes associated with this internal control principle are applicable to program managers and described as follows: establishing expectations of competence . management establishes expectations of competence for key roles , and other roles at management's discretion , to help the entity achieve its objectives . competence is the qualification to carry out assigned responsibilities . it requires relevant knowledge , skills , and abilities , which are gained largely from professional experience , training , and certifications . it is demonstrated by the behavior of individuals as they carry out their responsibilities . personnel need to possess and maintain a level of competence that allows them to accomplish their assigned responsibilities . training personnel . management develops competent personnel to achieve the entity's objectives . in particular , management considers the training of its personnel to enable individuals to develop competencies appropriate for key roles , reinforce standards of conduct , and tailor training based on the needs of the role . pmi defines program management as the application of knowledge , skills , tools , and techniques to a program to meet the program requirements and to obtain benefits and control not available by managing projects individually . program management involves aligning multiple components to achieve the program goals and allows for optimized or integrated cost , schedule , and effort . according to pmi's standard , which describes leading program management practices , the work associated with program management is characterized by the following five areas of activity . program strategy alignment — identifying opportunities and benefits to achieve the organization's strategic objectives through program implementation .