their transition to adulthood . for example , in arizona one developmental disabilities service provider offered its adult clients supervised employment in group settings both at businesses in the community and in - house at an adult center . another service provider ran a vocational training program for young adults with asd . the program has a number of work areas , such as reception , technology , and design , in which the client chooses one area to train in for a year . in addition to learning the skills for a specific work area , youth learn pre - employment skills such as getting along with others , following instructions , and appropriate work etiquette . a few providers we interviewed sent their clients to workplaces with a coach to supervise and assist them on the job , with the level of coaching determined by the needs of the individual . for example , one provider said they have staff check on some clients at their place of work for an hour three times a week , while other clients who have a higher level of need have a full - time coach . some of the adult service providers we interviewed reported providing residential supports — another service we previously identified that youth may need to support their transition to adulthood — funded either through the state developmental disabilities services agency or private , out - of - pocket payments . in arizona and south carolina , a few adult service providers we interviewed were developing housing or independent living programs for individuals with asd . another parent reported that the primary autism - specific provider in her area does not accept state developmental disability funding or regular insurance , and most families cannot afford to pay out - of - pocket . one advocate also noted that local transitional living programs' costs are higher than what the families she worked with could cover . several providers noted that state reimbursement rates did not align with actual provider expenses . cost of services may also contribute to some of the challenges previously mentioned , such as lack of service options and trained providers . after young adults with asd transition to adult life , they may encounter challenges similar to other young adults with disabilities , such as securing employment , housing , and transportation . we estimate that a majority of school districts consider a lack of employment options to be a top challenge to providing transition services across youth with asd with low - , moderate - , and high - intensity service needs ( ranging from 73 to 88 percent , respectively ) . in addition , we estimate that over one - quarter of school districts also reported that both job coaching and work experiences were difficult to provide to individuals with asd . similarly , stakeholders we interviewed reported that youth with asd face unique challenges to securing employment .