restriction on enrichment and reprocessing . according to public statements by agency officials , the united states supports a permanent restriction on enrichment and reprocessing . according to the secretary's september 2019 letter and to former officials we interviewed , however , the united states may be willing to accept a temporary restriction on enrichment and reprocessing in its negotiations with saudi arabia . according to these former officials , such a temporary restriction would allow the united states and other countries more time to work with saudi arabia to reach agreement on mutually acceptable terms . however , one stakeholder said that this option would not be attractive to saudi arabia and would not be useful to the united states as a nonproliferation measure because an existing nuclear cooperation agreement and any nuclear infrastructure that it would have enabled would reduce u.s. leverage to influence saudi enrichment and reprocessing decisions in the future . despite the lingering disagreement on certain provisions between both countries , nnsa officials told us in november 2019 they believed the negotiations had made progress since 2012 because the continued interactions with saudi officials over this time were useful in advancing saudi understanding of the united states' position on the nonproliferation conditions of a potential agreement . we are unable to characterize saudi views on the status of the negotiations or on other aspects of our review , because state did not respond to our repeated requests for assistance in facilitating travel to saudi arabia and interviews with relevant saudi officials . we also did not receive a response to our written request to the saudi ambassador to the united states for an opportunity to interview relevant saudi officials about the negotiations . agency management of u.s. - saudi nuclear cooperation negotiations remains unclear with regard to agency roles and informing congress . we were unable to confirm u.s. agency roles at a range of u.s. - saudi interactions where nuclear cooperation was or may have been discussed . we were also unable to determine whether the agencies kept the relevant congressional committees fully and currently informed of the negotiations . the roles various u.s. agencies have played in u.s. - saudi nuclear negotiations remain unclear because doe and state did not provide us with information to clarify or corroborate such roles . according to a state official and doe officials , state would have “by definition” led any negotiations and without state present , any interactions between u.s. and saudi officials on nuclear cooperation did not constitute negotiations . the aea stipulates that state conduct any nuclear cooperation negotiations but does not define “negotiations.” according to one stakeholder , during an nsc meeting in late 2017 , during which nuclear cooperation with saudi arabia was discussed , the nsc made a decision to reinforce established agency roles , including specifying that state would lead any negotiations . we were unable to confirm whether nsc made such a decision because nsc did not respond to our requests for interviews or documentation . however , through our interviews with state , doe , and nrc officials , we determined that representatives of each agency participated in the 2012 and march 2018 formal nuclear cooperation negotiations with saudi arabia .