can the alternatives be supported ? what are the programmatic ( eg , cost or schedule ) , technical , and operational risks for each alternative ? what are the development , production , deployment , and support costs for each alternative ? how do the alternatives compare to one another ? in addition , as we reported in september 2009 and again in september 2012 , aoas should be completed early enough in the acquisition cycle , prior to the start of technology development , to provide time for adjustments to requirements before those requirements are finalized . because of the flexibilities that have been granted to mda , its programs are not required to complete an aoa before starting technology development . nevertheless , mda's acquisition directive requires programs to show they have identified competitive alternative materiel solutions before they can proceed to mda's technology development phase . however , this directive provides no specific guidance on how this alternatives analysis should be conducted or what criteria should be used to identify and assess alternatives , such as risks and costs . according to dod , the office of the director for cost assessment and program evaluation develops and approves study guidance for aoas for other major defense acquisition programs . mda could look to that office for support should it decide to undertake more robust analyses of alternatives . while mda has conducted some analyses that consider alternatives , it has not conducted robust aoas for its new programs — the aegis bmd sm - 3 block iib and ptss programs . we recently reported the sm - 3 block iib program did not conduct an aoa prior to beginning technology development . while the program assessed some alternatives that could potentially achieve early intercept , it did not include other key aspects of an aoa , such as considering a broad range of alternatives and performing a cost - effectiveness assessment of the concepts considered . recent mda technical analysis has led to changes in the initial program assumptions about how to use the sm - 3 block iib and suggests additional development and investment by the program will be needed to defend the united states . further , potential missile configurations that are under consideration may provide increased capability for the sm - 3 block iib but also pose significant cost and safety risks . to some extent , these program issues may have been driven by the early decision to narrow solutions without the benefit of an aoa . although the ptss program has conducted a number of studies in the past , none can be considered a robust aoa because they either assessed too narrow a range of alternatives or did not fully assess program and technical risks . congress included a requirement in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 for dod to evaluate ptss alternatives partially in response to concerns raised by the national academy of sciences last year about the costs and benefits of the ptss program .