we do not agree . as we state in our report , dimhrs ( personnel / pay ) is a dod - wide program involving three distinct stakeholder groups whose respective chains of command do not meet at any point below the secretary and deputy secretary of defense levels . thus , we concluded that responsibility , accountability , and authority for the program are diffused , with responsibility for developing functional requirements resting with the joint requirements and integration office , responsibility for system acquisition resting with the joint program management office , and responsibility for preparing for the transition to dimhrs ( personnel / pay ) resting with 11 major end - user organizations . under this structure , only the joint requirements and integration office is accountable to the under secretary , and the two distinct other stakeholder groups are not accountable to the under secretary . this means , as we state in the report , that no single dod entity is positioned to exercise continuous leadership and direction over the entire program . the department also partially disagreed with our recommendation to follow all relevant acquisition management best practices associated with cots - based systems . according to dod's comments , all of these best practices are currently being followed , including the three that we cite in our report as not being followed: ( 1 ) ensuring that plans explicitly provide for preparing users for the impact that the business processes embedded in the commercial components will have on their respective roles and responsibilities , ( 2 ) proactively managing the introduction and adoption of changes to how users will be expected to use the system to execute their jobs , and ( 3 ) ensuring that project plans explicitly provide for the necessary time and resources for integrating commercial components with legacy systems . in this regard , the department stated that the dimhrs ( personnel / pay ) program had documented every change in current practices and policies that will be required for the military services , as well as future practices and policies , and that these were fully vetted through the functional user community . it also described a number of activities that it has undertaken to prepare and train users in the cots product and other aspects of dimhrs ( personnel / pay ) . we do not dispute whether dod has performed activities intended to facilitate the implementation of dimhrs ( personnel / pay ) . however , the best practices that we identified as not being followed , which form the basis of our recommendation , are focused on effectively planning for the full complement of activities that are needed to prepare an organization for the institutional and individual changes that cots - based system solutions introduce . such planning is intended to ensure , among other things , that key change management activities , including the dependencies among these activities , are defined and agreed to by stakeholders , including ensuring that adequate resources and realistic time frames are established to accomplish them .