gao - 09-793t . washington , d.c.: june 16 , 2009 . the army will soon be contracting for the procurement of those systems . gao - 09-326sp . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2009 . initial indications are that the army is moving in that direction . appendix i further discusses our scope and methodology . since it started development in 2003 , fcs was at the center of the army's efforts to modernize into a lighter , more agile , and more capable combat force . the fcs concept involved replacing existing combat systems with a family of manned and unmanned vehicles and systems linked by an advanced information network . the army anticipated that the fcs systems , along with the soldier and enabling complementary systems , would work together in a system of systems wherein the whole provided greater capability than the sum of the individual parts . the army expected to develop this equipment in 10 years , procure it over 13 years , and field it to 15 fcs - unique brigades — about one - third of the active force at that time . the army also had planned to spin out selected fcs technologies and systems to current army forces throughout the system development and demonstration phase . in 2006 , the army established the army evaluation task force to use , evaluate , and train with these fcs spinout capabilities . the army used a management approach for fcs that centered on a lead system integrator ( lsi ) to provide significant management services to help the army define and develop fcs and reach across traditional army mission areas . army officials have stated that they did not believe the army had the resources or flexibility to use its traditional acquisition process to field a program as complex as fcs under the aggressive timeline established by the then - army chief of staff . as we have reported in the past , the fcs program was immature and unable to meet dod's own standards for technology and design from the start ( see the list of related gao products at the end of this report ) . although adjustments were made , such as adding time and reducing requirements , vehicle weights and software code grew , key network systems were delayed , and technologies took longer to mature than anticipated ( see fig . by 2009 , after an investment of 6 years and an estimated $18 billion , the viability of the fcs concept was still unknown . as such , in our 2009 report , we concluded that the maturity of the development efforts was insufficient and the program could not be developed and produced within existing resources . in april 2009 , the secretary of defense proposed a significant restructuring of the fcs program in order to address more near - term combat needs and incorporate a role for the mine resistant ambush protected ( mrap ) vehicles being used in today's conflicts .