( see app . i for more information on the methods selected vamcs used to make veterans aware of the program. ) in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at draperd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . our eight selected department of veterans affairs ( va ) medical centers ( vamc ) use a variety of methods to make veterans or their representatives aware of the patient advocacy program , including providing brochures on the program , displaying signage , and providing program information on the vamc's website . ( see fig . 2 for examples of patient advocacy program signage at some of the vamcs we visited. ) patient advocacy program staff , such as patient advocates or service - level advocates who are designated to respond to veterans' feedback , enter feedback from veterans or their representatives in the veterans health administration ( vha ) patient advocate tracking system ( pats ) by creating a report of contact ( roc ) . each roc includes basic information regarding the individuals involved , a description of the feedback provided by the veteran , and a description of the steps taken to resolve the issue . patient advocacy program staff assign one or more issue codes that generally describe the nature of the feedback , such as “coordination of care.” ( see figures 3 and 4. ) in order to organize veterans' feedback , vha categorizes feedback as either requests for information , compliments , or complaints . within each of these categories vha defines specific issue codes for program staff to select from based on the description of the veteran's feedback . ( see table 2. ) the comprehensive addiction and recovery act of 2016 ( cara ) , includes a provision for every vamc to display the purpose of the program , along with the contact information of a patient advocate at the facility , in as many prominent locations as deemed appropriate to be seen by the largest percentage of veterans . in september 2016 , vha central office sent a memo to veterans integrated service network ( visn ) directors explaining this requirement and an office of patient centered care and cultural transformation ( opcc&ct ) official obtained confirmation from all vha facilities that this requirement was met in october 2016 . nevertheless , officials from two veterans service organizations ( vso ) we interviewed stated they often encounter veterans who are not aware of the patient advocacy program . according to va , in fiscal year ( fy ) 2017 , there were 268,114 veterans associated with rocs entered in pats . va also reported that , in the same year , patient advocacy program staff entered 414,256 unique reports of contact in pats .