across agencies . a cost sharing policy could also help facilitate ride and vehicle sharing . similar to the coordinating council , federal agencies have also taken actions to coordinate transportation planning , including: fta issued guidance in june 2014 for the public transit - human service transportation - planning process under the enhanced mobility of seniors and individuals with disabilities program . among other things , fta is required to make sure these plans are prepared and that there is participation by a wide range of stakeholders in the coordinated planning process . the stakeholders are to include local transportation and human - service agencies , as well as the general public . hhs's acl , in conjunction with fta , initiated a program in 2012 that seeks to foster inclusive planning efforts in local communities . seventeen projects were initially selected in june 2013 to serve as demonstrations in planning , developing , and testing replicable and sustainable community models of inclusive planning that include participation of people with disabilities and older adults in the design and implementation of coordinated transportation systems that are responsive to their needs . an initial evaluation of the program found that all of the project's activities had actively involved organizations and consumers with a focus on ensuring responsiveness to the needs of people with disabilities and older adults . in 2010 , va established the veterans transportation service ( vts ) , which provides funding to va medical centers to acquire vehicles , hire a mobility manager , and purchase vehicle routing / scheduling software . vts had been established at three of the five va medical centers we visited — lake city , florida , dallas , texas , and portland , oregon . in general , vts funds were being used to provide additional nemt service . separately , in july 2013 , va also began accepting applications for its transportation of veterans in highly rural areas grant program . this program made approximately $3 million available in fiscal year 2014 to fund projects that will create innovative ways to transport veterans in highly rural areas to va medical facilities or other va or non - va facilities in connection with the provision of va medical care . while the above federal actions may help improve the conditions for coordination or the provision of nemt services , such actions may not increase nemt coordination . although there is a coordinated transportation - planning process for certain fta programs , full stakeholder participation may not take place because human service agencies do not have a similar program requirement . for example , recipients of funds under fta's enhanced mobility for seniors and individuals with disabilities program are required to certify that , to the maximum extent feasible , the services funded under the program are coordinated with transportation services assisted by other federal departments and agencies and come from a locally developed coordinated public transit - human service transportation - planning process . however , fta officials told us that non - dot federal agencies that administer programs under which nemt services may be an eligible expense do not have human services - transportation coordination requirements as part of laws authorizing these programs .