gao - 06-341 . washington , d.c.: march 7 , 2006 . ( see fig . of those who received ui benefits , 44 percent received them more than once ; this represents about 17 percent of all of the workers in this age group . when all other worker characteristics have been controlled for , unemployed workers who are eligible for ui benefits are more likely to receive ui if they had higher earnings before they became unemployed , are younger , have completed more years of education , or if they have a history of past ui benefit receipt . in addition , we found that unemployed workers tend to have longer periods of unemployment if they receive ui benefits , have completed fewer years of education , had lower earnings before they became unemployed , or if they do not belong to unions . we also found that ui - eligible workers from certain industries are more likely than other workers to receive ui benefits , and that the strength of the relationship between previous ui benefit receipt and current ui receipt also varies by industry . we found that ui - eligible workers with certain characteristics are more likely to receive ui than otherwise similar ui - eligible workers . in particular , the likelihood of receiving ui tends to increase as the amount earned in the year before a worker became unemployed increases . ( see fig . for example , a ui - eligible worker with earnings ranging from $10,000 to just under $12,000 in the year before becoming unemployed has a 36 percent likelihood of receiving ui , whereas a worker who earned roughly twice as much has a 45 percent likelihood of receiving ui . the relationship between higher earnings and a higher likelihood of receiving ui benefits is also consistent with economic theory that predicts that workers with higher earnings prior to becoming unemployed will be more reluctant to accept lower reemployment wages and are therefore more likely to take advantage of ui benefits as a way to subsidize their job search efforts . we also found that the likelihood of receiving ui benefits among ui - eligible workers tends to be higher for younger workers , and lower for older workers . specifically , simulations based on our analysis results show that the likelihood of receiving ui peaks at about age 25 and decreases thereafter . in fact , a 25-year - old unemployed worker who is eligible for ui is more than twice as likely to receive ui as an otherwise similar 40-year - old . this finding is contrary to previous studies that reported that younger workers are less likely to receive ui benefits than older workers . however , these previous studies did not include as much information about workers' past unemployment and ui benefit receipt histories as our analysis . therefore , because older workers have more previous unemployment and ui benefit receipt experience than younger workers , it is possible that our analysis controlled for the effect of these experiences more completely than previous studies , resulting in a more precise estimate of the effect of age .