interoperability across federal agencies . in february 2005 , the department of commerce's national institute of in february 2005 , the department of commerce's national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) issued federal information processing standards and technology ( nist ) issued federal information processing standards ( fips ) 201 , personal identity verification of federal standards ( fips ) 201 , personal identity verification of federal employees and contractors . known as fips 201 , the standard is divided employees and contractors . known as fips 201 , the standard is divided into two parts . the first part , personal identity verification ( piv ) - i , sets out into two parts . the first part , personal identity verification ( piv ) - i , sets out uniform requirements for identity proofing — verifying the identity of uniform requirements for identity proofing — verifying the identity of individuals applying for official agency credentials — and for issuing individuals applying for official agency credentials — and for issuing credentials , maintaining related information , and protecting the privacy of credentials , maintaining related information , and protecting the privacy of the applicants . the office of management and budget ( omb ) , which is the applicants . the office of management and budget ( omb ) , which is responsible for ensuring compliance with the standard , issued guidance responsible for ensuring compliance with the standard , issued guidance requiring agencies to implement these requirements , with the exception of the privacy requirements , by october 27 , 2005 . the second part , piv - ii , specifies the technical requirements for credentialing systems for federal employees and contractors on the basis of interoperable smart cards . omb directed that by october 27 , 2007 , piv credentials be issued to and used by all employees and contractors who have been with the agency for 15 years or less . it also directed that the remainder of the employees be issued cards and begin using their cards no later than october 27 , 2008 . in february 2006 , we reported on agencies' progress toward implementing the first part of the standard , piv - i . this report responds to your request that we conduct a review of agencies' progress in implementing the second part of the standard , piv - ii . specifically , our objectives were to determine the progress selected agencies have made in ( 1 ) implementing the capabilities of the piv cards to enhance security and ( 2 ) achieving interoperability with other agencies . to address these objectives , we selected eight agencies that have a range of experience in implementing smart card - based id systems — the departments of agriculture ( usda ) , commerce , the interior , homeland security ( dhs ) , housing and urban development ( hud ) , and labor ; the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) ; and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) . to obtain information on the agencies' progress , we analyzed documentation such as agencies' high - level plans for hspd - 12 implementation , system architectures , cost estimates , and documentation of agencies' implementation activities .