potential options are discussed below . however , unlike the mspb and the eeoc , which have taken steps to address potential conflicts of interest when their own employees use their respective redress processes , osc would need explicit authority for implementing such options . osc employees could be afforded an external investigation of their prohibited personnel practice allegations against the special counsel or deputy special counsel through an independent entity . most of the current and former osc officials we spoke with acknowledged that the option of such an external investigation is warranted . if such an external investigation were authorized , it may be desirable to also provide the results of the investigation to the president , who has the authority to take appropriate corrective action . however , osc would need specific authority to implement this option since osc does not have the mechanism to provide for such investigations . osc employees could be afforded expanded rights to appeal directly to mspb that would specifically encompass prohibited personnel actions involving the special counsel or the deputy special counsel . as discussed above , osc employees , as is the case with other federal employees , can take allegations of prohibited personnel practices to the mspb only when certain adverse actions have been taken against those employees . one osc official observed that care should be taken in expanding jurisdiction so as to prevent minor personnel actions from being appealable to the board . since the mspb appeals process is in statute , this option would require legislation for implementation . osc employees who believe a prohibited personnel practice has occurred can file a complaint with osc in the same fashion as an individual from outside the agency . however , osc employees do not have an external , independent agency like osc to represent them . this becomes particularly important when the complaint is filed against the special counsel or the deputy special counsel . when an employee raises a prohibited personnel practice allegation against the special counsel , addressing such an allegation within osc becomes unworkable because osc employees ultimately report to the special counsel , including the complainant and any staff who would conduct an internal investigation . this difficulty extends to allegations against the deputy special counsel because this individual has a confidential relationship with the special counsel . steps could be taken to ensure that osc employees , who cannot effectively obtain the services of osc in addressing allegations of prohibited personnel practices , have alternative avenues of redress . adequate management oversight is critical to ensuring that , in an interagency contracting environment , the requiring agency and the agency ordering the services on its behalf work together to follow proper contracting procedures . ยง 3109 to hire intermittent consultants . section 3109 permits agencies , when authorized by an appropriation or other statute , to acquire the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants . under the statute , appointments of experts and consultants may be made without regard to competitive service provisions and classification and pay requirements .