required capabilities . the working group is to assess progress in implementing each joac - required capability based on the progress made on completing the implementation actions relevant to that capability . implementation actions . the working group is to assess the progress made in implementing the discrete materiel and nonmateriel actions in the execution matrix . operational objectives . the implementation plan organizes the required capabilities into four operational objectives — the broad goals a commander must achieve in order to project power despite a2 / ad challenges . the working group is to assess progress in implementing each operational objective based on the progress of the required capabilities aligned under each objective . end state . the working group is to assess progress in reaching the joac end state based on the implementation progress of the four operational objectives . the draft 2014 joac implementation plan includes measures and milestones for the 165 identified implementation actions but not for the other three implementation stages . specifically , the 165 actions will be assessed as being either complete or not yet complete , according to joint staff officials . however , joint staff officials stated the working group has not yet developed the necessary measures to gauge the extent to which required capabilities , operational objectives , or the end state have been implemented . for example , the working group has not yet developed measures for how the completion of an implementation action affects the completion of the required capability to which it is tied . in other words , the aggregate of the implementation actions will show how much work has been completed — i.e. , the number of actions — but it will not show how much work remains to be completed to fully implement the required capability . thus , even if dod completed all 165 implementation actions identified in the first plan , it currently would not be able to determine the progress in implementing the 10 required capabilities . figure 5 shows the stages at which the draft 2014 joac implementation plan has measures and milestones . similarly , the draft 2014 joac implementation plan does not fully identify milestones for all four implementation stages . specifically , the plan identifies milestones for the 165 implementation actions , but not for required capabilities , operational objectives , and the end state . moreover , the 2014 plan does not indicate if or when milestones will be established . for example , the implementation plan does not identify when the required capability for expeditionary missile defense should be completed , and army officials told us that plans for developing this high - priority capability may take decades . additionally , the plan does not identify milestones for implementing the operational objective related to engagement activities , which , as noted previously , is an area in which the army and marine corps play primary roles . joint staff officials emphasized that the 2014 joac implementation plan is the first of many iterations and was intended only to provide visibility of ongoing activities relevant to the top 10 joac - required capabilities . joint staff officials stated that they intend to include ways to assess overall implementation progress in future iterations of the plan .