to the increase . in june 2005 , fcc issued a notice of proposed rulemaking in which it sought comment on establishing useful outcome , output , and efficiency measures for each of the universal service programs , including the low - income program . in the august 2007 report and order , fcc developed output and efficiency measures for the program which it collects from usac on a quarterly basis , such as the number of connections supported ( program participation ) . fcc officials reported that it would continue to review this area and evaluate the effectiveness of the measures adopted . however , as of august 2010 , fcc had not developed outcome measures or taken any action to review and evaluate the effectiveness of the output and efficiency measures because it noted that it did not have sufficient historical data from the measures to establish goals for them . fcc's fiscal year 2009 annual performance report and fiscal year 2009 summary of performance and financial results include accomplishments , such as taking steps to reduce improper payments , related to improving the administration and operation of the fund . nevertheless , these accomplishments do not specifically address the low - income program or how they have impacted the provision of universal service . although fcc has a single overarching goal and has made efforts to develop measures , it has not developed and implemented specific outcome - based performance goals and measures for the program . such performance goals and measures would be very beneficial to fcc in that they would enable fcc to assess changes , such as the addition of prepaid wireless , and more effectively manage the current and future direction of the program . fcc's chairman says modernizing universal service programs to bring the benefits of broadband to all americans is one of fcc's top priorities , but developing clear performance goals and measures for the low - income program does not appear to be a priority . furthermore , table 4 demonstrates that , to date , fcc's efforts generally do not align with useful practices we have identified for developing successful performance goals and measures . fcc is considering restructuring the usf and expanding the low - income program to include broadband service , as recommended by the national broadband plan . in the plan , the fcc task force acknowledged that “there is a lack of adequate data to make critical policy decisions regarding how to better utilize funding to promote universal service objectives…as it moves forward on reforms in the plan , it should enhance its data collection and reporting to ensure that the nation's funds are being used effectively to advance defined programmatic goals.” further , fcc has acknowledged that as changes such as expanding the low - income program to include broadband service are made to the usf , it may be necessary to develop new metrics for measuring the success of universal service policies . clearly articulated performance goals and measures are important to help ensure the low - income program meets the guiding principles set forth by the congress . these guiding principles include access to telecommunications and information services for all consumers .