we did not assess these policies . to assess va's implementation of policies for servicing troubled home loans , we visited regional loan centers in cleveland , oh ; st. petersburg , fl ; and phoenix , az . we obtained information on their supplemental servicing activities and interviewed va officials , including loan servicing representatives . we also reviewed va's quality - control procedures . to analyze both va's measures for assessing the effectiveness of its supplemental servicing program and the agency's ability to generate meaningful data that can be used in its overseeing and improving its loan servicing program , we reviewed va's performance measures and requested data on defaults , foreclosures , and alternatives to foreclosure for the nine va regional loan centers . in addition to analyzing this data , we interviewed va regional loan center and washington headquarters officials about data collection and performance measures for the supplemental servicing program . while we identified inconsistencies in va data during our review , we did not assess the accuracy of the data . for the purposes of comparison , we reviewed the performance measures hud uses to assess the effectiveness of its fha program for servicing troubled loans . we did not analyze hud's performance measures . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. ; cleveland , oh ; st. petersburg , fl ; and phoenix , az between july 2000 and march 2001 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of veterans affairs . his written comments are presented in appendix vi . we also obtained technical comments from va , which we incorporated in this report as appropriate . in addition , we obtained technical comments from hud officials on our description of hud policies for servicing fha - insured single - family residential mortgage loans . we incorporated hud's technical comments in this report where appropriate . the first section of this appendix provides general background information on the va single - family mortgage guaranty program . the second section provides information on the number and average amount of loans va has guaranteed since 1996 . the va loan program is an entitlement program that provides single - family , residential mortgage loan guarantees for eligible veterans , service members , reservists , and surviving spouses . va loans cover the purchase , construction , repair , and refinancing of homes . the loan guaranty provides private sector mortgage lenders , such as banks , thrifts , and mortgage companies with a partial guarantee on mortgage loans when loans go into foreclosure . in exchange for the protection that the va guaranty provides lenders , va encourages lenders to provide small or no - down - payment loans to veterans . currently , the maximum guaranty on a va loan is $50,750 . while va places no limits on the maximum loan amount that a veteran may obtain , lenders generally limit the amount to $203,000 because of secondary market requirements . to obtain the loan , veterans must meet va's eligibility and underwriting requirements . to help support the program , va requires that veterans pay a funding fee to va .