iii ) . the agency provided technical comments , which we have addressed where appropriate . we are sending this report to the cms administrator and interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to other interested parties on request . in addition , the report available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 7101 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . this appendix provides detailed information on the gastroenterological and urological procedures that we selected for our study . the physician fee schedule includes three components . we interviewed medicare carrier medical directors in several locales with a range of population size and density , including the new york city area , north dakota , and wyoming . accreditation by a nationally recognized agency or organization is also required . in south carolina , guidelines address the safe delivery of anesthesia , the presence of emergency equipment , procedures to transfer emergency cases to hospitals , and physician training . in texas , regulations govern physicians in outpatient settings providing general or regional anesthesia . in addition , organizations such as the american society for gastrointestinal endoscopy and the society of american gastrointestinal endoscopic surgeons publish safety guidelines that are similar to the medicare guidelines for ascs . these guidelines are designed to ensure that endoscopies are conducted safely regardless of whether they are conducted in health care facilities or physicians' offices . to assess whether the practice expense site - of - service payment differential acts as an incentive for physicians to conduct gastroenterological and urological endoscopic procedures in their offices , we analyzed data from the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) using the part b extract and summary system on the medical settings ( office , inpatient hospital , outpatient hospital , and ambulatory surgical center ) for relevant procedures for 1996 through 2001 . for the gastroenterological and urological procedures in our analysis , we developed averages of practice expense reimbursements for health care facilities and offices for each year from 1998 through 2002 . to determine whether access to care by medicare beneficiaries would be affected if endoscopic procedures in physicians' offices were no longer reimbursed by medicare , we analyzed cms data ( using the part b extract and summary system ) on office - based endoscopy for the nation as a whole and for the new york city area , which has the highest proportion of office - based procedures in the nation . tables 3 and 4 summarize the percentages of gastroenterological and urological endoscopic procedures in our sample performed in physicians' offices , hospitals ( both inpatient and outpatient ) , and ascs for 1996 through 2001 . in the data provided to us by cms , there was another medical setting category ( “other” ) that captured a broad variety of medical settings , including nursing facilities , rural health clinics , and military treatment facilities . the proportion of procedures conducted in these settings was very low , about 1 percent or less .