office hours . assistance offices are often only open during regular working hours . for example , we visited an office that opened from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. from monday to friday . for working individuals , getting to a food stamp office during the work week can be difficult . a recent study by the urban institute supports the notion that a working families' participation status is influenced by the hours they work and , perhaps , by the hours a food stamp office is open . the study found that those who work so - called traditional hours are less likely to participate than those who work a less traditional schedule . however , offering longer hours of service can have cost implications such as additional personnel , utility , computer , and security costs . the food stamp application . during our site visits , program advocates said that applications , which often serve both food stamps and other assistance programs , such as medicaid and tanf , are too complex . for instance , an advocate said that she believed that the food stamp application was too long and required a reading level that was too advanced for most potentially eligible individuals . state officials in oregon , however , said that having a slightly longer food stamp application allows for better integration of assistance programs , which can benefit recipients , as well as a reduction of workload for caseworkers at assistance offices . eligibility documentation and verification . participating in the program requires proof of income level , residency , and family size , among other information . providing such proof usually is done by bringing documentation to the food stamp office at the time of enrollment . this , however , can be perceived as being burdensome for potential clients . for example , current and former food stamp clients surveyed in an oregon focus group reported that various documentation forms in that state are intrusive and often excessive . however , under current program rules , these requirements are an essential component of ensuring that food stamp applicants are eligible to receive food stamps and that they receive the proper benefit amount . the finger - imaging requirement . four states in the country have requirements that new recipients of food stamps are finger - imaged at the assistance office before they receive their benefits . new york was the only state we visited that had such a requirement . advocates in that state complained that being finger - imaged was a deterrent to participation , in that it potentially required them to make an additional trip to the food stamp office . however , quality control officials in that state believed that it was a vital way to prevent people from defrauding the food stamp program by allowing officials to verify that the applicant did not already have a case open somewhere else in the state . change reporting requirement . participating in the program often requires families to report income changes , meaning that some working families would have to be in frequent contact with their caseworker as the amount of hours they worked or the wages they received fluctuated .