aegis bmd . aegis bmd - capable ships are operated by the navy , and the navy supports those ships through existing service - based infrastructure and processes . servicemembers have been initially qualified on the ballistic missile defense mission through existing navy commands and according to navy practices . the navy updated its training and personnel requirements and relied on established procedures to certify the performance of aegis crews to perform the full range of aegis bmd missions . our analysis determined that dod has not yet put into place operational units that are fully organized , manned , and trained to execute all of their ballistic missile defense responsibilities for the remaining five ballistic missile defense elements , which were designed expressly for ballistic missile defense and thus required dod to create new units . in order to address existing and emerging threats , dod used flexible acquisition practices to make these elements available for operational use before the services were fully ready to operate them . however , without fully established organizations , personnel , and training , these units faced challenges in dealing with the rapid fielding of elements , the ongoing research and development activities involving fielded elements , and the lack of an established force structure for operating the bmds command and control system . operational units have faced challenges resulting from the rapid fielding of elements before the units have had all of the necessary organizations , personnel , and training in place . for example , the army had only a few months after being named lead service to organize and train a detachment for managing the an / tpy - 2 forward - based radar , which mda fielded in japan and added to the bmds operational baseline in september 2006 . in contrast , the army generally requires years to organize an operational unit , establish personnel requirements , and train servicemembers for operating a new weapon system . the rapid fielding required the army to deploy soldiers without a complete and approved force structure for sensor management operations when mda added the radar to the baseline . for example , the army did not yet have a program to train army soldiers ; to mitigate this shortfall , mda provided the first group of army sensor managers with an orientation of the an / tpy - 2 forward - based radar and of the radar management software then in use . a u.s. army space and missile defense command official told us that the initial servicemembers' orientation lacked the requirements , curriculum , training devices , standards , and evaluations that are generally expected to be in place as part of an initial qualification training course when the army fields a new weapon system . as a result of the army's initiative , the initial sensor managers developed their own tactics , techniques , and procedures for managing the radar before the army had in place a training course to qualify servicemembers in sensor management . since that time , the army has established a training course , which has graduated a sufficient number of servicemembers projected to meet combatant command needs .