( see fig . in fiscal year 2012 , more than three - quarters of the army's female servicemember population was age 35 and under , with the largest group being between 18 and 24 years old . recommendations for female - specific preventative health screenings are based on age , such as cervical cancer screening , which would be applicable for female servicemembers from an early age , while others , such as mammograms , are currently not recommended until age 50 , absent any personal history of health problems of this nature . ( see fig . dod operates its own large , complex health system — the military health system — that provides health care to approximately 9.7 million beneficiaries across a range of venues , from mtfs located on military installations to the battlefield . these beneficiaries include active - duty servicemembers and their dependents , eligible national guard and reserve servicemembers and their dependents , and retirees and their dependents or survivors . the military health system has a dual health care mission: supporting wartime and other deployments , known as the readiness mission , and providing peacetime care , known as the benefits mission . the readiness mission provides medical services and support to the armed forces during military operations and involves deploying medical personnel and equipment , as needed , around the world to support military forces . the benefits mission provides medical services and support to members of the armed forces , their family members , and others eligible for dod health care . the role of women in the military is changing . over the last four decades , the percentage of female servicemembers among enlisted ranks has increased seven - fold ( from 2 to 14 percent ) and the percentage of female servicemembers among commissioned officers has increased four - fold ( from 4 to 16 percent ) . we conducted one of the pretests where all gao participants were present and three pretests with some gao participants in person and others participated by telephone . currently , the largest total number of female servicemembers resides in the army . female servicemembers also are serving in more complex occupational specialties and are being deployed to combat operations , potentially leading to increased health risks . similar to their male counterparts , female servicemembers must maintain their medical readiness by ensuring that they are free of health - related conditions that would limit their ability to actively fulfill an assigned mission . female servicemembers also have unique health care needs that require access to gender - specific services , including routine gynecological care , such as breast and cervical examinations , as well as specialized services , such as obstetric care ( which includes prenatal , labor and delivery , and postpartum care ) and the treatment of reproductive cancers .