the department has done less on other postretirement benefit costs , however . the number of current department of energy ( doe ) contractor defined benefit plans open to new entrants has been dropping over the last decade , particularly since 2005 , while the number of frozen plans has increased . doe reimburses contractors for their contributions to defined contribution plans as well . changes in health care and other cost trends can influence the cost of these benefits and , in turn , the amount that must be reimbursed by doe . for example , officials at doe's savannah river site explained that as health care costs increase nationally , the cost of providing retiree health care to their employees has also increased . los alamos national laboratory officials attributed their rising health care costs to a variety of factors , including increases in emergency room and radiology costs . changes in statutory requirements can also have a significant effect on contractor benefit costs . for example , the funding requirements that govern a large majority of doe contractor private - sector pension plans have been changed or significantly amended over the last 5 years . one of the most sweeping amendments to erisa and the minimum - funding rules occurred with the passage of the pension protection act of 2006 . this act — prompted , in part , by the default of several large pension plans — increased the minimum funding requirements for pension plans and sought to strengthen the private pension system . of the 40 tax - qualified defined benefit plans currently sponsored by doe contractors , only 1 was frozen as of 2000 ( see fig . by 2006 , about one - fourth ( 9 ) of currently sponsored tax - qualified doe contractor defined benefit plans were frozen in some way . by 2010 , of the 40 tax - qualified defined benefit plans sponsored by doe contractors , 21 were frozen in some way , and 19 plans were open to new entrants . this trend in plan freezes over time is similar to the trend discussed in another report , which found that , among currently frozen plans nationwide , half of plan freezes were implemented after 2005 . table 3 shows the investment allocations of each doe contractor tax - qualified defined benefit plan by percentage and dollar values as of september 30 , 2010 . nevertheless , we continue to believe that doe should provide a consistent set of factors for program offices to consider when making those decisions . without such criteria , doe lacks assurance that program offices are systematically considering both near - term mission needs and potential spikes in future reimbursement costs when reaching their decisions . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . we believe that the evidence obtained provides such a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .