one is targeting . how do you concentrate funds in the places with the highest risks ? a proclivity to spread money around , unfortunately , may provide less additional net protection while actually placing additional burdens on state and local governments . given the significant needs and limited federal resources , it will be important to target to areas of greatest need . the council on foreign relations report recommends that congress establish a system for allocating scarce resources based on addressing identified threats and vulnerabilities . the report goes on to say that the federal government should consider factors such as population and population density , vulnerability assessments , and the presence of critical infrastructure within each state as the basis for fund distribution . by comparing three of the grants listed in table 2 , one can see differences in the way funds have been allocated thus far . for example , under the state homeland security grant program allocations are determined by using a base amount of .75 percent of the total allocation to each state ( including the district of columbia and puerto rico ) and .25 percent of the total to the territories . the balance of the funds goes to recipients on a population - share basis . in contrast , the urban area security initiative funds are distributed according to a formula from the department of homeland security as being a combination of weighted factors including current threat estimates , critical assets within the urban area , population and population density — the results of which are ranked and used to calculate the proportional allocation of resources . for byrne grants , each participant state receives a base amount of $500,000 or .25 percent of the amount available for the program , whichever is greater , with the remaining funds allocated to each state based on the state's relative share of the total u.s. population . a second dilemma in federal grant design involves preventing fiscal substitution or supplantation . in earlier work , we found that substitution is to be expected in any grant and , on average , every additional federal grant dollar results in about 60 cents of supplantion . we found that supplantation is particularly likely for block grants supporting areas with prior state and local involvement . however , our work on the temporary assistance to needy families block grant found that a strong maintenance of effort provision can limit states' ability to supplant since recipients can be penalized for not meeting a maintenance of effort requirement . it seems obvious to say that grant recipients should maintain the effort they were making prior to receiving the grant and use the grant to add to , rather than replace , their own contribution . however , since september 11 , 2001 , many local jurisdictions have taken it upon themselves to take the initiative to dramatically increase their own - source funding in an effort to enhance security . should the federal grant system now penalize them by locking in their increased spending levels and at the same time reward state and local governments that have taken a “wait and see” attitude concerning enhancing security ?