b. ) quetiapine or ( trial for up to 10 weeks ) response ? c. ) olanzapine ( trial for up to10 weeks ) d. ) clozapine ( trial for up to 6 months ) response ? typical antipsychotic if never tried ( trial for up to 10 weeks ) or clozapine if never tried ( trial for 6 months ) consider a trial of haloperidol or fluphenazine decanoate for patients non - adherent to therapy . risperidone or ( trial for up to 10 weeks ) response ? in february 2001 , va's pharmacy benefits management strategic healthcare group's medical advisory panel formed a task force of two va psychiatrists and two va pharmacists to develop a guideline for prescribing atypical antipsychotic drugs . according to the panel , such a guideline would help physicians prescribe them appropriately and cost effectively . the task members were selected based on their mental health clinical expertise and diverse skills . see figure 5 for the timeline and process of the task force . the task force reviewed scientific literature on the effectiveness , including side effects , of the atypical antipsychotic drugs and examined existing visn guidance on prescribing these drugs . based on these reviews , the task force drafted the guideline for prescribing atypical drugs . the draft guideline was then reviewed and modified by the medical advisory panel and va mental health officials . visn pharmacy leaders and the medical advisory panel approved the guideline . in july 2001 , va pharmacy benefits management posted the guideline to its web site and sent it to the visns . in the past , va pharmacy benefits management has used the same process to develop several similar guidelines for prescribing other classes of drugs . the institute of medicine , in a recent report on va's national formulary , commended va for these previous pharmacy - specific guidelines , stating that they were based on current scientific and clinical research data and its recommendations were consistent with recommendations of other leading medical organizations . examples where this could happen are discussed below . in va's greater los angeles healthcare system , los angeles , california , part of visn 22 , all psychiatrists provide written justifications for olanzapine prescriptions , which are reviewed by pharmacists or senior psychiatrists . for routine requests — such as those for va patients who are already stable on olanzapine or patients who did not respond favorably to other atypical antipsychotic drugs — the pharmacist fills the prescription . for nonroutine requests — such as those for new patients who have not previously taken atypical antipsychotic drugs — the pharmacist forwards the request and written justification to a senior psychiatrist who reviews them and may discuss recommended treatment options with the prescribing physician . these psychiatrists are generally concentrated in a few visns . for example , in visn 22 , 33 percent of responding psychiatrists reported that they did not feel free to prescribe the atypical antipsychotic drug that they believed was best for some of their patients , and in visn 18 , the rate was 22 percent . three other visns had rates of more than 10 percent .