gao - 11-922 . we interviewed officials from the u.s . departments of state ( state ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and officials representing 15 other member states to who . we interviewed representatives from institutions such as the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria and the gavi alliance ; nongovernmental organizations , such as doctors without borders and the institute of medicine ; and the bill & melinda gates foundation , one of the largest donors to the who . we also met with representatives of un agencies , such as unaids and the united nations development program ; private sector entities , including u.s. and international pharmaceutical research associations ; and two research centers that review global health issues . in addition , we reviewed who documents on its reform agenda and process , including its evaluation plans and its implementation and monitoring framework for reform . to examine u.s. support for who reforms , we met with officials from state , hhs , cdc , and usaid . we also conducted field work in geneva , switzerland , to meet with officials from usun - geneva , who , and other member state missions to learn about u.s. participation in who reform discussions and collaboration with other who member states . we collected and reviewed relevant u.s. government documents , including budget documents , strategies , position papers , talking points , and speeches . based on interviews with u.s. government officials and u.s. government documents , we conducted an analysis to identify possible u.s. government priorities for who reform . we also collected and analyzed data from state , hhs , cdc , and usaid on u.s. funding contributions to who . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of presenting specific agency contributions to who . to examine state's united nations transparency and accountability initiative ( untai ) tool to measure the performance and progress of un agencies , including who , on transparency and accountability , we interviewed state officials at state's bureau of international organization affairs , which developed and uses the assessment tool . to examine the results of state's assessment of who using the untai tool , we interviewed officials at usun - geneva who are involved in completing the assessment of who . we also systematically reviewed state's who untai report to verify the basis for state's determinations on each benchmark . specifically , we examined state's assigned score for each benchmark against the information who provided , noting benchmarks where the support for state's determination was not clear . in addition , we reviewed the specific benchmarks used in state's untai tool to determine potential threats to the accuracy and consistency of the resulting assessments . to do so , we developed definitions of the types of judgment necessary to implement the tools , and two analysts independently applied those definitions to each benchmark . they then met to compare and resolve any differences . the two analysts agreed upon resolutions until there was 100 percent agreement on the coding .