act early . campaign promotes awareness of healthy developmental milestones in early childhood , the importance of tracking each child's development , and the importance of acting early if there are concerns . we noted in our november 2013 report that the iacc and federal agencies may have missed opportunities to coordinate federal autism activities and reduce the risk of duplication of effort and resources . although the caa requires the iacc to coordinate hhs autism activities and monitor federal autism activities , oarc officials stated that the prevention of duplication among individual projects in agency portfolios is not specified in the caa as one of the iacc's statutory responsibilities and therefore is not a focus of the iacc . oarc officials stated that it was up to the individual federal agencies to use the information contained in the iacc's strategic plan and portfolio analysis to prevent duplication . officials from three federal agencies — cdc , dod , and nih — told us that they use the strategic plan and portfolio analysis , which are key documents used by the iacc to coordinate and monitor federal autism activities , when setting priorities for their autism programs and to learn of autism activities conducted by other agencies . oarc officials acknowledged that the iacc could choose to use data from the portfolio analysis as the basis for specific recommendations regarding areas where interagency coordination could be increased , but to date this has not occurred . oarc officials stated that they do not consider it to be their responsibility to review the data that they collect on behalf of the iacc for duplication or for coordination opportunities . instead , they said that they fulfill their role in assisting the iacc in its cross - agency coordination activities in other ways , such as by facilitating interagency communication and gathering information . in our november 2013 report , we recommended that the secretary of health and human services direct the iacc and nih , in support of the iacc , to identify projects through their monitoring of federal autism activities — including oarc's annual collection of data for the portfolio analysis , and the iacc's annual process to update the strategic plan — that may result in unnecessary duplication and thus may be candidates for consolidation or elimination ; and identify potential coordination opportunities among agencies . hhs did not concur with our recommendation . the agency stated that such an analysis by the iacc to identify duplication would not likely provide the detail needed to determine actual duplication , and that the role of the iacc should not include identification of autism - related projects for elimination . we agree that further analysis would be needed to identify actual duplication . while the strategic plan objectives , which represent broad and complex areas of research , are useful to identify the potential for unnecessary duplication , we believe that such identification is worthwhile as it can effectively lead to further review by the funding agencies to ensure funds are carefully spent . agencies can review specific project information to confirm whether research projects associated with an objective are , for example , necessary to replicate prior research results .