these and other challenges are summarized in table 1 below . all of these challenges further hamper nasa's efforts to develop firm estimates of ssp transition and retirement scope and cost . lastly , at the time nasa will be experiencing an increase in transition activity , it will simultaneously be finalizing the designs for the ares i and orion vehicles and conducting potentially the most complicated sequence of shuttle flights ever attempted — completing the international space station and conducting a fifth servicing mission to the hubble space telescope all by the end of 2010 . these activities will likely create additional challenges for the transition efforts , as they may require more attention than anticipated from the workforce as well as more resources should unexpected problems occur . ssp transition and retirement costs are not transparent in nasa's current budget request and are not expected to be fully reflected in its 2010 request . this is partly due to challenges and delays in finalizing cost estimates as described above as well as where costs are being reflected in the budget . specifically , in laying out its plans for ssp transition and retirement , nasa elected to capture transition and retirement costs within its existing budget structure rather than display them separately . consequently , the costs of the ssp transition and retirement are dispersed throughout nasa's budget request . ssp's direct transition and retirement costs are included in the ssp budget line . the cross - agency support portion of nasa's budget , however , includes funding for significant ssp transition and retirement activities that nasa considers indirect costs , including environmental compliance and remediation and demolition of excess facilities . these funds , however , are not identified as ssp transition and retirement costs and it is not easy to discern that they are transition related . furthermore , nasa plans to offset some transition costs by utilizing an exchange / sale authority that allows federal agencies to exchange or sell non - excess , non - surplus personal property and apply the proceeds toward acquiring similar replacement property . the ssp budget request for fiscal year 2009 identifies a funding need of about $370 million for transition and retirement through fiscal year 2010 to pay for activities within each of the ssp's three major projects — flight and ground operations , flight hardware , and program integration ( see table 2 ) . nasa will use these funds to cover the costs of the prime contractor , ssp personnel , and support contractors working on transition and retirement activities . these activities , however , do not represent the full scope of ssp transition and retirement . the cross - agency support appropriation account within nasa's budget includes or will include funding for significant ssp transition and retirement activities . this appropriation account — which is not aligned with a specific program or project — includes what are essentially nasa's administrative or overhead costs for all of its centers and activities . cross - agency support will include ssp transition and retirement funding within its environmental compliance and restoration , center management and operation , and strategic institutional investments budget lines . these funds , however , are not identified as ssp transition and retirement costs .