postal service . service components and the military postal service agency have taken some initial steps in employing alternative mail delivery and tracking systems . for example , the marine corps is currently testing an electronic mail system for getting mail delivered to forward deployed troops . this created a backlog . when the 3rd infantry division finally did redeploy , the 1st brigade of the 3rd infantry division stayed behind and was assigned to the 1st armored division . but this information was not disseminated , and the 1st brigade received no more mail while in theater . despite differences in operational theaters and an effort by postal planners to consider experiences from operations desert shield / storm in planning for operation iraqi freedom , many of the same problems continued to hamper postal operations during operation iraqi freedom . these problems include ( 1 ) difficulty with implementing joint - service postal operations , ( 2 ) postal personnel who were inadequately trained and initially scarce because of late deployments , and ( 3 ) inadequate postal facilities , material - handling equipment , and transportation assets to handle mail surge . during january 1991 , at the height of operations desert shield / storm , more than 500,000 u.s. troops supported a ground war that lasted a little more than 4 days . these troops were concentrated in camps located in kuwait and saudi arabia near the borders of kuwait and iraq . in contrast , operation iraqi freedom involved about half the number of troops ( about 250,000 ) , dispersed over a larger geographical area ( all of kuwait and iraq ) , and involved a ground war that lasted about 42 days . this greater dispersion of troops for a longer period of time increased the logistical requirements for delivering the mail . additionally , although the ground war for operation iraqi freedom is officially over , there is an ongoing requirement to provide timely and efficient postal support for a large number of personnel still in theater , fighting the global war on terrorism . several key planning assumptions used in the creation of u.s. central command's postal plan for operation iraqi freedom proved problematic . the embargo on any service member mail produced unintended negative results ; mail restrictions for the first 30 days in theater were never enacted ; and the volume of mail was grossly underestimated . table 2 summarizes these key assumptions , the actions taken , and the consequences of those actions . because any service member mail caused delays in the delivery of other personal mail and stressed the logistical system during operations desert shield / storm , postal plans for operation iraqi freedom placed an embargo on this type of mail . defense officials also discontinued any service member mail for security reasons following the anthrax scares of 2001 . during operations desert shield / storm , any service member mail acted as a morale booster because it provided mail to troops who might not have received mail otherwise . from an operations standpoint , this mail could be separated and set aside until individually addressed mail had been processed . however , the volume of any service member mail taxed transportation and storage capabilities .