medicare could benefit from various contracting reforms . perhaps most importantly , directing the program to select contractors on a competitive basis from a broader array of entities would allow medicare to benefit from efficiency and performance improvements related to competition . a full and open contracting process will hopefully result in the selection of stronger contractors at better value . broadening the pool of entities allowed to hold medicare contracts beyond health insurance companies will give cms more contracting options . also , authorizing medicare to pay contractors based on how well they perform rather than simply reimbursing them for their costs could result in better contractor performance . we also believe that the program could benefit from efficiencies by having contractors perform specific functions , called functional contracting . contractors that process and pay part a claims ( i.e. , for inpatient hospital , skilled nursing facility , hospice care , and certain home health services ) are known as fiscal intermediaries and those that administer part b claims ( i.e. , for physician , outpatient hospital services , laboratory , and other services ) are known as carriers . the three test questions , all selected from the “frequently asked questions” on the carriers' web sites , concerned the appropriate way to bill medicare under different circumstances . the results of our test , which were verified by a cms coding expert , showed that only 15 percent of the answers were complete and accurate , while 53 percent were incomplete and 32 percent were entirely incorrect . we found that cms has established few standards to guide the contractors' communication activities . while cms requires contractors to issue bulletins at least quarterly , they require little else in terms of content or readability . similarly , cms requirements for web - based communication do little to promote the clarity or timeliness of information . instead , they generally focus on legal issues — such as measures to protect copyrighted material — that do nothing to enhance providers' understanding of , or ability to correctly implement , medicare policy . in regard to telecommunications , contractor call centers are instructed to monitor up to 10 calls per quarter for each of their customer service representatives , but cms' definition of what constitutes accuracy and completeness in call center responses is neither clear nor specific . moreover , the assessment of accuracy and completeness counts for only 35 percent of the total assessment score , with the representative's attitude and helpfulness accounting for the rest . cms conducts much of its oversight of contractor performance through contractor performance evaluations ( cpes ) . these reviews focus on contractors that have been determined to be “at risk” in certain program areas . to date , cms has not conducted cpe reviews focusing on the quality or usefulness of contractors' bulletins or web sites , but has begun to focus on call center service to providers . again , the cpe reviews of call centers focus mainly on process — such as phone etiquette — rather than on an assessment of response accuracy .