damage reduction benefits . reducing damages to existing structures , including homes and commercial buildings , is the primary benefit the corps considers when identifying benefits for coastal storm risk management project alternatives , according to the corps' planning guidance . the guidance outlines general steps for estimating damage reduction benefits , which are to be calculated and included in each coastal storm and flood risk management alternative's economic analysis . in seven of the eight projects we reviewed , the corps analyzed damage reduction benefits as part of its economic analysis . other than these reduced maintenance costs , the corps did not include other types of direct incidental benefits , such as environmental or other social benefits , in the economic analyses for the eight projects we reviewed . according to corps officials , some project alternatives using natural infrastructure may provide direct incidental benefits that are not included in the economic analysis , such as environmental and social benefits . for example , the draft feasibility study for the new york district's jamaica bay project states that natural infrastructure can provide direct incidental benefits , such as improving ecosystems , filtering water , and improving aesthetics . the corps acknowledged these incidental benefits and their importance to communities in its draft feasibility study , but did not incorporate these benefits into its economic analysis because they could not be monetized , according to corps district officials . corps headquarters officials said incidental benefits that cannot be monetized in the economic analysis are considered in the planning process through the evaluation of other principles and guidelines categories . two reports published by the national academy of sciences stated that when assessing project alternatives , the corps primarily uses qualitative measures to assess benefits that are difficult to monetize but that relegates such effects to secondary status compared to the monetized estimates of costs and benefits . moreover , a 2004 national academy of sciences report found that the principles and guidelines outlines a process that focuses on the effects that can be monetized , which does not allow for full consideration of a project's total economic effects . nonetheless , for three of the eight projects we reviewed , we found that the corps modified its approach in selecting the use of natural infrastructure as part of the recommended alternative . for instance , for the encinitas - solana beach project , the corps granted an exception to its planning process and recommended a locally preferred plan . in certain circumstances , corps project teams can deviate from the corps' planning guidance that calls for the corps to select the project alternative with the maximum net benefits . corps headquarters officials said that requesting such an exception is the primary method the agency uses for recommending a project alternative that does not meet the corps maximum net benefits requirement for a project focused solely on coastal storm or flood risk management . for the encinitas - solana beach project , the california coastal commission found that the corps' proposed alternative with the maximum net benefits was inconsistent with the mission of california's coastal management program to protect and enhance the state's coastal environment .