we provided a draft of this report to ssa for comment . ssa concurred fully with our recommendations and agreed to take steps to implement them . the course was designed and is conducted by an outside contractor . the course addresses topics such as cultural diversity , geographic diversity , unconscious bias , and gender dynamics through a series of exercises designed to help the aljs understand how their thought processes , beliefs , and past experiences with people influence their decision - making process . oha also increased its efforts to recruit minorities for alj and other legal positions , although the impact of these efforts on the racial / ethnic mix of ssa's alj workforce has been limited . according to oha officials , oha has attended conferences held by several minority bar organizations , to raise awareness about the opportunities available at ssa to become an alj . in addition to having information booths and distributing information on legal careers at oha , oha presented a workshop called “how to become an administrative law judge at oha,” at each conference . despite these efforts , there have not been significant changes in the racial / ethnic profile of ssa aljs . in addition to these efforts , in 1993 ssa instituted a complaint process under the direction of oha that provides claimants and their representatives with a new mechanism for voicing complaints specifically about bias or misconduct by aljs . the alj complaint process supplements and is coordinated with the normal appeals process . all ssa claimants have the right to appeal the alj decision to the appeals council and , in doing so , may allege unfair treatment or misconduct . according to oha officials , the vast majority of allegations of unfair hearings are submitted by claimants or their representatives in connection with a request for appeals council review . under the 1993 process , claimants or their representatives may also file a complaint at any ssa office , send it by mail , or call it into ssa's 800 number service . any complaints where there is a request for appeals council review are referred to the appeals council for its consideration as part of its normal review . for complaints where the complainant did not request an appeals council review , the complaint is reviewed by the appropriate regional chief alj , and the findings are reported to the chief alj . regardless of how the complaint was filed or which office reviewed the complaint , oha's special counsel staff is notified of all claims and any findings from either the appeals council or the regional chief alj . on the basis of these findings , oha may decide to take remedial actions against the alj , such as a counseling letter , additional training , mentoring or monitoring , an official reprimand , or some other adverse action . oha's special counsel staff may also decide to conduct a further investigation .