, operations not in the oag ) . faa also provides funding to airports . the funding that airports receive from faa for airport improvements is conditioned on open and nondiscriminatory access to the airlines and other users , and the airlines are free to schedule flights at any time throughout the day , except at airports that are subject to limits on scheduled operations . the airlines can also affect the efficiency of the airspace system through the number and types of aircraft that they choose to operate . faa has many ongoing and planned initiatives — such as longer - term next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) procedures and technologies — that could also reduce delays , but these actions are not included in our discussion because they are not expected to realize delay reduction benefits in the next 2 to 3 years . these actions to reduce delays are available or planned at various oep airports , but we did not assess the extent to which they are being used at a given location . to determine the extent to which dot and faa actions are being implemented at the most congested airports , we reviewed related reports and studies , including faa's 2009 performance and accountability report , the rtca nextgen mid - term implementation task force report , and faa's capacity needs in the national airspace system , 2007-2025 ( fact 2 ) , and interviewed airport officials at some of these airports and faa officials at both the national and local airport levels . to determine the status of dot's and faa's actions to reduce delays and their potential to reduce delays , we interviewed officials in faa's air traffic organization ; office of aviation policy , planning and environment ; office of airport planning and programming ; and local airport officials . to gain an understanding of aviation stakeholder perspectives on the expected impact of dot's and faa's actions in the next 2 to 3 years , we spoke with industry and academic experts , airport and airline officials , the dot inspector general , the air transport association , the airports council international - north america , the national air traffic controllers association , the national business aviation association , the air carrier association of america , and the regional airline association . to identify the extent to which faa has modeled or assessed the delay reduction impact of its actions , including nextgen , we interviewed officials from mitre , faa's performance analysis and strategy office , and faa's air traffic organization nextgen offices . faa officials also provided information based on model simulations that examine future benefits of nextgen technologies . in particular , we received analysis of expected delay minutes for the oep airports in future years under various assumptions — a baseline scenario that estimates the delays that may occur if no improvements are made to the system ; a runway scenario that estimates the delays that may occur if only runway improvements are made over the next 10 years , but no nextgen air traffic management improvements ; and the nextgen case that estimates the delays that may occur if planned runway improvements and nextgen technologies and procedures are implemented .