changes in the dialysis population . the increased age and prevalence of comorbidities in the dialysis population may have reduced the portion considered clinically appropriate for home dialysis . ( see fig . from 1988 to 2008 , the mean age of a dialysis patient rose from 52.2 years to 58.6 years . similarly , the proportion of the dialysis population affected by various comorbid conditions increased during this time period . for in - center hemodialysis treatments , blood flows from the patient's body through a surgically created vein or a catheter , known as a vascular access site , and through tubing to the dialysis machine . the machine pumps the blood through an artificial kidney , called a dialyzer , to cleanse the excess fluids and toxins from the bloodstream and then returns the cleansed blood to the body . patients typically receive in - center hemodialysis for 3 to 4 hours three times per week . for home hemodialysis treatments , the process is the same , but the patient performs the treatments and may perform treatments more frequently and at night . we believe that this examination and any resulting revisions to these payment policies have the potential to address our recommendation . hhs did not concur with our third recommendation that cms examine the kde benefit and , if appropriate , seek legislation to revise the categories of providers and patients eligible for the benefit . hhs said that cms works continuously to appropriately pay for esrd services and must prioritize its activities to improve care for dialysis patients . while we acknowledge the need for hhs to prioritize its activities to improve dialysis care , it is important for hhs to help ensure that medicare patients with chronic kidney disease understand their condition , how to manage it , and the implications of the various treatment options available , particularly given the central role of patient choice in dialysis care . the limited use of the kde benefit suggests that it may be difficult for medicare patients to receive this education and underscores the need for cms to examine and potentially revise the benefit . we received comments from five groups: ( 1 ) home dialyzors united ( hdu ) , which represents home dialysis patients ; ( 2 ) the national renal administrators association ( nraa ) , which represents small dialysis facility chains and independent facilities ; ( 3 ) davita , which is one of the two large dialysis facility chains ; ( 4 ) fresenius , which is the other large dialysis facility chain ; and ( 5 ) the renal physicians association ( rpa ) , which represents nephrologists . the groups expressed appreciation for the opportunity to review the draft , and the three groups that commented on the quality of the overall report stated that it accurately addressed issues related to the use of home dialysis . three of the groups commented on some or all of our recommendations , while the remaining two groups did not comment specifically on this aspect of our report . specifically , hdu , nraa , and rpa agreed with our first recommendation that cms improve the reliability of cost report data for treatment and training associated with specific types of dialysis .