mr . chairmen , this completes my prepared remarks . i would be happy to respond to any questions either of you or other members of the subcommittees have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact randall williamson at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made major contributions to this testimony are listed in appendix ii . we selected locations for our site visits using va data on each va medical center ( vamc ) in the united states . our goal was to identify a geographically diverse mix of facilities , including some facilities that provide services to a high volume of women veterans , particularly women veterans of operation enduring freedom ( oef ) and operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) ; some facilities that serve a high proportion of national guard or reserve veterans ; and some facilities that serve rural veterans . we also considered whether vamcs had programs specifically for women veterans , particularly treatment programs for post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) and for women who have experienced military sexual trauma ( mst ) . for each of the factors listed below , we examined available facility - or market - level data to identify facilities of interest: total number of unique women veteran patients using the vamc ; total number of unique oef / oif women veteran patients using the vamc ; proportion of unique women veterans using the vamc who are oef / oif proportion of unique oef / oif women veterans using the vamc who were discharged from the national guard or reserves ; within the va - defined market area for the vamc , the proportion of women veterans who use va health care and live in rural or highly rural areas ; and availability of on - site programs specific to women veterans , such as inpatient or residential treatment programs that offer specialized treatment for women veterans with ptsd or who have experienced mst , including programs that are for women only or have an admission cycle that includes only women ; and outpatient treatment teams with a specialized focus on mst . we selected a judgmental sample of the vamcs that fell into the top 25 facilities for at least two of these factors . once we had selected these vamcs , we also selected at least one community - based outpatient clinic ( cboc ) affiliated with each of the vamcs and one nearby vet center , which we also visited during our site visits . in selecting these cbocs and vet centers , we focused on selecting facilities that represented a range of sizes , in terms of the number of women veterans they served . tables 5 and 6 provide information on the unique number of women veterans served by each of the vamcs and cbocs we selected for site visits . in addition to the contact named above , marcia a. mann , assistant director ; susannah bloch ; chad davenport ; alexis macdonald ; and carmen rivera - lowitt made key contributions to this testimony .