the association agreed with our recommendation . aahomecare noted that respiratory therapists provide services that are associated with dispensing inhalation therapy drugs , as well as with the use of nebulizers , and , therefore , the exclusion of all costs associated with respiratory therapists from our analysis was not appropriate . we have clarified the discussion of our methodology to indicate that we excluded respiratory therapist costs related to patient education on the use of the nebulizer but we included respiratory therapist costs related to the medication refill and compliance phone calls . aahomecare also made technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . we are sending a copy of this report to the administrator of cms and appropriate congressional committees . we found these data suitable for our purposes . our sample of 12 suppliers accounted for more than 42 percent of medicare inhalation therapy payments in 2003 . from the supplier - reported cost data , we calculated per unit acquisition costs ( net of rebates and discounts ) for the three inhalation therapy drugs most frequently billed to medicare , representing approximately 98 percent of medicare inhalation therapy drug expenditures in 2003 . we also calculated per patient monthly dispensing costs , which include patient care costs , such as pharmacy and shipping , and administrative and overhead costs , such as billing . we reported the range of these costs across all 12 suppliers and separately for the 4 largest suppliers in our sample , each of which had payments accounting for at least 3 percent of all medicare inhalation therapy payments in 2003 , and all other suppliers in our sample , which we refer to as small suppliers . we interviewed officials from cms ; three dme regional carriers , the contractors responsible for processing and paying dme and inhalation therapy drug claims ; and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) to gather comparative information on how va pays for inhalation therapy . we also interviewed officials from an industry association representing suppliers ; two patient advocacy organizations ; two associations of health care professionals who care for inhalation therapy patients ; and two manufacturers and a wholesaler of inhalation therapy drugs . these interviewees helped us identify 20 inhalation therapy suppliers representing national , regional , and local homecare and mail - order pharmacies of various sizes and geographic locations . appendix i contains a more complete description of our methodology . we conducted our work from may through october 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . inhalation therapy consists of drugs , including bronchodialators such as albuterol sulfate , taken through a nebulizer to alleviate severe respiratory problems . in the medicare population , this therapy is primarily used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , which includes diseases such as asthma , emphysema , and chronic bronchitis . once beneficiaries begin receiving inhalation therapy , they are likely to receive it for the remainder of their lives . inhalation therapy drugs are covered by medicare because the nebulizer , which is covered as dme , is only useful in conjunction with the drugs .