we did not evaluate the outcomes of the field tests . to determine to what extent the designs for the initial 2020 decennial census field tests were consistent with key practices for a sound study plan , we reviewed bureau design documents and interviewed bureau officials about the field test design process . we compared each of the 25 practices to the bureau's field test design documents for the three initial tests to answer the question of whether the respective practice was followed . our determinations provide a measure of the general rigor of the test designs , although they do not recognize the extent to which the bureau may have considered the key practices later in the life cycle of the designs . after comparing documents provided by the bureau for each field test to the key practices and determining the extent each practice was followed for each test , we verified the determinations by having different auditors independently determine the extent practices were followed for 25 percent of each others' initial determinations for each test . some will be designed to encompass more exploratory questions . others will be designed to more rigorously test the implementation of specific operations . when we initiated this review in early 2013 , the bureau had designed its initial three tests as summarized in table 1 . more information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from january 2013 to october 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the bureau's testing program for the 2010 census relied principally on a small number of large - scale census - like tests . specifically , the 2010 testing program included two national tests on the content of questionnaires in 2003 and 2005 , two site tests focused on data - collection methods and systems in 2004 and 2006 , and a final “dress rehearsal” at two sites in 2008 . the dress rehearsal , considered to be the final step of a decade of research and testing , had the primary focus of testing automated field operations and their interfaces . the bureau previously reported that implementing the census tests , including the dress rehearsal , cost about $108 million . as part of the bureau's effort to conduct the 2020 census at a cost lower than the 2010 census , it plans to invest in early research and conduct smaller more frequent tests to inform its 2020 census design decisions . the lifecycle for 2020 census preparation is divided into five phases , as illustrated in figure 1 . the bureau is attempting to frontload critical research and testing to an earlier part of the decade than it had in prior decennials . it intends to use the early research and testing phase through fiscal year 2015 to develop a preliminary design and to evaluate the possible impact that changes would have on the census' cost and quality .