iii. ) we also compared the costs and services of the cmop program with dod's mail order program , the tricare mail order pharmacy . ( see app . iv. ) to assess the reliability of dod and va data , we interviewed agency officials and tested the data for errors . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted our work from april 2004 through may 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . dod's beneficiaries have four options for obtaining prescription drugs . they can pick them up directly from mtfs , network retail pharmacies , or nonnetwork retail pharmacies . they can also receive them in the mail through dod's tricare mail order pharmacy . dod operates 536 pharmacies at 121 of its mtfs . each mtf may have multiple pharmacies . for example , san diego maintains satellite pharmacies at several locations in addition to its main pharmacy , which has a separate section that dispenses outpatient refill prescriptions . fort hood and kirtland each maintain a separate pharmacy to dispense outpatient refill prescriptions , and fort hood maintains several satellite pharmacies at health care clinics . in addition to pharmacies at its mtfs , dod contracts with express scripts , inc. , a private pharmacy benefits management company , to operate dod's retail pharmacy program and its tricare mail order pharmacy . for the retail system , express scripts has a network of over 54,000 retail pharmacies where dod beneficiaries can pick up prescriptions ; beneficiaries can also utilize nonnetwork pharmacies , that is , any retail pharmacy not in express scripts' network . for the tricare mail order pharmacy , beneficiaries submit their prescriptions to express scripts , which dispenses and mails the drugs directly to the beneficiary . civilian beneficiaries pay copayments for drugs obtained through the mail or at retail pharmacies , but do not pay at mtfs . ( see table 1. ) active duty service members do not pay copayments . we note , however , that dod has taken action to influence beneficiary behavior to choose one option over another option , for example , by increasing copayment amounts to help it manage the pharmacy benefit and control costs . while dod's use of the cmop is a significant opportunity for dod to achieve savings and expand its sharing of resources with va , there are other cost implications that could become important if mtf refill operations were closed with the expectation that beneficiaries would use the cmop . specifically , rather than obtaining drugs from the cmop , beneficiaries might choose instead to obtain their drugs from a more costly option for dod , such as retail pharmacies . any cost increases will challenge dod to find more efficient ways to manage its pharmacy benefits program , such as by encouraging beneficiaries to choose the most cost - effective options for where they obtain their drugs . we received written comments from dod and va on a draft of this report . va concurred with our draft report . va stated that our report would benefit from a discussion of market pressures that control the cost of generic drugs .