this remains the case today . according to a pensions & investments survey , the percentage of large plans ( as measured by total plan assets ) investing in hedge funds grew from 11 percent in 2001 to 60 percent in 2010 ( see fig . over the same time period , the percentage of large plans that invest in private equity grew at a much slower rate — 71 percent to 92 percent — likely because of the fact that a much larger percentage of plans were already invested in private equity in 2001 . data from the same survey reveal that investments in hedge funds and private equity typically constitute a small share of plan assets . the average allocation to hedge funds among plans with such investments was a little over 5 percent in 2010 . similarly , among plans with investments in private equity , the average allocation was a little over 9 percent . although the majority of plans with investments in hedge funds or private equity have small allocations to these assets , a few plans have relatively large allocations , according to the pensions & investments survey . of the 78 large plans that reported hedge fund investments in 2010 , 20 had allocations of 10 percent or more ( see fig . the highest reported hedge fund allocation was 33 percent of total assets . similarly , of the 121 plans that reported private equity investments in 2010 , 34 had allocations of 10 percent or more , and the highest reported private equity allocation was 30 percent . available survey data show that larger plans , measured by total plan assets , are more likely to invest in hedge funds and private equity compared with midsize plans . as shown below , a 2010 survey by greenwich associates found that 22 percent of midsize plans — those with $250 million to $500 million in total assets — were invested in hedge funds compared with 40 percent of the largest plans — those with over $5 billion in total assets ( see fig . survey data on plans with less than $200 million in assets are unavailable and , in the absence of this information , the extent to which these smaller plans invest in hedge funds and private equity is unclear . one of the major challenges that both hedge fund and private equity investments pose to plan sponsors is uncertainty over the current value of the sponsors' investment . with regard to hedge funds , we noted that plan officials may lack information on both the nature of the specific underlying holdings of the hedge fund , as well as the aggregate value on a day - to - day basis . because many hedge funds may own thinly traded securities and derivatives whose valuation can be complex and subjective , a plan official may not be able to obtain timely information on the value of assets owned by a hedge fund . further , hedge fund managers may decline to disclose information on asset holdings and the net value of individual assets largely because the release of such information could compromise their trading strategy .