microgravity can be provided through parabolic flights . nasa officials told us microgravity flights are used to test equipment that will be sent into orbit , including for example exercise equipment and 3d printers . according to faa , one company currently conducts microgravity research using a boeing 727 with a standard airworthiness certificate . other companies have proposed using retired military aircraft to fly scientific payloads for researchers . it is difficult to determine the size of the market for the use of space support vehicles for training because we have found no publicly available studies on the size of the spaceflight participant training market , and companies we interviewed told us they have not conducted their own market analysis . however , companies within the industry provided a wide range of estimates of the size of a potential training market . estimates of the training market reported by stakeholders are often dependent on the size of the overall space tourism market and the training burden launch companies anticipate for their customers . one industry study that found that there are around 8,000 individuals with the money and inclination to take a space tourism flight by 2022 . some stakeholders said that the current avs system is preferable because ast is overburdened , and its staff needs to focus on other commercial space activities , such as issuing launch licenses . some stakeholders would like these activities to remain under avs to keep them separate from commercial space launch activities , especially in the public eye . for example , three stakeholders we interviewed were worried that a crash involving a space support vehicle might negatively impact the entire commercial space transportation industry . two stakeholders expressed concern that moving space support vehicles to ast would place these activities under the informed consent regime . the results of these interviews are non - generalizable . however , this report only focuses on one type of vehicle — hybrid launch vehicles . as we described previously , hybrid launch systems contain elements of both aircraft and rocket - powered vehicles . these vehicles take off horizontally and then launch the spacecraft once reaching a certain altitude . company representatives said that they do not want to invest in a space support vehicle until they know if they will be allowed to operate it . allowing companies to use experimentally certified aircraft for compensation or hire would require a regulatory change . some industry stakeholders ( 13 of 37 ) told us that future space flight participants will need to receive training in high - performance aircraft . for a full list of stakeholders we interviewed , see appendix i . to identify the commercial space industry's potential uses for space support vehicles , we also reviewed prior gao reports on commercial space issues , faa's annual compendium of commercial space transportation , a national research council report requested by the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) related to astronaut training , and industry reports on the commercial space market . further , four stakeholders said this training is necessary to become acquainted with g - forces involved with spaceflight and that space support vehicles are best able to provide this training .