( in thousands ) . commitment to improvement and oversight are needed to ensure progress . chairman smith has recently requested an assessment of nij's impact evaluation studies . this work may lead to additional recommendations related to ojp grant evaluations . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact laurie e. ekstrand or john f. mortin at ( 202 ) 512-8777 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included james blume , dan harris , charles johnson , weldon mcphail , wendy simkalo , lori weiss , jared hermalin , rochelle burns , jenna battcher , and kimberly hutchens . we expect to issue a report on this issue in april 2002 . in summary , ojp's grant programs have grown rapidly during the last decade , increasing the importance of ensuring that they are achieving intended results . yet , repeated gao reviews of grant monitoring and impact evaluations across a variety of ojp entities have shown a need for improvement . ojp itself and the doj office of the inspector general have identified a need for improvements in grant management as well . despite past commitments to shore up grant monitoring and better assess program results , we have still found problems in very recent reports . the recent reorganization plans and the anticipated management information system have been cited as the foundation for positive changes in grants management , including monitoring and evaluation . but , reorganization and management information systems are only tools and are only as good as the management that wields them . ojjdp said that it anticipates ojjdp - wide implementation during fiscal year 2002 . finally , with respect to our 1999 weed and seed report , eows said it recognizes the need to improve program monitoring — citing that it has a chronic problem of grantees not submitting programmatic progress reports in a timely manner — and acknowledged the need to document all monitoring visits . in a july 2000 letter , eows officials said that eows had taken steps to improve program monitoring , including documentation of site monitoring visits . we have also issued reports questioning the methodological rigor of impact evaluation studies of various ojp grant programs . impact evaluations are intended to assess the net effect of a program by comparing program outcomes with an estimate of what would have happened in the absence of the program . today , we are issuing a report on work undertaken at the request of senators sessions and grassley concerning the methodological rigor of impact evaluations of a byrne grant program and three vawo discretionary grant programs . during fiscal years 1995 through 2001 , nij awarded about $6 million for 5 byrne and 5 vawo discretionary grant program evaluations . of the 10 program evaluations , all 5 vawo evaluations were intended to measure the impact of the vawo programs . one of the 5 byrne evaluations was designed as an impact evaluation .