( see app . ii for summaries of the types of benefits and drawbacks for each option. ) we also asked irs officials to share their insights on the benefits and drawbacks of the options from a tax administration perspective . we received responses from 9 of these groups . stakeholders did not unanimously support or oppose any of the 19 options . although views were mixed , stakeholders generally expressed support for the options more frequently than they expressed opposition . table 4 lists the 19 options . the list is not ranked in any order , but rather is grouped in seven broad categories . we asked 11 external stakeholders to provide input on these 19 options , including ( 1 ) the extent to which they supported or opposed each option and ( 2 ) the benefits and drawbacks of each option ( see app . ii for a summary of these benefits and drawbacks for each option ) . these stakeholders included 4 groups that represent the views of small businesses , independent contractors , and those who hire them ( i.e. , independent contractor groups ) ; 4 groups that represent the views of organized labor ( i.e. creating standardized documents on worker rights and tax obligations can impose burdens on businesses , although such burdens could be reduced by requiring employers to provide such documents only to newly hired or retained workers rather than to all workers . also , irs may not currently have the authority to require employers to provide such documents to workers . requiring a separate tin for each independent contractor could help compliance but would impose some costs on businesses and irs to reprogram its computers . requiring forms ss - 8 for all newly retained independent contractors would create tremendous costs for irs , and it may not be able to review the forms quickly enough to affect some independent contractors who employers retain on a short - term basis . an online classification system that uses factors like those that irs uses to make form ss - 8 determinations could provide guidance to those unsure about classifying workers . however , the system should not be used to make classification determinations because those entering the data could manipulate their entries to receive a desired outcome . some of the identified options relate to goals , objectives , and strategies in irs's strategic plan for 2009-2013 . for example , irs's plan envisions placing more emphasis on providing more targeted and timely guidance and outreach on how to voluntarily comply and creating opportunities for taxpayers to proactively resolve tax disputes as soon as possible as part of its goal to improve service to make voluntary compliance easier . to enforce the law to ensure that everyone meets their tax obligations , irs plans to strengthen its partnerships with other government agencies to leverage resources in a way that allows quick identification and pursuit of emerging tax schemes through education as well as enforcement . irs also seeks to expand its enforcement approaches by allowing for alternative treatment of potential noncompliance .