all of these plans were assessed an afc more than once . plan sponsors can meet the afc requirement by applying funding credits earned in prior years in place of cash contributions . the account value of these credits , which accumulate interest , may not reflect the underlying value of the assets in the plan . many plans experienced significant market value losses of their assets between 2000 and 2002 while they were able to apply these funding credits . among the 100 largest plans , just over 30 percent of the time a plan was assessed an afc , the funding rules allowed the sponsor to forgo a cash contribution altogether that year . the experience of two large terminated plans illustrates the ineffectiveness of the afc . for example , bethlehem steel's plan was assessed an afc of $181 million in 2002 , but the company made no cash contribution that year , just as it had not in 2000 or 2001 , years in which the plan was not assessed an afc . when the plan terminated in late 2002 , its assets covered less than half of the $7 billion in promised benefits . ltv steel , which terminated its pension plan for hourly employees in 2002 with assets of $1.6 billion below the value of benefits , had its plan assessed an afc each year from 2000 to 2002 , but for only $2 million , $73 million , and $79 million , or no more than 5 percent of the eventual funding shortfall . despite these afc assessments , ltv steel made no cash contributions to its plan from 2000 to 2002 . both plans were able to apply existing credits instead of cash to satisfy minimum funding requirements . in addition , both sponsors had unused funding credits at the time their plans were terminated . unclear measures of pension funding and a lack of timely information have made it difficult for plan participants , investors , regulators , and policy makers to accurately assess the financial condition of pension plans . without timely and reasonably accurate data about the financial condition of pension plans , the various stakeholders cannot make timely and informed decisions on retirement savings , employment , and other key life issues . the primary regulatory filing for pension plans — the form 5500- - requires multiple measures of pension assets and liabilities , yet none of these measures tell pbgc and plan participants what share of the benefit obligations are funded in the event of plan termination . furthermore , by the time these regulatory reports are publicly available , the information is usually at least 2 years old . in a time of significant changes in interest rates and equity prices , it is possible that reported measures of pension funding will substantially differ from current measures of plan funding . pbgc does receive more current information about plans that are underfunded by at least $50 million . this more current information includes estimates of funding measures if the plan were to be terminated ; however , by law this information is not disclosed to the public .