performance management . the performance management capabilities are intended to move dhs's existing primarily paper - based performance management processes into an electronic environment and capture performance - related information throughout the performance cycle ( eg , recording performance expectations discussed at the beginning of the rating period and performance ratings at the end of it ) . each component is responsible for its own palms implementation project , and is expected to issue a task order using a blanket purchase agreement that was established in may 2013 with an estimated value of $95 million . before implementing palms , each component is completing a fit - gap assessment to , among other things , identify any requirements and critical processes that cannot be met by the preconfigured , commercial off - the - shelf system . if such component - specific requirements are identified , the component must then decide whether to have the vendor customize the system . the headquarters palms program management office ( pmo ) is responsible for overseeing the implementation projects across the department . additionally , ocio is the component acquisition executive responsible for overseeing palms . in addition to implementing projects intended to address the strategic improvement opportunities in the blueprint , the hrit investment also carried out the following two projects that were not included in the blueprint: balanced workforce assessment tool: this project provided an enterprise - wide tool to automate the formerly paper - based balanced workforce strategy process to determine the appropriate mix of federal employees and contractor employees required to fulfill a specific work function in the government . dhs deployed this tool beginning in september 2013 . workers compensation – medical case management services: this project provided an enterprise - wide contract to enable nurses to execute case management processes and facilitate the case management activities to be performed by dhs human resources staff . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to ( 1 ) evaluate the progress the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has made in implementing the human resources information technology ( hrit ) investment and how effectively dhs has managed the investment since completing the human capital segment architecture in august 2011 , ( 2 ) describe whether dhs has justified its investment in the performance and learning management system ( palms ) program , ( 3 ) determine whether palms is being implemented enterprise - wide , and ( 4 ) evaluate the extent to which palms is implementing selected information technology ( it ) acquisition best practices . to address the first part of our first objective — to evaluate the progress dhs had made in implementing the hrit investment — we compared hrit's goals , scope , and implementation time frames ( as defined in the human capital segment architecture blueprint , which was completed in august 2011 ) to the investment's actual accomplishments . specifically , we compared the completed and in - progress hrit projects against the strategic improvement opportunities and projects that were outlined in the blueprint to determine which of the improvement opportunities and projects had been fully implemented or were in - progress .