gao - 14-627 . washington , d.c.: july 29 , 2014 . ( see fig . these sources were used to fund medicaid supplemental payments — both dsh and non - dsh — to a greater extent than other types of payments , and we found this reliance was growing . for medicaid dsh and non - dsh supplemental payments , the percentage of the nonfederal share financed with funds from providers and local governments increased from 57 percent ( or $8.1 billion ) in state fiscal year 2008 to 70 percent ( or $13.6 billion ) in state fiscal year 2012 . several states relied on health care providers and local governments for the entire nonfederal share of supplemental payments in 2012 . our reports have illustrated how this increased reliance on non - state sources of funds can shift costs from states to the federal government , changing the nature of the federal - state partnership . for example , in our july 2014 report , our analysis of arrangements involving financing of the nonfederal share of medicaid payments with funds from provider taxes or local governments in three selected states illustrated how medicaid costs can be shifted from the state to the federal government and , to a lesser extent , to health care providers and local governments . the use of funds from providers and local governments is , as previously described , allowable under federal rules , but it can also have implications for federal costs . by increasing providers' medicaid payments , and requiring providers receiving the payments to supply all or most of the nonfederal share , we found that states claimed an increase in federal matching funds without a commensurate increase in state general funds . for example , in our 2014 report , we found that in one state a $220 million payment increase for nursing facilities in 2012 ( which was funded by a tax on nursing facilities ) resulted in an estimated $110 million increase in federal matching funds ; no increase in state general funds ; and a net payment increase to the facilities , after paying the taxes , of $105 million . ( see fig . as we found in our 2014 report , due to data limitations , cms is not well - positioned to either identify states' medicaid financing sources or assess their impact . apart from data on provider taxes , cms generally does not require ( or otherwise collect ) information from states on the funds they use to finance medicaid , nor ensure that the data that it does collect are accurate and complete . the lack of transparency in states' sources of funds and financing arrangements hinders cms's and federal policymakers' efforts to oversee medicaid . further , it is difficult to determine whether a state's increased reliance on funds from providers and local governments primarily serves to ( 1 ) provide fiscal relief to the state by increasing federal funding , or ( 2 ) increase payments to providers that in turn help improve beneficiary access . cms has recognized the need for better data from states on how they finance their share of medicaid and has taken steps to collect some data , but additional steps are needed .