rejects . this category is used when air force field locations cannot verify payments made by someone else on their behalf . this can happen when they determine that they have not been provided sufficient supporting documentation to post the transaction or the payment belongs to another accounting station . the field locations “reject” the individual payment back to dfas denver for transmission either back to the originator of the payment or to another field location . interfund . dod components sometimes use the interfund system to sell materials to each other . if the seller and buyer do not record the transactions in the same month , which often occurs , it automatically appears as a reconciling difference between dfas denver's records and treasury's records and would be placed in this category for reconciliation purposes . reducing the total undistributed amount is important because fewer transactions will have to be tracked until reconciled . however , the use of nonintegrated systems and routine business processes does not permit the simultaneous processing of transactions and affects when transactions are recorded . therefore , eliminating the undistributed amount entirely is not possible because timing differences will continue to cause a difference between dfas denver's and treasury's records that will need to be identified and reconciled . dfas denver's analysis cannot yet identify all the transactions that make up the total undistributed difference . the amount that is not identified is referred to as the “variance.” eliminating the variance is important because the variance constitutes the amount of receipt and disbursement activity for which dfas denver cannot identify transactions . without first identifying the transactions , dfas denver cannot reconcile the activity . as figure 4 shows , dfas denver has reported progress in reducing both the variance and the total undistributed amount . as of september 30 , 2000 , the reported variance for all appropriations totaled $35 million , or about 2 percent , of the $1.6 billion in total difference in treasury's and dfas denver's records . as of september 30 , 1998 , the reported variance was $386 million , or almost 10 percent , of the $3.7 billion in total difference . at the time of our review , dfas denver had additional efforts under way to refine its methodology for identifying transactions for the remaining variance . dfas denver officials told us that by april 2001 they had identified causes and potential explanations for all but $2 million of the $35 million variance as of september 30 , 2000 . however , they will not be able to prevent the variance from continuing until they have learned how to consistently identify the types of transactions that were causing the variance . dfas denver's analysis of undistributed transactions is crucial to part two of the overall reconciliation process , and the progress dfas denver has made in reducing the reported variance is commendable . however , the undistributed analysis is incomplete because two types of transactions are not subject to the analysis . as discussed in the following section , adding these transactions to the analysis is one of the needed refinements to the reconciliation process . step three is the tracking process .