a variety of factors have deterred tribes from pursuing teras . uncertainty associated with interior's tera regulations is one factor . for example , tera regulations authorize tribes to assume responsibility for energy development activities that are not “inherently federal functions,” but interior officials told us that the agency has not determined what activities would be considered inherently federal because doing so could have far - reaching implications throughout the federal government . according to officials from one tribe we interviewed , the tribe has repeatedly asked interior for additional guidance on the activities that would be considered inherently federal functions under the regulations . according to the tribal officials , without additional guidance on inherently federal functions , tribes considering a tera do not know what activities the tribe would be assuming or what efforts may be necessary to build the capacity needed to assume those activities . we recommended in our june 2015 report that interior provide additional energy development - specific guidance on provisions of tera regulations that tribes have identified as unclear . additional guidance could include examples of activities that are not inherently federal in the energy development context , which could assist tribes in identifying capacity building efforts that may be needed . interior agreed with the recommendation and stated it is considering further guidance but did not provide additional details regarding issuance of the guidance . in addition , the costs associated with assuming activities currently conducted by federal agencies and a complex application process were identified by literature we reviewed and stakeholders we interviewed as other factors that have deterred any tribe from entering into a tera with interior . specifically , through a tera , a tribe assuming control for energy development activities that are currently conducted by federal agencies does not receive federal funding for taking over the activities from the federal government . several tribal officials we interviewed told us that the tribe does not have the resources to assume additional responsibility and liability from the federal government without some associated support from the federal government . in conclusion , our review identified a number of areas in which bia could improve its management of indian energy resources and enhance opportunities for greater tribal control and decision - making authority over the development of their energy resources . interior stated it intends to take some steps to implement our recommendations , but we believe interior needs to take additional actions to address data limitations and track its review process . we look forward to continuing to work with this committee in overseeing bia and other federal programs to ensure that they are operating in the most effective and efficient manner . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . factors , such as shortcomings in bia's management and additional factors generally outside of bia's management responsibilities — such as a complex regulatory framework , tribes' limited capital and infrastructure , and varied tribal capacity — have hindered indian energy development . specifically , according to some of the literature we reviewed and several stakeholders we interviewed , bia's management has three key shortcomings .