katrina relief , poplarville , miss . louisiana association of nonprofit organizations , baton rouge and new orleans , la . louisiana and mississippi differed in how funds from these programs were distributed . louisiana created organizations like the nonprofit lfrc and the state - level louisiana recovery authority to serve as custodians and distributors of some of its federal funding , while mississippi took advantage of provisions in the national community service trust act to establish a state - level commission to oversee the state's community service block grants . using federal funding programs such as those shown in table 2 , nonprofit organizations have provided a wide range of recovery services to residents affected by hurricanes katrina and rita including housing , long - term case management , and a variety of counseling services ( including crisis management and substance abuse ) . according to nonprofit officials in both louisiana and mississippi , as of early 2010 , gulf coast residents continue to need services in these areas . cdbg funds are being used by providence community housing , a collaborative effort of catholic housing and social service organizations in the new orleans community , to build , rebuild , or repair 7,000 units of affordable houses and apartments over a 5- year period that began in 2006 . some nonprofit officials also told us that long - term case management services were still widely needed . for example , according to officials with the lutheran episcopal services in mississippi , as of the summer of 2008 , this nonprofit had provided case management services for several years to katrina - affected residents in the mississippi gulf coast region through the efforts of approximately 60 case managers who worked with clients throughout mississippi . some nonprofits in our review were instrumental in helping other nonprofits access available federal funds in order to deliver much needed services . the united methodist committee on relief ( umcor ) , for example , also served as the umbrella grants manager for katrina aid today ( kat ) , a national consortium of nine subgrantees . the consortium was required to provide matching funds and was able to put up $30 million of in - kind funds , while fema channeled foreign donations of $66 million over a 2-year period . at the completion of its grant - funded activity in march 2008 , kat had enabled case management services for approximately 73,000 households . as the umbrella grants manager , umcor provided financial compliance monitoring , technical assistance and training to the nine consortium members . nonprofits such as louisiana's odyssey house and mercy family center also provided crisis , mental health , and substance abuse counseling made possible as the result of federal funds . in addition , according to officials from the catholic charities archdiocese of new orleans , their organization contracted with the louisiana state office of mental health and the resulting louisiana spirit hurricane recovery project , funded by fema , helped provide intervention and mental health services to its clients . the national response framework ( nrf ) designates the fema voluntary agency liaison ( val ) as the primary liaison to the nonprofit community .