asset accountability . dod has continued to experience problems in properly accounting for and reporting on its weapon systems and support equipment . material weaknesses continue in the central systems dod relies on to maintain visibility over assets critical to meeting military objectives and readiness goals . for example , in fiscal year 1999 , auditors found that army's central visibility system excluded information on 56 airplanes , 32 tanks , and 36 javelin command - launch units . auditors' fiscal year 2000 financial audit testing showed that previously identified problems in the systems and processes that dod relied on to account for and control its large investment in weapon systems had not yet been corrected . in addition , dod's inability to account for and control its huge investment in inventories has been an area of major concern for many years . for example , auditors' fiscal year 2000 reviews revealed that ( 1 ) army did not perform required physical counts for wholesale munitions with an estimated value of $14 billion and ( 2 ) central accountability and visibility records at four army test facilities excluded data on about 62,000 missiles , rockets , and other ammunition items that were on hand . in addition , physical counts at the defense logistics agency's 20 distribution depots showed that none of the depots achieved the department's goal of 95 percent inventory record accuracy — with error rates ranging from 6 to 26 percent . as a result of continuing problems in this area , the department continues to spend more than necessary to procure inventory and at the same time , experience equipment readiness problems because of the lack of key spare parts . for example , we reported that because of long - standing weaknesses in controls over shipments , the department's inventories are at high risk for undetected loss and theft . at the same time , and for a number of years , insufficient spare parts have been recognized as a major contributor to aircraft performing at lower mission capable rates than expected . our recent reporting disclosed that inaccurate , inconsistent , and missing pricing data for weapon system spare parts undermined military units' ability to buy needed spare parts . net cost information unreliable . a continuing inability to capture and report the full cost of its programs represents one of the most significant impediments facing the department . dod does not yet have the systems and processes in place to capture the required cost information from the hundreds of millions of transactions it processes each year . consequently , while dod reported $347 billion in total net costs for its fiscal year 2000 operations , it was unable to support this amount . the lack of reliable , cost - based information hampers dod across nearly all its programs and operations . for example , recent reporting highlights the adverse impact the lack of such information has had on the department's studies conducted under office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 76 and its performance measurement and cost reduction efforts .