controls . dod and jieddo agreed with our recommendations and have taken actions in response . beginning in february 2006 , jieddo has been responsible for developing dod's ied defeat strategic plan for countering the ied threat , but its strategic - planning actions have not followed leading strategic management practices , or have since been discontinued . in march 2007 , we found that jieddo had not developed a strategic plan and as a result could not assess whether it was making the right investment decisions or whether it had effectively organized itself to meet its mission . we recommended that the secretary of defense require the director of jieddo , in developing dod's ied defeat strategic plan , to clearly articulate jieddo's mission and specify goals , objectives , and measures of effectiveness . jieddo fully concurred with our recommendations and was working to complete a strategic plan when we issued this report , and in september 2007 , jieddo completed its dod - wide counter - ied strategic plan . however , jieddo's 2007 strategic plan did not contain a means of measuring its performance outcomes , which is a leading strategic management practice . subsequent jieddo strategic - planning efforts also did not follow leading strategic management practices or have been discontinued . for example , jieddo's 2009 – 2010 strategic plan contained performance measures , but jieddo discontinued using these measures because they determined that the data from these measures were not relevant to the organization's goals . we have previously reported that good strategic planning helps organizations ( 1 ) make the key decisions that will drive their actions , ( 2 ) measure the effectiveness of their actions to achieve intended results , and ( 3 ) if not achieving intended results , have the data to determine modifications needed to achieve intended results — all attributes of a plan that helps maximize organizational resources . many of jieddo's plans contained output measures such as the percentage of initiatives for which jieddo completes operational assessments or the percentage of counter - ied initiatives that were adopted by one of the military services . while collecting outputs is an important initial step in measuring progress , they do not provide information about progress toward achieving jieddo's mission as outcome measures would . since 2006 , jieddo has made several attempts to develop a counter - ied strategic plan including its 2007 and 2009 – 2010 strategic plans , which in the case of the 2007 plan , included elements for guiding dod subordinate organizations and the military services involved with counter - ieds in developing their own counter - ied planning . however , those plans did not have outcome - related goals specific enough for jieddo and these organizations to be able to develop enduring measures of effectiveness that inform dod whether its counter - ied mission is being met . as shown in figure 1 , we identified 17 key actions or triggering events applicable to dod that were to either produce counter - ied strategic plans for the department or further develop the strategic plans .