( see table 2. ) the border patrol paid about $6,600 for the trainee's meals and lodging , and a portion of the cost of instructors , and fletc paid about $8,100 for tuition , a portion of the cost of instructors , and miscellaneous expenses such as support services , supplies , and utilities . the $14,700 cost figure does not include the costs associated with instructors conducting postacademy and field training in the sectors . for fiscal year 2007 , the average cost to train a new agent will increase to about $16,200 . this is primarily due to an increase in the number of instructors hired , which increased cbp's instructor costs from about $2,800 to $6,100 per student . the border patrol's average cost per trainee at the academy is consistent with that of training programs that cover similar subjects and prepare officers for operations in similar geographic areas . this cost represents the amounts expended by both the border patrol and fletc . for example , the estimated average cost per trainee for a bia police officer was about $15,300 ; an arizona state police officer , $15,600 ; and a texas state trooper , $14,700 . however , differences in the emphasis of some subject areas over others dictated by jurisdiction and mission make a direct comparison difficult . similarly , the border patrol does not provide instruction in investigative techniques , while bia , arizona , and texas require 139 , 50 , and 165 hours of such instruction , respectively . table 3 shows a comparison of border patrol's basic training program with other federal and nonfederal law enforcement basic training programs . the border patrol is considering several alternatives to improve the efficiency of basic training delivery and to return agents to the sectors more quickly . for example , in october 2007 the border patrol plans to implement a proficiency test for spanish that should allow those who pass the test to shorten their time at the academy by about 30 days . according to border patrol officials , this could benefit about half of all trainees , because about half of all recruits already speak spanish . the border patrol also plans to convert postacademy classroom training to computer - based training beginning in october 2007 , allowing agents to complete the 1-day - a - week training at their duty stations rather than having to travel to the sector headquarters for this training . as a result , fewer senior agents will be required to serve as instructors for postacademy training . finally , the border patrol is considering what other training it can shift from the academy to postacademy and field training conducted in the sectors , which could further reduce the amount of time trainees spend at the academy . while these strategies may improve the efficiency of training at the academy , officials expressed concern about the sectors' ability provide adequate supervision and continued training once the new agents arrive at the sectors . some border patrol officials are concerned with having enough experienced agents available in the sectors to serve as first - line supervisors and field training officers for these new agents .