payments with patient needs . home health visits per user than those currently being provided . as a result , the pps can support a large expansion of services . however , pps incentives are intended to reward efficiency and control use of services . because criteria for what constitutes appropriate home health care do not exist , it may be difficult for medicare to ensure that patients receive all necessary services . how home health agencies respond to the pps and its incentives could have major implications for the amount of future medicare funding for home health care , the services provided , and whether medicare remains a significant payer of long - term care . many baby boomers will have more financial resources in retirement than their parents and may therefore be better able to absorb some long - term care costs . the oldest baby boomers are now in their fifties . in 2011 , the first of the baby boomers born in 1946 will turn 65 years old and become eligible for medicare . the medicaid program , which pays for many health care services for low - income elderly , including nursing home care , will also begin to be affected . baby boomers are likely to have a disproportionate effect on the demand for long - term care because more are expected to live to advanced ages , when need is most prevalent . the first baby boomers reach age 85 in 2030 . in 2000 , individuals aged 65 or older made up 12.7 percent of our nation's total population . by 2020 , that percentage will increase by nearly one - third to 16.5 percent - - one in six americans - - and will represent nearly 20 million more seniors than there are today . by 2040 , the number of seniors aged 85 years and older will more than triple to 14 million ( see fig . long - term care may have increased . others contend that better treatment and prevention could decrease the time period at the end of life when long - term care is needed . baby boomers may also have a disproportionate effect on the demand for paid services . many baby boomers will have fewer options besides paid long - term care providers because a smaller proportion of this generation may have a spouse or adult children to provide unpaid caregiving . this likelihood stems from the geographic dispersion of families and the large percentage of women who work outside the home , which may reduce the number of unpaid caregivers available to elderly baby boomers . in 1999 , spending for nursing home and home health care was about $134 billion . individuals needing care and their families paid for almost 25 percent of these expenditures out - of - pocket , public programs ( predominantly medicaid and medicare ) funded 61 percent , private insurance ( including long - term care insurance as well as services paid by traditional health insurance ) accounted for about 10 percent , and other private sources paid the remaining 5 percent ( see fig . these amounts , however , do not include the many hidden costs of long - term care .