cost of programming . another economic factor that influences programming decisions is the cost to produce radio content . for example , radio station owners and experts told us that increased costs and decreased advertisement revenue over the past decade have led to an increase in the use of voice tracking and syndicated programming . according to radio station owners and experts , voice tracking is less costly than producing shows for individual markets , and to save programming costs , some stations choose to import programming from another market during peak listener times rather than hire their own radio personalities . in addition , radio industry experts pointed out that historically , stations in small markets have generally relied on nationally syndicated programming to bring in marketable talent that will allow them to compete with other stations in the market . some stakeholders have expressed concern that voice tracking and syndicated programming are replacing local programming and therefore the needs and interests of the local community are not being reflected by the voice - tracked or syndicated programming . however , representatives of radio station owners have stated that there is no evidence that voice tracking or syndicated programming diminishes localism . for example , one station owner pointed out that the value of programming is determined by how strongly it resonates with listeners , regardless of where it originates . market competition . marketplace factors , such as the extent of competition in a given market , also affect programming decisions . for example , radio station owners stated that when radio station program directors are trying to determine a station's format , they will consider what formats are currently available in the local market and what formats are missing . if there are already stations programmed with a popular format in a given market , a radio station will likely look to competitively differentiate itself by selecting a format targeted toward a demographic that is not currently being served . in doing so , a station may also better compete for audiences and advertising revenues with other media . experts and representatives of independent producers told us that radio station formats have become more specific in recent years in an attempt to enable stations to target a specific demographic and attract advertisers , and as a result , radio station formats have changed over time . according to radio station owners , the number of radio station formats has increased . representatives of radio station owners conducted a study examining radio station formats , and found that from 2001 to 2005 , the number of radio station formats increased by 7.5 percent . station owners have characterized this increase in the number of formats as an increase in variety in radio programming . however , some experts and representatives of independent producers have noted that formats with different names often have similar playlists , diminishing real variety among those formats . for example , one expert noted that it is very difficult to discern differences in playlists between radio formats such as rock and light rock . economic factors . representatives of independent networks and some video providers said economic factors affect carriage of new independent networks and their programming .