days . although the performance data showed that this timeliness goal for fiscal year 1999 was generally met by all district offices , the results are probably not statistically reliable . conversely , owcp did seem to have a valid and reliable system for tracking responses to priority mail involving congressional requests . for example , the date of receipt of all congressional correspondence was to be recorded in the priority correspondence tracking system . this system provides reports that track each piece of correspondence until a response is provided . as i said earlier , the third approach that npr found model organizations followed was to continuously improve customer service by using performance data — including surveys of important customers and stakeholders - - to identify how and where improvements are needed . we found that owcp's efforts in this area fell well short of the best practices that npr found in the private sector and in the three agencies we surveyed . let me first state the obvious - - owcp did not measure progress toward goals that it did not establish in the first place . owcp did not have goals — nor did it have related measures — for three basic areas of telephone communications: the percentage of callers able to access the telephone system , the percentage of callers who can reach a customer service representative and their time waiting on line , and the percentage of callers' inquiries that are resolved during the first call . officials from ssa and vba told us that setting goals for those areas ( eg , telephone access ) for their agencies and measuring the results has proven useful in identifying areas where customer satisfaction levels needed improving . for example , data from ssa's customer satisfaction surveys in 1993 showed that access was the single biggest factor affecting customer satisfaction . according to an ssa official , ssa began collecting access data and found that callers attempting to reach ssa at the busiest times were getting busy signals 50 percent of the time . ssa established a telephone access goal and continued to collect access data , explore new technologies , and acquire additional telephone capacity . by 1996 , ssa said , it was able to set and achieve a goal of 95 percent of the callers reaching the system within 5 minutes , and customer satisfaction scores improved accordingly . my point in using this example is that without goals or measures in these three basic high priority areas , owcp was not in a position to know what levels of customer service it was providing and where and how telephone services needed to be improved . for the goals that owcp did establish , we found that it often did not collect credible performance data from surveys of ( 1 ) injured workers , ( 2 ) medical providers , or ( 3 ) employees that was sufficiently reliable or done in a timely manner to measure progress or to set goals for improving customer service .