this major subsystem is referred to as a cryocooler . the cryocooler moves helium gas through 10 meters ( approximately 33 feet ) of refrigerant lines from the spacecraft located on the sun - facing surface of the jwst observatory to the colder , shaded side where the isim is located . according to nasa officials , a cooler of this configuration has never been developed or flown in space before . see figure 3 for a depiction of the cryocooler on jwst . project officials stated that the miri cryocooler is particularly complex and challenging because of the relatively great distance between the cooling components and the need to overcome multiple sources of unwanted heat through the regions of jwst before the subsystem can cool miri's detector . specifically , the cooling components span temperatures ranging from approximately 300k ( about 80 degrees fahrenheit , or room temperature ) where the spacecraft is located on the sun - facing surface to approximately 40k ( about - 388 degrees fahrenheit ) within the isim . complex development efforts like jwst must plan to address a myriad of risks and unforeseen technical challenges . to do this , projects reserve extra time in their schedules — which is referred to as schedule reserve — and extra money in their budgets – which is referred to as cost reserve . schedule reserve is extra time in the project's overall schedule that is allocated to specific activities , elements , and major subsystems in the event there are delays or to address unforeseen risks . each jwst element and major subsystem has been allocated schedule reserve . when an element or major subsystem exhausts schedule reserve it may begin to affect schedule reserves on other elements or major subsystems whose progress is dependent on prior work being finished for its activities to proceed . the element or major subsystem with the least amount of schedule reserve determines the critical path for the project . any delay to an activity that is on the critical path will reduce schedule reserve for the whole project , and could ultimately impact the overall project schedule . cost reserves are additional funds that can be used to address unanticipated issues for any element or major subsystem . cost reserves are used to mitigate issues during the development of a project . for example , cost reserves can be used to buy additional materials to replace a component or , if a project needs to preserve schedule reserve , reserves can be used to accelerate work by adding extra shifts to expedite manufacturing and save time . nasa's goddard space flight center ( goddard ) — the nasa center with responsibility for managing jwst — has issued requirements that at project confirmation establish both the level of cost and funded schedule reserves that projects must hold . after this point , a specified amount of schedule reserve continues to be required throughout the remainder of development . prior to 2011 , early technical and management challenges , contractor performance issues , low level cost reserves , and poorly phased funding levels caused jwst to delay work , which contributed to significant cost and schedule overruns .