comparable accuracy . the test showed that the accuracy of decisions made by disability claim managers was comparable to the accuracy of decisions made by others on similar claims . improved employee satisfaction . serving as a disability claim manager improved the job satisfaction of more than 80 percent of employees serving in that role . employees cited several factors for their job satisfaction , namely , their increased control over the claim , their greater interaction with the claimant , their enhanced job knowledge , and their ability to provide better customer service . federal employees also cited their increased pay as a factor in their increased job satisfaction . the disability claim manager initiative provided additional benefits as well , such as improving understanding between ssa and dds employees , according to ssa's evaluation of the initiative . training each organization's staff in the others' functions not only helped to identify training needs , but it also improved communication between the two organizations and increased their awareness of , and appreciation for , the other . specifically , ssa found the initiative had the following results: higher claims processing costs . ssa estimated that claims processing costs were 7 percent to 21 percent higher under the disability claim manager initiative than under the traditional process . the costs for salaries and for obtaining medical evidence , including consultative examinations performed by dds - paid physicians or psychologists , were higher under the disability claim manager initiative than under the traditional process . because of these higher costs , ssa concluded that claims processing costs would continue to be higher under the initiative even if productivity — the amount of claims processed per staff year — improved . substantial start - up and maintenance costs . in addition to the higher claims processing costs , ssa experienced substantial start up costs to train ssa and dds employees to function as disability claim managers and to develop an infrastructure to support the new claims process . ssa also determined that it would cost more to maintain the staff skills and the infrastructure required by the disability claim manager initiative . ssa also assessed the initiative's impact on the percentage of claimants awarded benefits , productivity , and costs . while the test results on award rates and productivity were inconclusive , the test results on costs showed that the disability claim manager initiative substantially raised costs . ssa did not quantify the initiative's start - up and extra maintenance costs . ssa's evaluation concluded that the benefits of implementing the disability claim manager initiative were not compelling enough to warrant its implementation . the primary consideration in reaching this conclusion was that the initiative would require major resource investments in higher operational costs , training , and infrastructure . but other factors also played a part . for example , ssa officials were concerned about the initiative's effect on the long - standing relationship between ssa and the ddss . implementing the disability claim manager initiative beyond the test would require legislation and regulatory changes to permit federal employees to determine medical eligibility and to permit state employees to determine nonmedical eligibility .