our review did not confirm this explanation . we reviewed the target intensities derived from the infrared frames covering that period and found that several seconds of data were excluded before objects began to leave the field of view . boeing officials gave us another explanation . a false alarm is a detection of a target that is not there . according to the experts we hired , during integrated flight test 1a , the boeing sensor often mistakenly identified noise produced by the power supply as signals from actual target objects . did the flight test show whether each object deployed in space by an attacking missile exhibits distinguishable features ? why did the national missile defense joint program office reduce the complexity of later flight tests ? what were the methodology , findings , and limitations of the evaluation conducted by the phase one engineering team of trw's discrimination software ? you also asked us to determine whether the department of defense misused the security classification process to stifle public discussion of possible problems with the national missile defense system . we addressed this question in a separate report , dated june 12 , 2001 . boeing and trw disclosed the key results and limitations of integrated flight test 1a in written reports released between august 13 , 1997 , and april 1 , 1998 . the contractors explained in a report issued 60 days after the june 1997 test that the test achieved its primary objectives , but that some sensor abnormalities were noted . for example , while the report explained that the sensor detected the deployed targets and collected some usable target signals , the report also stated that some sensor components did not operate as desired and the sensor often detected targets where there were none . in december 1997 , the contractors documented other test anomalies . according to briefing charts prepared for a december meeting , the boeing sensor tested in integrated flight test 1a had a low probability of detection ; the sensor's software was not always confident that it had correctly identified some target objects ; the software significantly increased the rank of one target object toward the end of the flight ; and in - flight calibration of the sensor was inconsistent . additionally , on april 1 , 1998 , the contractors submitted an addendum to an earlier report that noted two more problems . in this addendum , the contractors disclosed that their claim that trw's software successfully distinguished a mock warhead from decoys during a post - flight analysis was based on tests of the software using about one - third of the target signals collected during integrated flight test 1a . the contractors also noted that trw reduced the software's reference data so that it would correspond to the collected target signals being analyzed . project office and nichols research officials said that in late august 1997 , the contractors orally communicated to them all problems and limitations that were subsequently described in the december 1997 briefing and the april 1998 addendum . however , neither project officials nor contractors could provide us with documentation of these communications .