to be determined . an nnsa official stated that the pantex project was delayed for about a year so that a study could be conducted to determine if this capability could be outsourced . the results of the report are still in draft , but officials told us the conclusion was that the capability could not be outsourced . as a result of the delay , pantex revised the baseline for the costs of the project and the u.s. army corps of engineers are currently planning to award a construction contract in may 2011 . facilities and infrastructure . nnsa's real property portfolio dedicated to its nuclear weapons mission is vast , with thousands of facilities and associated infrastructure . a number of these facilities are unique national assets used for research and development . as such , while individual contractors operate a given facility , its capabilities may be needed to support users and activities across the enterprise . nnsa delegates responsibility for operating authority of these facilities to its m&o contractors , though nnsa broadly defines the scope of work to be performed at a facility . according to nnsa and site officials , the process to determine specific users and individual activities at the facilities are managed by each individual facility . for example , the los alamos neutron science center ( lansce ) — a powerful proton accelerator used for , among other things , nuclear weapons research — has a management plan governing its submission and review process for shared use of the facility that only applies to lansce . other shared assets operate under their own management plans . nnsa has identified a need to effectively manage these assets enterprisewide to ensure that programmatic priorities are addressed and that users enterprisewide have well supported access to these facilities . in february 2009 , nnsa developed a directive stating that the assistant deputy administrators within the office of defense programs will ( 1 ) select and approve the research and development facilities to be designated as shared assets , and ( 2 ) review and concur on the governance plan developed for each designated facility . however , we found that nnsa does not have information on which facilities are designated as shared use assets , and a nnsa official told us the agency has not reviewed individual management plans throughout the enterprise to ensure that each facilities' submission and review process for use of the facility provides for adequate enterprisewide access . critical human capital skills . nnsa lacks comprehensive information on the status of its m&o contractor workforce . specifically , the agency does not have an enterprisewide workforce baseline of critical human capital skills and levels for the contractor workforce to effectively maintain the capabilities needed to achieve its mission . nnsa officials said this is primarily because nnsa relies on its contractors to track these critical skills . while contractor efforts may be effective at a specific site , these efforts do not ensure long - term survival of these skills across the enterprise , nor do they provide nnsa with the information needed to make enterprisewide decisions that have implications on human capital .