, includes procurement costs ) . navy and marine corps officials stated that they were unable to identify any official from the navy or marine corps as the source for providing or producing this total reset cost data for marine corp aviation equipment . these maintenance actions are conducted by operating forces .  third , upon return to the continental united states , equipment identified as obsolete or uneconomical to repair is replaced through procurement as its reset action .  fourth , if equipment acquired for combat operations does not have a long - term requirement within the marine corps , no reset maintenance actions are taken unless there is an immediate requirement in another campaign or theater of operations . estimating aviation equipment reset costs follows a separate process . for aviation equipment reset , the marine corps has a process for requirements determination , budgeting , and execution , all of which are included in the annual budget process . according to navy and marine corps officials , a clearly defined process is used to determine reset costs for aviation equipment that includes requirements generated from the fleet while working closely with the chief of naval operation fleet readiness division and each of the program offices to determine current and future reset requirements . overseas contingency costs — including reset costs — are generated using issue sheets that record information on each item such as the categorization of funding , the amount of funding requested for a specific item , the number of items requested , and the cost per unit . once the issue sheets are generated , headquarters , marine corps , and the commander of naval air forces prioritize the issue sheets and provide a finalized list of the funding priorities according to current needs for which future funding is allocated . the marine corps has developed an annual aviation plan and an aviation reset program policy that together constitute its reset strategy for aviation equipment used in afghanistan . although separate documents , the annual aviation plan and aviation reset program policy are linked through the aviation plans' reference to the aviation reset policy . our evaluation of this reset strategy shows that it incorporates the six elements of a comprehensive , results - oriented strategic planning framework . specifically , we analyzed the reset strategies and supporting guidance documents to determine if they included the six key elements of a strategic planning framework . in performing our analysis , we reviewed the strategies to determine if they included , partially included , or did not include each of the six key elements . through our assessment we determined the guidance documents in addition to the aviation equipment reset strategy that comprises the marine corps strategic plan for reset . in addition , to understand the extent to which the marine corps aligns its modernization plans with its reset strategies , we interviewed marine corps officials to discuss the plans used for modernization and discussed the process for how these plans are incorporated with the strategies for equipment reset .