see app . iv for the numbers of all health center grantees , by state and territory , operating in 2001 — before the initiative began — and in 2003 — the most recent year for which data were available at the time we conducted our review . figure 4 shows the location of health centers that hrsa was funding in 2003. ) in 2003 , the distribution of all health center grantees was 48 percent urban and 52 percent rural . hrsa is required by law to make awards so that 40 to 60 percent of patients expected to be served reside in rural areas . hrsa officials told us that the agency meets this requirement by ensuring that the proportion of awards to rural health centers is from 40 to 60 percent . based on the numbers of patients reported by health centers to the uds , the proportion of patients served by urban health centers in 2003 was 54 percent and the proportion served by rural centers was 46 percent . while hrsa can provide information on the geographic distribution of health center grantees , it does not have reliable information on the number and geographic distribution of the delivery sites where the centers provide care . in its budget justification documents and government performance and results act reports , hrsa has used the number of delivery sites it funds to provide information on its progress toward achieving its goals for the consolidated health centers program . for example , in its fiscal year 2005 performance plan , hrsa has a performance goal of increasing access points in the health centers program , and it used 2001 uds data on the number of health center delivery sites as a baseline to measure progress toward this goal . hrsa , however , is not confident that uds data accurately reflect the number of sites supported by program dollars . hrsa officials told us that the agency does not verify the accuracy of the delivery site information grantees provide to uds . they also said that uds delivery site data through 2003 may include sites not funded by the health centers program and sites that hrsa did not approve in the scope of a health center's grant . moreover , hrsa has been reporting inconsistent data on the number of health center delivery sites in the program . for example , in its fiscal year 2005 performance plan , hrsa reported funding 3,588 delivery sites in fiscal year 2003 , consisting of 3,317 delivery sites operating in fiscal year 2001 and 271 new access point grants funded in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 ; however , some of the new access point grants represent more than one delivery site . as a result , hrsa underestimated the number of new program delivery sites operating in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 . hrsa's new tool for periodic on - site review of health centers — the opr performance review — focuses on monitoring individual health centers' performance on selected measures , including health outcome measures . the opr performance review generally does not provide hrsa with standardized performance information for evaluating the consolidated health centers program as a whole .