this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions the members of the committee may have . dhs has informed us that this has been completed . our work is reflected in this law in different ways . in our may 2004 testimony on the use of biometrics for aviation security , we reported on the need to identify how biometrics will be used to improve aviation security prior to making a decision to design , develop , and implement biometrics . using information from our statement , the house introduced a bill on july 22 , 2004 , directing the transportation security administration ( tsa ) to establish system requirements and performance standards for using biometrics , and establish processes to ( 1 ) prevent individuals from using assumed identities to enroll in a biometric system and ( 2 ) resolve errors . these provisions were later included in an overall aviation security bill and were eventually included in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , enacted in december 2004 . we conducted a body of work assessing the physical screening of airport passengers and their checked baggage . we found that the installation of systems that are in line with airport baggage conveyor systems may result in financial benefits , according to tsa estimates for nine airports . we also found that the effectiveness of the advance passenger screening under the process known as secure flight was not certain . tsa agreed to take corrective actions in these areas , and the congress required tsa in the intelligence reform and terrorism protection act to prepare a plan and guidelines for installing in - line baggage screening systems , and enacted measures to promote secure flight's development and implementation . we reported on the verification of identity documents for drivers' licenses , noting that visual inspection of key documents lent itself to possible identity fraud . to demonstrate this , our investigators were able to obtain licenses in two states using counterfeit documents and the social security numbers of deceased persons . the congress established federal identification standards for state drivers' licenses and other such documents and mandated third - party verification of identity documents presented to apply for a driver's license . we assisted the congress in crafting major improvements to a program intended to compensate individuals who worked in doe facilities and developed illnesses related to radiation and hazardous materials exposure . in a 2004 report , we identified features of the originally enacted program that would likely lead to inconsistent benefit outcomes for claimants , in part because the program depended on the varying state workers compensation systems to provide some benefits . however , to better prepare census workers — some of whom speak spanish as their first language — to locate migrant farm workers and other hard - to - count groups , we recommended that the bureau consider providing training materials in languages other than english to targeted areas .