see figure 3 . nasa commercial orbital transportation services ( cots ) program: the cots program , which began in 2006 , is intended to facilitate the development and demonstration of end - to - end transportation systems , including the development of launch and space vehicles , ground and mission operations , and berthing with the international space station . under this program , nasa provides funding to spacex and orbital through funded space act agreements to help offset international space station - related developmental costs of the falcon 9 and taurus ii , respectively . both the spacex vehicle , falcon 9 , and the orbital vehicle , taurus ii , are medium class launch vehicles similar in capability to the delta ii . spacex plans three demonstration flights under the cots agreement , while orbital plans one such flight . under these agreements nasa provides progress payments , offsetting a portion of the developer's costs , when the partners meet established milestones . nasa's cargo crew services program: the program is responsible for acquiring commercial cargo resupply services for the international space station through the commercial resupply services ( crs ) contract with spacex and orbital for flights beginning in calendar year 2011 . nasa has ordered 12 resupply missions to the international space station from spacex , and 8 from orbital . spacex and orbital will use their respective launch vehicles , falcon 9 and taurus ii , to provide these services . nasa's lsp is taking steps to address risk and ensure the success of the last planned delta ii launched missions . lsp's risk mitigation strategy uses established oversight mechanisms to address areas of concern and to assure the success of all remaining delta ii launched missions . lsp has issued task orders to united launch alliance for the final three delta ii missions through the launch services i contract . lsp exercises oversight of united launch alliance through a combination of specific government approvals and targeted government insight into contractor activities and designs . specific areas requiring government approval include spacecraft - to - launch vehicle interface control documents , mission - unique hardware and software design , top - level test plans , and requirements and success criteria for integrated vehicle systems . the government also has insight into baseline vehicle design , analyses , models and configuration management , critical flight hardware pedigree and postflight anomaly , and compliance evaluations . an important element in lsp's oversight approach is the use of engineering review boards to independently review and validate the competency and adequacy of the contractor's technical efforts . according to lsp officials , having government systems engineers with the technical expertise to review or repeat the contractors' engineering analyses is a key factor in high launch success rates . from 1990 through 2009 , nasa has achieved about a 98 percent launch success rate — compared to about a 69 percent success rate for u.s. commercial launches without significant u.s. government involvement . likewise , united launch alliance officials indicate that their company has never had a mission failure , successfully launching 37 missions in a 36-month period from december 2006 through december 2009 . lsp is taking some additional actions to mitigate risk associated with the remaining delta ii flights .