some of these projects are discussed as follows . improving lower manhattan's transportation system ( $2.75 billion ) . public assistance has traditionally been limited to repair of disaster - related losses and damages to existing infrastructure . assistance has not generally been provided to enhance or modernize the infrastructure beyond its pre disaster conditions . in recognizing the interdependence of lower manhattan's transportation system , however , fema officials said that they broadly interpreted their guidelines to enter into an interagency agreement with dot to rebuild physical facilities that were damaged from the attacks and construct new facilities that may improve the overall lower manhattan transportation system . fema attorneys said that they determined that the stafford act would permit funding for the restructuring of the lower manhattan transportation system because they concluded that repairing and replacing individual elements would not completely restore the system's functionality . all tunnel components ( i.e. , fiber optics , conduits , pipes , lighting , ductbanks , track , contact rail , and ballast ) needed to be replaced . the port authority also received public assistance funds to replace equipment it lost when its world trade center facilities were destroyed , including its voice telephone network , desktop computers , and fax and photocopy machines , and to pay overtime labor costs for the emergency response . figure 8 shows path tunnel repair and construction efforts . fema also provided public assistance funds to many other non - nyc government agencies to reimburse them for emergency and repair costs . for example , the new york state police received $45 million for security operations , and new york university received $5.9 million for air monitoring , environmental cleaning , and emergency supplies and services . other examples include the nyc office of emergency management , which received $11.8 million from fema to replace destroyed equipment and leased office space that was located in the world trade center ; pace university , which was provided $4.4 million for damaged buildings ; and the battery park city authority , which received $3.9 million to repair damaged facilities . lastly , $1.2 billion was made available in june 2003 as a result of fema's early close out of its traditional public assistance program to nyc and state for congressionally authorized costs associated with the terrorist attacks . most of these costs would not have been eligible for reimbursement under fema's traditional public assistance program . figure 3 shows debris removal and barging operations . the need to sort and screen the debris to recover the remains and personal effects of victims and criminal evidence made the debris removal operation even more difficult . fema provided $72 million to the u.s. army corps of engineers to manage the debris inspection at the landfill . the sorting activities were an intense , meticulous effort to recover remains and personal belongings of victims to return them to their families and to gather criminal evidence related to the terrorist attacks . the corps of engineers provided labor , heavy equipment , conveyer belts , and screening equipment . the corps also provided temporary buildings for storage and to shelter workers , worker decontamination facilities , and food service facilities .