attorneys . fbi headquarters officials also reported that the assistant fsd for law enforcement position has helped improve coordination between tsa and the fbi at airports . tsa did not provide an agency - level position on whether every fsd needs an assistant fsd for law enforcement . although most of our contacts reported that partnerships between fsds and airport stakeholders were generally working well , about half ( 13 ) of the 25 fsds we interviewed said that it is challenging to foster partnerships with the parties they are responsible for regulating . several fsds stated that while it may be hard to partner with those one regulates , having good communication and relationships with stakeholders and a mutual understanding of the responsibility of regulating airport security makes such partnering possible . ( 2 ) to what extent are fsds involved in the development of tsa aviation security policy ? ( 3 ) how have fsds at selected airports formed and facilitated partnerships with airport stakeholders , and how are these partnerships working ? ( 4 ) what key changes has tsa made or planned to make to better support or empower the fsd position , and how have selected fsds viewed these efforts ? to address these questions , we interviewed tsa's chief operating officer and officials from tsa's aviation security program office , office of law enforcement , office of compliance programs , and office of human resources , and we reviewed relevant laws and tsa documentation related to the fsd position . to obtain additional views on the role of the fsd and fsd - stakeholder partnerships , we met with headquarters officials from the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) border and transportation security directorate ( bts ) , and the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi ) counter - terrorism and criminal investigations divisions . we also met with officials from national organizations representing airports ( the american association of airport executives and the airports council international ) , airport law enforcement officials ( the airport law enforcement agencies network ) , and air carriers ( the air transport association ) . we conducted site visits to seven airports . we selected these airports because they incorporated all five airport security categories — three airports with an fsd dedicated solely to each airport , and two sets of airports where the fsd was responsible for at least two airports . at each airport , we met with the fsd ( five in total ) or the top - ranking tsa official , as well as the assistant fsds for law enforcement and regulatory inspection , where these positions existed . we also met with key airport stakeholders , including airport managers , airport law enforcement officials , station managers representing selected air carriers ( 15 representatives of 12 air carriers and , additionally , two air carrier representative groups specific to two airports we visited ) , and fbi airport liaison agents and officials from dhs's customs and border protection as well as immigration and customs enforcement ( at the two international airports we visited ) . at each airport , we conducted a single joint interview with representatives from multiple air carriers , and we selected air carriers through different means .