worksharing . epo and jpo have systems to share search and examination results . the exchange of prior art searches or patent examination results among patent offices — referred to as worksharing — facilitates more efficient prior art searches for applications filed in multiple countries , according to foreign officials . as we discussed above , approximately half of all patent applications worldwide are part of patent families filed in multiple offices . to gain patent protection in multiple countries , inventors may file applications for the same invention in several different offices . because the underlying invention is the same , the search and examination results at one office may be useful to examiners in another office . therefore , worksharing can ameliorate the challenges posed by the quantity of potential prior art that examiners must search and the time pressure examiners face by allowing patent offices to leverage others' work and knowledge . the ip5 , a multilateral forum of the five largest patent offices , identified worksharing as the main tool for addressing an increasing number of patent applications , while helping the patent offices conduct timely , quality examinations . jpo officials noted that worksharing systems allow more efficient access to foreign patent literature and help jpo examiners more easily see foreign examiners' work . jpo examiners still have to review the relevant literature themselves , but access to foreign examination results may help jpo examiners identify relevant art or sources of prior art . an epo official also noted that worksharing could give offices access to search reports of unpublished applications at other offices , and that these search reports may include prior art relevant to similar applications filed with epo . creating internal databases of nonpatent literature . epo and jpo incorporate specific nonpatent literature resources into their offices' main search tools , which may allow examiners to more efficiently search both patent and nonpatent literature by keyword , rather than searching multiple sources individually . officials at these offices said that incorporating these resources into their main search tools allows examiners to consider a wide array of nonpatent literature sources . according to epo officials , epo's primary search tool allows examiners to use a single interface to search through all of epo's internal databases as well as some external databases of prior art . in addition to creating an internal database of nonpatent literature documents to facilitate examiners' searches , epo also added descriptive metadata to index these documents to help examiners find the most relevant documents . epo's system also incorporates features that make it user - friendly — for example , grouping documents to avoid examiners facing dozens of copies of the same article from different sources . epo officials stated that examiners find that these groupings enhance their ability to search through larger quantities of prior art . overall , epo officials identified their search engine and the large number of indexed prior art resources available within the search engine as strengths of the office in addressing the quantity of prior art available . epo officials said that the office prefers to have internal collections of these resources so they may be integrated into its search tools , but some sources remain external and separate from epo's search systems .