currently , u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , a component within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , in conjunction with the social security administration ( ssa ) , operates a voluntary electronic employment verification program , called e - verify . while participation in this program remains voluntary , some states are moving to require all employers in the state to verify newly hired employees using e - verify . for example , as of january 1 , 2008 , the “legal arizona workers act” requires all employers in arizona to verify the employment eligibility of newly hired employees through the e - verify program . after 8 days , employers are required to either immediately terminate the employment , or notify dhs of the continued employment , of workers who do not successfully contest the tentative nonconfirmation and those whom the program finds are not work - authorized . the e - verify program uses the same system as uscis's systematic alien verification for entitlements program , which provides a variety of verification services for federal , state , and local government agencies . additionally , some employers took prohibited adverse actions against employees — such as restricting work assignments , reducing pay , or requiring employees to work longer hours or in poor conditions — while they were contesting tentative nonconfirmations . we appreciate the opportunity to comment on electronic employment verification issues . as we and others have reported in the past , the opportunity for employment is one of the most powerful magnets attracting unauthorized immigrants to the united states . to help address this issue , in 1986 congress passed the immigration reform and control act ( irca ) , which made it illegal for individuals and entities to knowingly hire , continue to employ , or recruit or refer for a fee unauthorized workers . the act established a two - pronged approach for helping to limit the employment of unauthorized workers: ( 1 ) an employment verification process through which employers verify all newly hired employees' work eligibility and ( 2 ) a sanctions program for fining employers who do not comply with the act . following the passage of irca , the u.s. commission on immigration reform and various immigration experts indicated a number of problems with the implementation of immigration policies and concluded that deterring illegal immigration requires , among other things , strategies involving a more reliable employment eligibility verification process that focuses on disrupting the ability of unauthorized immigrants to gain employment . in particular , the commission report and other studies found that the single most important step that could be taken to reduce unlawful migration is the development of a more effective system for verifying work authorization . in the over 20 years since passage of irca , the employment eligibility verification process has remained largely unchanged . legislation has been introduced in congress to reform immigration laws and strengthen electronic employment verification . some of this legislation includes proposals that would require employers to use a mandatory , functional electronic employment verification program for verifying the work authorization of all newly hired employees .