wait times . two payees said that it takes too long to provide information in person at ssa field offices . for example , after signing in at a kiosk , a payee may have to wait for hours until their number is called . this payee said that they often bring beneficiaries to the ssa office and that long wait times can be very difficult for them , particularly those with mental illness . in some cases , beneficiaries have walked out or passed out while waiting in the ssa office , according to the payee . the payee also said that long wait times are sometimes compounded when field office staff require them to return to the queue for each successive case rather than handling all the payee's cases at once . however , because field offices are allowed to establish their own workflow processes , this issue may not apply to other field offices . faxing documents versus sending them electronically . three payees said that having to fax documentation to ssa rather than send this information electronically creates additional work . ssa officials said that the agency has a plan to allow individual payees to securely transmit personally identifiable information electronically , but has not established a timeframe for allowing organizational payees to do so . at the field offices we visited , managers had different expectations regarding time frames for responding to payee requests . three managers we interviewed said that staff should respond to payees as soon as possible , three managers said that staff should respond within 24-48 hours , and two managers said staff should respond within 7-14 days . ssa officials told us that ssa has not set timeliness standards for field offices because doing so could affect other workloads in unanticipated ways and it is the agency's goal to provide service and support to all payees on an ongoing basis . ssa may receive feedback from organizational payees through various mechanisms . officials from ssa's central office told us that organizational payees can provide feedback either by contacting their local field office or calling ssa's national customer service number . some field office staff also said that they provide informal opportunities for payees to offer feedback . for example , one field office manager told us that he spends time building relationships with organizational payees , solicits feedback by asking how things are going , and sometimes visits organizational payees when he is nearby . another manager emphasized the importance of gathering and responding to organizational payee feedback . this manager said that she established quarterly calls with multiple payees to discuss issues and solicit feedback . managers of two field offices told us that they provide standardized ssa customer comment cards in their waiting areas , although the cards do not ask respondents to identify whether they are organizational payees . however , ssa does not have a mechanism for payee feedback to be systematically collected , compiled , and analyzed across field offices to determine if programmatic changes are warranted .