some have deductibles . most states have no limits on workers compensation payments . guaranty funds are supported by assessments on insurers doing business in the state . the typical homeowners insurance policy covers the house , the garage , and other structures on the property , as well as personal possessions inside the house such as furniture , appliances , and clothing , against a wide variety of perils including windstorms , fire , and theft . the extent of the perils covered depends on the type of policy . an all - risk policy offers the broadest coverage . this covers all perils except those specifically excluded in the policy . homeowners insurance also covers additional living expenses . known as “loss of use,” this provision in the policy reimburses the policyholder for the extra cost of living elsewhere while the house is being restored after a disaster . coverage for flood and earthquake damage is excluded and must be purchased separately . coverage with a simple relationship that is based on the insurer's actual incurred claims . for example , an insurer could contract with a reinsurer to cover half of all claims — up to $100 million in claims — from a hurricane over a specified time period in a specified geographic area . if a hurricane occurs where the insurer incurs $100 million or more in claims , the reinsurer would pay the insurer $50 million . insurer's inability to pay debts . insurance insolvency standards and the regulatory actions taken vary from state to state . when regulators deem an insurance company is in danger of becoming insolvent , they can take one of three actions: place a company in conservatorship or rehabilitation if the company can be saved or liquidation if salvage is deemed impossible . the difference between the first two options is one of degree — regulators guide companies in conservatorship but direct those in rehabilitation . typically the first sign of problems is an inability to pass the financial tests regulators administer as a routine procedure . an organization such as a bank or insurance company that buys and sells large quantities of securities . insurers that join together to provide coverage for a particular type of risk or size of exposure , when there are difficulties in obtaining coverage in the regular market , and share in the profits and losses associated with the program . the incentive created by insurance that induces those insured to undertake greater risk than if they were uninsured , because the negative consequences are passed to the insurer . coverage that specifies a specific event that triggers payment and payment formulas that are not directly related to the insurer's actual incurred losses . payment could be tied to industry loss indexes , parametric measures such as wind speed during a hurricane or ground movement during an earthquake , or models of claims payments rather than actual claims . a specific risk or cause of loss covered by an insurance policy , such as a fire , windstorm , flood , or theft .