dhs has not evaluated each of these practices . according to dhs officials , the agency is awaiting congressional approval of the proposed consolidation before developing implementation steps . however , should dhs receive this approval to reorganize its cbrne functions , consulting each of these practices would ensure that lessons learned from other organizations are considered . according to our prior work on organizational change , implementing large - scale change management initiatives , such as mergers and organizational transformations , are not simple endeavors and require the concentrated efforts of both leadership and employees to realize intended synergies and to accomplish new organizational goals . in addition , the practices will be helpful in a consolidated cbrne environment . for example , overall employee morale differs among the components to be consolidated , as demonstrated by the difference in the 2015 employee satisfaction and commitment scores of dndo and s&t , making employee involvement to gain their ownership for the transformation a key step to consider . also , given the range of activities conducted by the consolidated entities , establishing a coherent mission and integrated strategic goals to guide the transformation will be important . given the critical nature of dhs's cbrne mission , considering key factors from our previous work would help inform a consolidation effort should congress approve it . the lessons learned by other organizations involved in substantial transformations could provide key insights for agency officials if they implement reorganization and attention to the factors we identified would improve the chances of a successful cbrne consolidation . preventing a terrorist attack in the united states remains the foundation of homeland security , especially when cbrne threats continue to be enduring areas of concern . dhs's cbrne consolidation proposal is intended to centralize cbrne functions within dhs headquarters while also becoming a focal point for cbrne issues . conducted limited external stakeholder consultations . dhs conducted limited external stakeholder outreach in developing the consolidation proposal , and thus the proposal may not sufficiently account for stakeholder concerns . according to an office of policy official , the review team consulted with omb , national security council staff , the executive office of the president ( eop ) and congressional staff . among the six components involved in the proposed consolidation , dhs officials stated that two of these components , dndo and oha , have significant working relationships with a wide range of external stakeholders including the departments of defense , state , energy , and health and human services . however , while the impact of consolidation to external stakeholders was a consideration , agency officials did not solicit input directly from the full range of interagency stakeholders associated with each of the cbrne components in developing the proposal . according to a dhs office of policy official , dhs's assessment of its consolidation was that it was an internal reorganization with a goal to improve outward - facing messaging and collaboration . this official also indicated that both dndo and oha are considered useful sources for identifying potential positive or negative consolidation impacts for their stakeholders .