detection standard . tsa and s&t also use the region of responsibility data to determine whether the explosive material can already be detected by deployed screening technologies . if screening technologies can already detect the material , tsa will not contract with technology manufacturers to develop a new software algorithm or screening technology . but regardless of whether a new software algorithm or new technology is needed , tsa will draft a new detection standard for the material that , generally , will specify the minimum threat mass and density range to be detected , the acceptable probability of detection , and probability of false alarm . the draft standard is reviewed by tsa senior management before being approved . we found that the work s&t and other stakeholders performed to characterize explosive threat materials was consistent across the threat materials . specifically , we found that s&t consistently followed the process described to us ( as outlined above ) for characterizing a threat material in the seven material threat assessments we reviewed . we also reviewed documentation regarding additional testing and analysis s&t performed on select threat materials , and found the additional testing and analyses were performed consistently . tsa has not updated its 2015 guidance for developing new detection standards to reflect key changes in their procedures . in december 2015 , tsa issued the detection requirements update standard operating procedure , which a senior official told us served as the agency's approved guidance for developing detection standards . further , officials said that if they had information about a threat to a specific airport that would be mitigated by deploying a screening technology , they would modify their plans for deployment accordingly . however , tsa's process for how it would change its deployment plans to specific airports based on risk lacks transparency . for example , officials said that as part of the acquisition process they have ongoing discussions with stakeholders about their deployment strategies , including security and intelligence officials who would inform them of any relevant risk information . officials said these discussions are generally informal and not documented — it was unclear how these discussions have incorporated information about risk in the past , and officials could not provide an example of when risk information at specific airports had directly influenced deployment of technologies to airports in the recent past . in 2018 , the agency released its transportation security administration systems acquisition manual , which called for deployment plans to be written documents , and officials said they began documenting their plans for deploying screening technologies in the last two years . tsa officials provided us with one deployment plan — for their 2018 deployment of explosives trace detection units — but we found that it was not transparent about how risk was a factor in officials' methodology for determining the order of airports to receive the technology . the explosives trace detection plan documented tsa's schedule of deployment and the roles and responsibilities of relevant stakeholders , among other things .