evidence . cigie's standards for inspections state that evidence to support findings , conclusions , and recommendations should be sufficient , competent , and relevant and should provide a basis for bringing a reasonable person to the reported conclusions and findings . it may also include time frames and work assignments . additionally , the cigie inspection standard for planning states that research , work planning , and coordination should be thorough enough to ensure that the inspection objectives are met . the commission oig's policies and procedures addressed planning but did not fully adhere to cigie's inspection standards . we found that the commission oig's policy for planning inspections did not adhere to the cigie standards for inspections related to planning . the commission oig's policy for planning states that the basic documentation for an inspection will include ( 1 ) an inspection plan , ( 2 ) a copy of the report with cross - references to the evidence workpapers , and ( 3 ) detailed footnotes in the report itself . this policy does not address the purpose or contents of the plan as described in the cigie inspection standard . regarding implementation , we found that the oig's inspection plans were not adequately developed . specifically , we found that none of the 12 inspections included clearly defined descriptions of the objective , scope , and methodology . in addition , 9 of the 12 inspection plans were not planned sufficiently to reach reasonable conclusions about the topic inspected because of a lack of detailed procedures in the inspection plan to perform the inspection . the commission oig's policies and procedures adhered to cigie inspection standards for independence . they state the commission ig will maintain strict political neutrality and an appropriate level of social detachment from the commission's management and beneficiaries as a critical element of oig independence . we did not find any impairment , in fact or appearance , with the independence of the commission oig . professional judgment . the cigie inspection standard for professional judgment states that due professional judgment should be used in planning and performing inspections and in reporting the results . the commission oig's policies and procedures addressed professional judgment but did not address the broader intent of the cigie inspection standard for professional judgment . the oig's policy states that it will conduct interviews of agency officials through an inspection methodology that conforms to the cigie quality standards for that inspection procedure , which is in accordance with the cigie inspection standard for professional judgment . the oig's policy only addresses the intent to interview agency officials in accordance with these standards instead of the oig's intent to use professional judgment when performing all aspects of inspection procedures . this would include the intent to use professional judgment in selecting the type of inspections to perform , defining the scope and methodology , and determining the type and amount of evidence to gather . in addition , the problems with the oig's inspection plans and lack of evidence and analysis in the workpapers , as discussed in this report , are indications that the oig's professional judgment did not adhere to cigie standards . quality control .