ii ) . the department indicated that it is taking action to improve its gpra processes and products and would implement our recommendations in its fiscal year 2001 performance report . the department also provided technical comments , which we have appropriately incorporated into this report . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of state ; and the director , omb . copies will also be made available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-4128 . the relationships between some strategies and key outcomes were not always apparent . for example , state does not clearly explain how some strategies , such as establishing law enforcement academies in southern africa and new mexico , related to the key outcome of minimizing the impact of international crime and stemming the flow of illegal drugs . state also reported on some indicators that were not clearly linked to key outcomes . for example , it is not clear how a nation maintaining a 90-day stock of petroleum reserves becomes a more open market for u.s. goods and services . in addition , reducing the caseload of overseas child - abduction investigators appears more closely related to reducing the impact of international crime on american citizens than providing efficient , knowledgeable , and courteous services to americans traveling and living abroad . furthermore , the relationship between performance indicators and strategies were not always clear . in particular , it is unclear whether each strategy is designed to pursue specific indicators under a performance goal or whether the strategies are part of a more general effort . for example , three of the five indicators for the key outcome , “opening foreign markets” to u.s. goods and services , related to a single strategy — ”advancing civil aviation , transport , telecommunications , and energy initiatives” — while most of the remaining nine strategies had no readily associated indicators . some indicators to measure performance in 1999 were changed in 2000 without explanation , which makes it difficult to track performance from one year to the next . for some indicators used in 1999 , measurement methodologies were altered with no discussion in either the performance plan or performance report for 2000 , resulting in orders of magnitude differences . for the indicator “sales of u.s. telecommunications and information technology equipment,” state's 1999 performance report showed a 1998 baseline of $18.9 billion in sales and a 1999 target of $20.6 billion , but it did not provide actual performance for 1999 . for the same indicator in 2000 , state reported a 1998 baseline of $111 billion in sales , a 1999 actual level of $123 billion , a 2000 target of $120 billion , and a 2000 actual level of $140 billion . it is apparent that state changed the methodology for assessing this indicator , but the department did not explain why it did so .