overlap . we found that 23 of the 27 federal grid resiliency efforts overlapped to some degree with at least one other effort in that they addressed similar goals . these overlaps included: 12 efforts with similar goals related to enhancing the cybersecurity of 4 with similar goals related to enhancing the resilience and availability of large , high - power transformers ; 3 with similar goals related to enhancing the grid's resilience to 2 with similar goals related to enhancing energy storage technology ; 2 with similar goals related to enhancing the resilience of the grid's distribution system . as figure 1 illustrates , we also found that all but one federal grid resiliency effort overlapped to some degree with at least one other effort by supporting similar types of activities to achieve their goals . duplication . we did not find any instances of duplication among the 27 federal grid resiliency efforts because none of the efforts had the same goals or engaged in the same activities . for example , although 4 efforts overlapped in that they had similar goals related to enhancing the resilience of large , high - power transformers and improving their availability , those efforts were not duplicative because their goals were not the same . specifically , dhs's recovery transformer program , begun in 2008 and completed in 2014 , aimed to design and demonstrate a rapidly deployable large , high - power transformer that could be used to enable rapid recovery of the grid in the event of multiple large , high - power transformer failures . in contrast , doe's transformer resilience and advanced components program , launched in 2016 , is focused on ensuring the resilience of aging transformers and accelerating the development , demonstration , and deployment of next - generation transformer components . furthermore , doe's strategic transformer reserve effort is an analytical and planning activity with a goal of developing a plan for congress related to establishing a strategic transformer reserve . similarly , a fourth effort led by ferc was distinct from the other three efforts in that its goal was to act on a petition from a private company for regulatory findings related to the company's plan to establish a subscription service for spare critical transmission equipment , including transformers . in their questionnaire responses , doe , dhs , and ferc reported coordinating with each other on their federal grid resiliency efforts through a variety of activities and mechanisms . in particular , agency officials associated with all of the programmatic efforts that we identified as having overlapping characteristics ( in that they supported similar goals and types of activities ) reported coordinating with other federal agencies . furthermore , many reported coordinating their efforts with states , and most also reported coordinating their efforts with industry . coordination is important because , as we have previously reported , it can preserve scarce funds and enhance the overall effectiveness of federal efforts . we also have previously reported that coordination across programs may help address fragmentation , overlap , and duplication .