b . each member has the right to grant compulsory licenses and the freedom to determine the grounds upon which such licenses are granted . c. each member has the right to determine what constitutes a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency , it being understood that public health crises , including those relating to hiv / aids , tuberculosis , malaria and other epidemics , can represent a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency . d. the effect of the provisions in the trips agreement that are relevant to the exhaustion of intellectual property rights is to leave each member free to establish its own regime for such exhaustion without challenge , subject to the mfn and national treatment provisions of articles 3 and 4 . we recognize that wto members with insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector could face difficulties in making effective use of compulsory licensing under the trips agreement . we instruct the council for trips to find an expeditious solution to this problem and to report to the general council before the end of 2002 . we reaffirm the commitment of developed - country members to provide incentives to their enterprises and institutions to promote and encourage technology transfer to least - developed country members pursuant to article 66.2 . we also agree that the least - developed country members will not be obliged , with respect to pharmaceutical products , to implement or apply sections 5 and 7 of part ii of the trips agreement or to enforce rights provided for under these sections until 1 january 2016 , without prejudice to the right of least - developed country members to seek other extensions of the transition periods as provided for in article 66.1 of the trips agreement . we instruct the council for trips to take the necessary action to give effect to this pursuant to article 66.1 of the trips agreement . in the wake of the hiv / aids crisis at the time , some wto members were concerned about the extent to which the trips agreement allowed them to address public health needs . the african members known as the african group were among the members pushing for clarification . wto members formally addressed this issue in the main doha ministerial declaration and their intention to adopt a separate declaration , as shown below . ministerial declaration - fourth session november 2001 we stress the importance we attach to implementation and interpretation of the agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips agreement ) in a manner supportive of public health , by promoting both access to medicines and research and development into new medicines and , in this connection , are adopting a separate declaration . the doha declaration is divided into seven paragraphs . paragraphs one through four are general principles that wto members agreed to that describe the relationship between ip rights and public health . paragraph five lays out specific flexibilities provided in trips that can be used by wto members to address public health related problems .