( see fig . 4 for the amount of benefits ssa paid in 2018 according to prior income levels. ) using the formula , we calculated that at an average indexed annual earnings of $44,000 , the monthly benefit would be $1,693 , which is 46 percent of prior average monthly earnings . under the formula , workers earning less would receive a higher proportion of their prior average , while workers earning the taxable maximum ( set at $128,400 for 2018 ) or more would be eligible to receive $3,042 per month , which is at most 28 percent of their earnings . under federal law , disabled workers with qualifying dependents may receive additional ssdi payments , up to 50 percent of their individual benefit amount . ssa's office of the chief actuary also reviewed the proposal at our request and concluded that the ssdi and pdi termination rates shown in the proposal were comparable neither in concept nor in unit of analysis . even with common units of analysis in ssdi and pdi termination rates , estimates of the impact of pdi on ssdi would also need to consider the other differences that we described above , such as differences in covered populations . the authors of two proposals we spoke to suggested that any proposal to expand pdi should be pilot tested before being implemented nationwide due to the number and complexity of factors involved and their potential effect on ssdi . for example , in their proposal , autor and duggan noted that , given the inevitable challenges and uncertainties associated with rolling out a major program innovation , it would be desirable to phase in such a plan and to run pilot programs in a limited number of states . they also suggested that pilot programs could be targeted , such as to larger firms . in discussing the greszler proposal with the author , she told us that a pilot test of her proposal might help show if the program works better in some industries or occupations than others , as well as determine how employers respond to the tax incentive and if employees feel they are treated fairly by private insurers . similarly , we have previously reported that changes affecting the ssdi program may raise particular implementation challenges , given the program's inherent complexity ; any changes may require pilot testing to evaluate the potential effects or unintended consequences that the congress , the administration , ssa , and the broader public will need to know to make an informed decision about whether to implement program changes nationwide . ssa and dol have funded and overseen pilot programs to test other proposals to help individuals with disabilities participate in the workforce . employee advocacy groups , employers , and insurance companies we spoke with raised various questions and concerns about the potential impacts of expanding pdi — implications that the proposals did not explicitly or fully address and therefore remain uncertain . the proposals also provided few details on any oversight role that would be needed by federal or state governments .