adx . adx inmates are included in any prd program review that covers the entire florence prison complex . while prd has some oversight over adx , prd does not monitor adx to the same degree that it monitors shus and smus . shus . from fiscal year 2008 through february 2013 , the total shu population remained about the same at 10,070 and 10,050 , respectively . prd reviews are required to check compliance with nine smu - specific policies such as providing inmates with 5 hours of recreation per week ; an opportunity to shower a minimum of three times per week ; and access to visits , correspondence , and medical and mental health care . according to bop officials , bop incorporates aca monitoring standards as part of its smu policy . to what extent does bop centrally monitor how individual facilities document and apply policies guiding segregated housing units ? see figure 7 for a photographic example of a smu recreation area , which prd is required to monitor to ensure the prison provides conditions of confinement for inmates held in smus . according to bop officials , except for inmates held in adx - shus , prd is not required to monitor adx - specific conditions of confinement – such as exercise , telephone , and visitation – as they do for shus or smus . to what extent has bop assessed the costs to operate segregated housing units and how do the costs to confine an inmate in a segregated housing unit compare with the costs of confining an inmate in a general inmate population housing unit ? to what extent does bop assess the impact of segregated housing on institutional safety and the impacts of long - term segregation on inmates ? overall , to address our objectives , we reviewed bop statutory authority and policies and procedures related to each type of segregated housing unit and interviewed bop management officials responsible for inmate placement and security , monitoring and program compliance , facility and financial management , and research . to address our first objective , we obtained and analyzed bop's inmate population and number of cells data for each type of segregated housing unit for the past 5 fiscal years to the most recent data available — from fiscal year 2008 through february 2013 . we also compared the total inmate population in bop - operated facilities with the total segregated housing unit population data to identify trends in the segregated housing unit population as a share of the total inmate population in bop - operated facilities during this period . we assessed the reliability of bop's segregated housing unit inmate population and cell data by reviewing relevant documentation , interviewing knowledgeable agency officials about how they maintain the integrity of their data , and examining the data for obvious errors and inconsistencies . we found the segregated housing unit inmate population and cell data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also interviewed bop headquarters officials to discuss reasons for the trends in bop's segregated housing unit inmate population and cells . to address our second objective , we assessed bop's monitoring for each type of segregated housing unit by reviewing monitoring policies , guidelines and reports .