we disagree with this depiction . our assessment examined all six components of the imf's vulnerability assessment framework , including the weo and the ews . as the only mature and quantifiable elements of the framework , our analysis focused more heavily on the track records of the weo and ews . the imf also stated that its responsibility to maintain financial stability could make its predictions less accurate so as not to contribute to a crisis . the imf's comment not only validates our finding on the weo's weakness but also raises questions regarding the purpose and credibility of the weo forecasts . the world bank generally agreed with the report's recommendations . however , the bank expressed concern with the report's suggestion that consideration be given to making participation in the fsap and rosc assessments mandatory . while we are not suggesting that the assessments should be made mandatory , the voluntary nature of the fsap and rosc has posed an obstacle to full participation by important emerging market countries . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of the treasury , the international monetary fund , the world bank , and interested congressional committees . we also will make copies available to other interested parties upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions regarding this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-8979 . other gao contacts and staff are acknowledged in appendix xiii . the chairman of the house financial services and the vice chairman of the joint economic committee requested that we assess ( 1 ) the international monetary fund's ( imf's or the fund's ) framework for anticipating financial crises , ( 2 ) the status of key imf initiatives to prevent financial crises , and ( 3 ) new imf proposals to resolve future financial crises . they requested that our review cover the period after the mexican financial crisis of 1994 – 95 . to assess imf's framework for anticipating financial crises , we examined prior and new imf mechanisms for anticipating crises . our analysis focused on the world economic outlook ( weo ) forecasts and the imf's early warning system ( ews ) models that were the imf's primary forecasting tools prior to the implementation of the new vulnerability assessment framework in may 2001 . data on the performance of the other four components of the framework were not made available to us because these elements are considered part of the staff level deliberative process , and are not provided to the executive board . we obtained near - term data from the weo forecasts , including real gross domestic product ( gdp ) growth rate and current account balance for 87 emerging market countries for the period 1990 – 2001 ( see appendix iii ) . we focused on the 81 middle - income countries and an additional 6 low - income countries listed by j.p. morgan as emerging markets . to evaluate the weo and program forecasts , we used standard econometric techniques based on methods commonly found in the forecasting literature .