( see fig . u.s. data on bpt services differentiate between affiliated and unaffiliated trade . affiliated trade occurs between u.s. parent firms and their foreign affiliates and between foreign parent firms and their affiliates in the united states ; while unaffiliated trade occurs between u.s. entities and foreigners that do not own , nor are owned by , the u.s. entity . we identified these companies through publicly available sources , including public media , company filings with the securities and exchange commission , annual reports of companies , the list of nasscom member companies , and lists of companies compiled by information technology interest groups . what challenges has the united states faced in collecting services data ? to address these questions , we compared u.s. and indian services trade data , reviewed official methodologies , and interviewed u.s. and indian government officials from relevant agencies , including the department of commerce's u.s. bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) and the reserve bank of india ( rbi ) . specifically: what is the extent of the gap between u.s. and indian data on trade in bpt services ? what factors explain the difference between u.s. data on imports of bpt services and india's data on exports of those same services ? in order to examine the coverage of bea surveys for collecting services data , we supplied bea with a list of companies we collected to compare with its mailing lists . we identified these companies through publicly available sources , including public media , company filings with the securities and exchange commission , annual reports of companies , the list of national association of software and service companies ( nasscom ) members , and lists of companies compiled by information technology interest groups . our lists of firms are not necessarily representative of all u.s. firms importing from india , and we do not generalize our results . we also met with representatives and reviewed documents from members of nasscom , which assists in collecting india's services data . we interviewed a range of u.s. and indian businesses that supply these data to the united states and india and reviewed relevant literature on the reliability of u.s. statistics . nasscom did not provide us with their methodology for ensuring the reliability of their data . however , rbi recently released a public report outlining a new methodology to collect services exports data separately from nasscom , and in accordance with balance of payments ( bop ) requirements of the international monetary fund ( imf ) . as a u.s. government agency , we do not have review authority over these data . therefore , we were not able to independently assess the quality and consistency of these data . a detailed description of our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . this report is one of a series of reports that we plan to issue on offshoring . however , for the purposes of this report , we found both u.s. and indian data to be sufficiently reliable for reporting the difference between the official u.s. and indian trade data in bpt services . we conducted our analysis in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from march 2005 through september 2005 .