discovery . missions in the discovery program have a development cost cap of $450 million to $500 million and have shorter development time frames , according to nasa officials and documentation . no discovery mission has been powered by rps . doe oversees the design , development , fabrication , testing , and delivery of rps to meet nasa's overall systems requirements , specifications , and schedules . doe's goal under its supply project is to reach a full pu - 238 production rate of 1.5 kg per year by 2023 , at the earliest , with a late completion date of 2026 . doe also established an interim production rate of 300 to 500 grams per year by 2019 , to ensure an adequate supply of pu - 238 for nasa's near - term missions , before the full production rate goal is achieved . the supply project involves a number of steps across several doe national laboratories , including the use of two doe research reactors — the high flux isotope reactor at ornl , and the advanced test reactor at inl . nasa began fully funding doe's supply project in 2011 , and since 2014 , has been responsible for funding all aspects of rps production operations , according to nasa documents . nasa funds doe's efforts to build , test , and fuel rps , as well as to update equipment and sustain staffing levels associated with rps production between missions . since 2014 nasa has provided , on average , approximately $50 million per year to support doe's ongoing operations and maintenance of rps production equipment . since its inception until early 2017 , doe has used a short - term and incremental segmented management approach to manage the supply project . nasa selects rps to power its missions primarily based on scientific objectives and mission destinations . according to nasa officials we interviewed , the need for rps is usually apparent based on the mission's scientific objectives and destination . for instance , an rps is more likely to be needed for a mission to a distant planet , where minimal sunlight reduces the effectiveness of solar power . nasa officials we interviewed stated that , consistent with the national space policy , the agency uses rps when they enable or significantly enhance a mission , or when alternative power sources , such as solar power , might significantly compromise mission objectives . nasa prioritizes mission selection based on missions identified in the national academy of sciences' decadal survey report , which represents the highest priorities of the scientific community and includes many missions that require the use of rps . prior to the establishment of doe's supply project in fiscal year 2011 , nasa officials we interviewed stated that mission selections were influenced by the limited amount of available pu - 238 . these same officials told us that missions are now selected independently from decisions about how they will be powered . however , projected availability of pu - 238 is factored into whether an rps is available for a specific mission opportunity .