ii. ) self - referring providers were more likely to refer their medicare prostate cancer patients for imrt and less likely to refer them for other treatments when compared to non - self - referring providers . for a subset of beneficiaries who lived in new york , we obtained clinical information on the beneficiaries' prostate cancer — including information used to determine whether the localized cancer was low , intermediate , or high risk — from the new york state cancer registry.prostate cancer was low , intermediate , or high risk , we used a beneficiary's gleason score , prostate - specific antigen ( psa ) , and tumor to establish whether a stage from the new york state cancer registry.york analysis are not generalizable to the entire medicare population . the results of the new we also determined whether the percentage of a provider's prostate cancer patients referred for imrt changed after providers began to self - refer . specifically , we identified a group of providers , which we called “switchers,” that did not self - refer in 2006 or 2007 but began to self - refer in either 2008 or 2009 . we then calculated the change in the percentage of switchers' patients referred for imrt and other treatments among those diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2007 and 2009 . we then compared the change among switchers to the change experienced by providers that did not change whether or not they self - referred imrt services from 2007 to 2009 . specifically , we compared the change in the percentage of switchers' prostate cancer patients they referred for imrt to the percentage of patients referred for imrt by ( 1 ) self - referring providers — providers that self - referred in 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 and either self - referred or did not bill medicare in 2006 and 2010 and ( 2 ) non - self - referring providers — providers that did not self - refer in 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 and either did not self - refer or did not bill medicare in 2006 and 2010 . we took several steps to ensure that the data used to produce this report were sufficiently reliable . specifically , we assessed the reliability of the cms data we used by interviewing officials responsible for overseeing these data sources , including cms and medicare contractor officials . we also reviewed relevant documentation and examined the data for obvious errors , such as missing values and values outside of expected ranges . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our study . we conducted this performance audit from may 2010 through july 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . medicare prostate cancer – related intensity - modulated radiation therapy ( imrt ) utilization varied substantially between settings ( see fig .