asset control area . properties located in areas that hud has designated for revitalization based on the area's household incomes , home ownership rates , and level of fha - insured mortgage foreclosure activity can be offered to sale to municipal government entities or approved nonprofits through this program . these properties are offered at discounts of at least 50 percent of the appraised value of the property for properties valued at over $25,000 . properties valued at less than that amount may be sold for as little as $100 . discount sales to nonprofit organizations and government entities . qualified nonprofit organizations and government entities may also purchase fha properties at a discount . discounts range from 10 to 30 percent , depending on the property's fha insurability status , location , and other factors . for example , one initiative provides grantees participating in the neighborhood stabilization program exclusive access to newly conveyed reo properties that are located in their designated areas for 2 days after the grantee is notified that an appraisal has been obtained . good neighbor next door . under this program , properties in revitalization areas can also be offered to police officers , teachers , fire fighters , and emergency medical technicians at 50 percent off of the list price . $1 home sale . sales of “aged inventory” ( properties listed for sale for more than 6 months ) can also be made for $1 plus closing costs to local governments to support local housing and community development initiatives . based on this analysis , we estimate that fha's aggregate independently assessed value net execution rate still trailed that of the enterprises by 2 and 5 percentage points . similarly , fha's aggregate net execution rate based on initial list prices for the entire period was worse than enterprise 2's and enterprise 1's by 3 and 6 percentage points , respectively , as shown in figure 5 . after controlling for the effects of certain property characteristics — as we did for the independently assessed value net execution rate — we estimate that fha's net execution rate based on initial list prices was less than that of enterprise 2 and enterprise 1 by 2 and 4 percentage points , respectively . when comparing aggregate execution rate performance based on gross sales prices rather than net sales proceeds , the difference between fha and the enterprises widened slightly for both independently assessed values and initial list prices . both fha's net and gross execution rates improved relative to the enterprises during the first half of 2012 and for the list price ratio , fha's performance was equal to that of the enterprises . although the difference in aggregate net sales returns between fha and the enterprises over the entire period was 6 percent or less , a small improvement in performance can yield substantial amounts of additional revenue because fha disposes of tens of thousands of properties each year . for example , if fha had achieved a similar net execution rate based on independently assessed value as enterprise 2 , it would have received over $400 million in additional revenue for 2011 alone .