lignite . north dakota and texas lignite , the fuel source for roughly 3 percent of boilers nationwide , have relatively high levels of elemental mercury — the most difficult form to capture . overall , tests on boilers using lignite reduced mercury emissions by roughly 80 percent , on average . for example , four long - term doe tests were conducted at coal units burning north dakota lignite using chemically - treated sorbents . mercury emission reductions averaged 75 percent across the tests . sulfur trioxide interference . high levels of sulfur trioxide gas may limit mercury emission reductions by preventing some mercury from binding to carbon sorbents . using an alkali injection system in conjunction with sorbent injection can effectively lessen sulfur trioxide interference . depending on the cause of the sulfur trioxide interference — which can stem from using a flue gas conditioning system , a selective catalytic reduction system , or high sulfur bituminous coal — additional strategies may be available to ensure high mercury reductions: flue gas conditioning systems , used on 13 percent of boilers nationwide , improve the performance of electrostatic precipitators by injecting a conditioning agent , typically sulfur trioxide , into the flue gas to make the gas more conducive to capture in electrostatic precipitators . mercury control vendors are working to develop alternative conditioning agents that could be used instead of sulfur trioxide in the conditioning system to improve the performance of electrostatic precipitators without jeopardizing mercury emission reductions using sorbent injection . selective catalytic reduction systems , a common control device for nitrogen oxides , are used by about 20 percent of boilers nationwide . although selective catalytic reduction systems often improve mercury capture , in some instances these devices may lead to sulfur trioxide interference when sulfur in the coal is converted to sulfur trioxide gas . newer selective catalytic reduction systems often have improved catalytic controls , which can minimize the conversion of sulfur to sulfur trioxide gas . high sulfur bituminous coal — defined as having a sulfur content of at least 1.7 percent sulfur by weight — may also lead to sulfur trioxide interference in some cases . as many as 20 percent of boilers nationwide may use high sulfur coal , according to 2005 doe data ; however , the number of coal boilers using high sulfur bituminous coal is likely to decline in the future as more stringent sulfur dioxide regulations take effect . plants can consider using alkali - based sorbents , such as trona , which adsorb sulfur trioxide gas before it can interfere with the performance of sorbent injection systems . plants that burn high sulfur coal can also consider blending their fuel to include some portion of low sulfur coal . in addition , according to epa , power companies are likely to have or to install scrubbers for controlling sulfur dioxide at plants burning high sulfur coal and are more likely to use the scrubbers , rather than sorbent injection systems , to also reduce mercury emissions . hot - side electrostatic precipitators . installed on 6 percent of boilers nationwide , these particulate matter control devices operate at very high temperatures , which reduce the incidence of mercury binding to sorbents for collection in particulate matter control devices .