base categories . this year , all of the commands categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating base , forward operating site , and cooperative security location , which provided users a clearer picture of the infrastructure plans and requirements at these sites . the commands also supplemented the information on base categories with detailed data on the installations' capabilities , overall mission , population , and types of equipment and facilities located at each site . for example , centcom and eucom also identified adjustments to the base categories , such as redesignating a main operating base as a forward operating site or consolidating two cooperative security locations into one . eucom also provided specific details on sites no longer considered cooperative security locations in bulgaria , romania , and poland , such as sites with no operational importance and a commercial facility readily available for military use that did not require u.s. investment or presence . end state date . this year , all of the commands identified a common strategic end state date of 2013 , which identifies the last fiscal year of the construction time frame . the strategic end state date of 2013 provides users a more complete and clearer basis for tracking progress in meeting the command infrastructure objectives for their areas of responsibility . previously , osd had provided the commands the discretion in choosing an end date from 2011 to 2015 . for example , the guam integrated military development plan considered both existing and former dod land areas for potential use to accommodate realignment actions . in terms of existing land , dod owned about 40,000 acres of land in guam at the time of this review — approximately 29 percent of the island . former dod land areas have previously been a part of the base realignment and closure process or released to the government of guam . there are political sensitivities to using former dod land areas , since local community officials in guam are concerned with the community's reaction to dod's possible expansion of land holdings on the island . eucom provided information on north atlantic treaty organization contributions and discussed a burden - sharing arrangement with the government of norway . centcom also provided host nation estimates and explained that its efforts to attain host nation funding were ongoing . effects of other defense activities . this year , all of the commands described the effects of other defense activities on implementation of their master plans . last year , only pacom's plan gave some indication of how its implementation could be affected by another activity — the potential decrease in traditional japanese construction funding that would help japan offset its defense policy review initiative costs , such as those associated with the relocation of u.s. marines to guam . this year , pacom discussed this topic as well as the progress of bilateral negotiations with japan and challenges associated with this realignment . last year , eucom's master plan did not explain the potential effect of implementing base realignment and closure recommendations on the movement of troops from germany to bases in the united states , commonly called overseas rebasing .