some are experiencing technology difficulties , and some have not been fully funded . the context within which the fcs investment is being made is important . fiscal imbalances faced by the federal government will continue to constrain discretionary spending . one of the single largest investments the government makes is the development and production of new weapon systems . doing so can help reveal key technical and engineering challenges and can help determine if a mismatch exists between what the customer wants and what the product developer can deliver . an early preliminary design review is intended to help stabilize cost , schedule , and performance expectations . the critical design review ideally occurs midway into the product development phase . the critical design review should confirm that the system design is stable enough to build production - representative prototypes for testing . the fcs acquisition schedule indicates several key issues: the program did not have the basic knowledge needed for program start in 2003 . while the preliminary design review normally occurs at or near the start of product development , the army has scheduled it in fiscal year 2008 , about 5 years after the start of product development . instead of the sequential development of knowledge , major elements of the program are being conducted concurrently . the critical design review is scheduled in fiscal year 2010 , just 2 years after the scheduled preliminary review and the planned start of detailed design . the timing of the design reviews is indicative of how late knowledge will be attained in the program , assuming all goes according to plan . the critical design review is also scheduled just 2 years before the initial fcs low - rate production decision in fiscal year 2012 , leaving little time for product demonstration and correction of any issues that are identified at that time . the fcs program is thus susceptible to late - cycle churn , which refers to the additional — and unanticipated — time , money , and effort that must be invested to overcome problems discovered late through testing . the total cost for the fcs program , now estimated at $160.7 billion ( then year dollars ) , has climbed 76 percent from the army's first estimate . in april 2005 , the secretary of the army decided that the army should convert the ota to a far - based contract . a request for proposals was issued by the army on august 15 , 2005 . an interim letter contract was issued on september 23 , 2005 . the systems development and demonstration work through september 2005 will be accounted for under the ota and all future work under the far - based contract . boeing / saic and all of the fcs subcontractors were to submit a new certifiable proposal for the remainder of systems development and demonstration and that will be the subject of negotiations with the army . the army expects the content of the program — its statement of work — will remain the same and they do not expect the cost , schedule , and performance of the overall systems development and demonstration effort to change materially .