managed care . cms assessed state oversight of managed care plans , and the program integrity activities of selected managed care plans that delivered services to medicaid enrollees . for example , cms reviewed state efforts to ensure plan compliance with contractual requirements for program integrity activities , and reviewed plans' procedures for identifying , recovering , and reporting on overpayments made to providers . provider enrollment and screening . cms examined state implementation of enhanced provider enrollment and screening requirements under ppaca . for example , cms reviewed whether states checked certain federal databases to determine providers' eligibility to participate in medicaid fee - for - service programs , and whether they terminated the participation of providers that had been revoked by medicare or terminated by medicaid and children's health insurance program ( chip ) programs in other states . personal care services . cms assessed the extent of state oversight , including state processes for enrolling providers and monitoring services provided . non - emergency medical transportation . cms assessed the extent of state oversight and the program integrity activities of organizations that provide non - emergency medical transportation services . state comments on cms's focused state program integrity review officials from one state said cms's focused review was a “huge improvement” over the prior approach . in the past they felt cms reviewed too many issues with no depth , and there was a large burden on staff . in contrast , the focused review was in - depth and involved “tremendously less work” for staff . as a result of the review , officials felt cms understood how their state operated and that cms was “on our side,” and state officials “absolutely” saw benefits from the review . cms and state officials we spoke with told us that the tailored oversight of cms's focused reviews has been beneficial and helped identify areas for improvement . they noted that cms tailored the reviews to high - risk areas that were appropriate for their states , and that within each of those high - risk areas , cms had focused on issues that were important to their program integrity efforts . state officials indicated that while the focused reviews still took a substantial amount of staff time , they were less of a burden on staff and they got feedback from cms in a timely way . in addition , officials in two states added that they felt that cms was now working with them more in partnership to address any vulnerabilities ; they also appreciated that cms shared feedback about what their states were doing well and did not focus solely on where their states needed to improve . cms and state officials shared examples of how the focused reviews were beneficial to their program integrity efforts in their specific high - risk areas . managed care reviews . cms officials said that they found substantial variation across states' managed care programs , but that their reviews identified some common issues , such as a low number of investigations conducted by managed care plans and a low amount of recoveries by plans .