commerce's it infrastructure is decentralized . although the commerce it review board approves major acquisitions , most bureaus have their own it budgets and act independently to acquire , develop , operate , and maintain their own infrastructure . four of the other six reported incidents related to our testing activities , one of which was reported after our discovery of evidence of a successful intrusion that commerce had not previously detected and reported . however , we observed instances of detected incidents that were not reported to bureau security officers or the department's information security manager . for example , the commerce employees who responded to our testing by targeting our systems in the two instances discussed above did not report either of the two incidents to their own bureau's security officer . by not reporting incidents , the bureaus lack assurance that identified security problems have been tracked and eliminated and the targeted system restored and validated . furthermore , information about incidents could be valuable to other bureaus and assist the department as a whole to recognize and secure systems against general patterns of intrusion . the underlying cause for the numerous weaknesses we identified in bureau information system controls is that commerce does not have an effective departmentwide information security management program in place to ensure that sensitive data and critical operations receive adequate attention and that the appropriate security controls are implemented to protect them . our study of security management best practices , as summarized in our 1998 executive guide , found that leading organizations manage their information security risks through an ongoing cycle of risk management . this management process involves ( 1 ) establishing a centralized management function to coordinate the continuous cycle of activities while providing guidance and oversight for the security of the organization as a whole , ( 2 ) identifying and assessing risks to determine what security measures are needed , ( 3 ) establishing and implementing policies and procedures that meet those needs , ( 4 ) promoting security awareness so that users understand the risks and the related policies and procedures in place to mitigate those risks , and ( 5 ) instituting an ongoing monitoring program of tests and evaluations to ensure that policies and procedures are appropriate and effective . however , commerce's information security management program is not effective in any of these key elements . establishing a central management function is the starting point of the information security management cycle mentioned above . this function provides knowledge and expertise on information security and coordinates organizationwide security - related activities associated with the other four segments of the risk management cycle . for example , the function researches potential threats and vulnerabilities , develops and adjusts organizationwide policies and guidance , educates users about current information security risks and the policies in place to mitigate those risks , and provides oversight to review compliance with policies and to test the effectiveness of controls . this central management function is especially important to managing the increased risks associated with a highly connected computing environment .