we agree . given the statutory underpinning and features of the system for in - business ffls , we conclude that atf's use of a2k for in - business records does not violate the restriction on the consolidation or centralization of firearms records . atf's use of a2k for in - business records is rooted in the specific statutory requirement that ffls respond promptly to atf trace requests in connection with criminal investigations . in addition , although the system allows ffls to respond to atf's trace requests virtually , atf obtains the same information as it would otherwise obtain by phone , fax , or e - mail and in similar disaggregated form , that is , through multiple servers located at individual ffls . moreover , industry members retain possession and control of their disposition records and , according to atf officials , may withdraw from using a2k — and remove their records from the atf - accessible servers — at any time . for these reasons , we do not view a2k for in - business records to constitute the type of data aggregation prohibited by the appropriations act restriction on the consolidation or centralization of records within doj . during the course of our review , we found that when participating industry members permanently discontinued their operations , the disposition data maintained in connection with a2k was transferred to atf , and atf used the data when conducting firearms traces . specifically , when an a2k participant went out of business , an atf contractor remotely transferred the data on the server to a backup disk and the industry member shipped the backup disk with intact disposition records , as well as the blank server , to atf's ntc . atf officials placed the data from the backup disk on a single partitioned server at ntc and accessed the data for firearms traces using the same type of interface and url as used while the industry member was in business . as a result , in response to an industry member – specific query using an exact firearm serial number , the a2k out - of - business server would automatically generate the disposition information related to that firearm serial number . according to atf , records of eight industry members were placed on the server at ntc from as early as late 2000 through mid - 2012 . while atf estimated that there were approximately 20 million records associated with these industry members on the server , the agency did not have a means of ascertaining the actual number of records . the number of records on the atf server would have been expected to grow as additional a2k participants discontinued their operations and provided their backup disks to atf . however , during the course of our review , atf officials told us that the agency planned to move all of the a2k records into obris and that , once converted to obris images , the records would be searchable like other obris records .