container security initiative . automated targeting system . information on shipments destined for the united states is automatically fed into cbp's automated targeting system ( ats ) — an enforcement and decision support system that compares cargo information against intelligence and other law enforcement data . ats consolidates data from various sources to create a single , comprehensive record for each u.s. - bound shipment . ats uses a set of rules that assess different factors in the information to determine the risk level of a shipment . one set of rules within ats , referred to collectively as the maritime national security weight set , is programmed to check for information or patterns that could be indicative of suspicious or terrorist activity . ats uses this weight set to assess and generate risk scores for every cargo shipment as the shipment moves throughout the global supply chain and new information is provided or existing information is revised . cbp classifies the risk scores from the maritime national security weight set as low , medium , or high risk . ats automatically places high - risk shipments on hold , and cbp officials use information in ats to identify ( target ) which high - risk shipments should be examined or waived . to assist in its targeting efforts , cbp uses key information about shipments destined for the united states obtained through the 24-hour rule and the 10+2 rule . through the 24-hour rule , cbp generally requires vessel carriers to electronically transmit cargo manifests to cbp 24 hours before cargo is loaded onto u.s. - bound vessels at foreign ports . through the importer security filing and additional carrier requirements ( known as the 10+2 rule ) , cbp requires importers and vessel carriers to provide data elements for improved identification of cargo shipments that may pose a risk for terrorism . importers are responsible for supplying cbp with 10 shipping data elements — such as country of origin — 24 hours prior to loading , while vessel carriers are required to provide 2 data elements — container status messages and stow plans — that are not required by the 24-hour rule . csi is a bilateral government partnership program operated by cbp that aims to identify and examine u.s. - bound cargo container shipments that are at risk of containing wmd or other terrorist contraband . as part of the program , cbp officers are stationed at select foreign seaports and review information about u.s. - bound containerized cargo shipments . cbp uses ats to target u.s. - bound container shipments and request examinations of high - risk container shipments before they are loaded onto vessels . csi is operational at ports in north america , europe , asia , africa , the middle east , and latin and central america . cbp estimates that , through the csi program , it prescreens over 80 percent of all maritime containerized cargo imported into the united states . secure freight initiative . in response to a requirement in the safe port act to scan 100 percent of u.s. - bound cargo containers , cbp established sfi .