however , these actions are not documented in the reservist program manual . the results from our sample cannot be generalized to the entire population of referrals from dhs oig to fema ; however , they raise questions as to whether there could be additional instances of misconduct complaints that fema has not reviewed or addressed . therefore , in our july 2017 report we recommended that fema develop reconciliation procedures to consistently track referred cases . dhs concurred and stated that once the new case management system described above is established and fully operational , fema will be able to upload all dhs oig referrals into a single , agency - wide database . additionally , fema will work with dhs oig to establish processes and procedures that will improve reconciliation of case data . dhs estimated that these efforts would be completed by march 31 , 2018 . these actions , if fully implemented , should address the intent of the recommendation . chairman perry , ranking member correa , members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared testimony . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff members have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact me at 404-679-1875 or curriec@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . other individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include sarah turpin , kristiana moore , steven komadina , and ben atwater . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . these employees play a key role in supporting communities and first responders . however , incidents of misconduct can detract from fema's mission , damage the agency's reputation , and hamper the agency's ability to respond to disasters and maintain public trust if not effectively managed . within fema , three primary offices are involved in reviewing , investigating , and adjudicating employee misconduct allegations . office of the chief security officer ( ocso ) internal investigations branch: conducts investigations related to more serious allegations , such as those that may involve potential criminal misconduct . the office of the chief component human capital officer labor and employee relations branch ( ler ) : advises supervisors who conduct lower level investigations and inquiries , such as time and attendance violations , and provides recommendations on any counseling or any disciplinary or adverse action for all cases . the office of the chief counsel personnel law branch ( plb ) : provides legal advice during investigations and conducts legal reviews of certain reports of investigation and all disciplinary and adverse actions . representatives from these three offices form fema's administrative investigations directive ( aid ) committee , which reviews misconduct allegations , assigns investigators , and tracks the status of open cases . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) office of inspector general ( oig ) also plays a role in reviewing and investigating certain misconduct allegations , such as allegations of criminal misconduct against a dhs employee and any allegations of misconduct against senior employees .