we disagree . as stated in our report , the current reporting formats did not provide cms with sufficient information to determine whether action had been taken to recover approximately $24 million in questioned costs identified in audit reports more than 2 years ago . regarding our recommendation to revise its audit tracking reports , cms stated that the reports are as complete as they can be given the information that they receive from the hhs - oig . cms offered a number of reasons for lack of complete data . cms stated that the hhs - oig does not consistently provide timely copies of medicaid audit reports or make audit reports available on - line in a timely manner . further , cms said that the reports do not contain the information it needs to enter the report and related findings into the cms tracking system properly , such as audit findings categorized by type ( i.e. , questioned cost or management related ) . hhs / oig officials acknowledged that they sometimes fail to send some audit reports that cms is responsible for tracking and resolving but said that they attempt to provide reports promptly when cms contacts them . in our view , cms and the hhs - oig share responsibility in audit resolution . accordingly , we continue to believe that cms needs to be proactive in ensuring its tracking mechanisms promptly identify medicaid findings for resolution and in following up to ensure that actions are taken to prevent medicaid financial management weaknesses from continuing . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on governmental affairs and house committee on government reform . we are also sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , administrator of cms , inspector general of hhs , and other interested parties . copies will also be made available to those who request them . please contact me or kimberly brooks at ( 202 ) 512-9508 if you or your staff have any questions about this report or need additional information . w. ed brown , lisa crye , carolyn frye , chanetta reed , vera seekins , taya tasse , and cynthia teddleton made key contributions to this report . strategies to manage improper payments: learning from public and private sector organizations ( gao - 02-69g , oct. 2001 ) . public assistance: paris project can help states reduce improper benefit payments ( gao - 01-935 , sept. 2001 ) . internal control management and evaluation tool ( gao - 01-1008g , aug. 2001 ) . medicaid: state efforts to control improper payments vary ( gao - 01-662 , june 2001 ) . medicaid in schools: improper payments demand improvements in hcfa oversight ( gao / hehs / osi - 00-69 , apr . standards for internal control in the federal government ( gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 , nov. 1999 ) .