operations . a major expansion of the verification program would have a greater chance at success if its priorities and operations were more stable and if the recent changes that va adopted were shown to have improved the program's performance . for example , the steps va has taken to standardize its procedures and make them more efficient , improve its quality assurance process , and enhance training of cve employees and contractors are promising . however , it is too soon for us to test the effectiveness of these evolving procedures , and it is not clear whether va will adopt further significant changes as a result of the recommendations of the senior executive task force reviewing the verification program . applicant education . because a government - wide program would potentially affect thousands of additional firms , va would need to have in place effective methods for educating business owners about the program and for obtaining and responding to their feedback . va officials suggested that the agency's recent efforts to clarify online guidance for applicants and to partner with organizations to better educate applicants about the verification requirements were intended to help firms understand the rationale for the required documentation and explain how va interprets the documents submitted in making its determinations . the officials described plans for collecting the data they would need to evaluate these efforts , which included assessing whether denial rates differed for firms that used the online guidance or received assistance from a partner organization and those that did not . information technology . as we noted earlier , the limitations of the verification program's information system ( vip / vcms ) have hampered va's ability to effectively manage , monitor , and report on the program's operations and results . addressing these limitations by , for example , ensuring that the information system collects the data needed to monitor the consistency and accuracy of va's determinations , allows customized reporting to meet managers' needs , and supports efficient workflow management would also help position va to manage an expanded government - wide program . furthermore , cve and oi&t officials said that , in planning to modify or replace vip / vcms , they were factoring in the potential need for the system to have the capacity and flexibility to expand to a government - wide scale and to be adapted for automated interagency information sharing . for example , the officials said they were planning to consider how to enable contracting officers from other agencies to determine whether an sdvosb was verified without having to manually search for the firm in vip . in addition , va has begun a process to revise the verification program's regulations , which would likely serve as the starting point if va were charged with implementing a government - wide verification program . va officials said that they were planning to revise the regulations partly in response to applicants' and veterans' organizations concerns about va's eligibility standards . for example , two veterans' organizations questioned va's regulatory requirement that veteran owners be able to transfer their ownership interest without restriction by nonveteran owners , effectively suggesting that va's standard for establishing control of a firm is too strict .