wsb . in december 2008 , nnsa approved start of construction of the wsb and a cost estimate of $344.5 million and start of operations in september 2013 . in february 2012 , nnsa directed the wsb contractor to develop a plan to address potential cost and schedule overruns . in december 2012 , nnsa approved an increase in the estimated cost to $414.1 million and a delay in the start of operations to august 2015 . nnsa has not finalized a life - cycle cost estimate for the plutonium disposition program — that is , an estimate of all costs to complete the mission to dispose of surplus weapons - grade plutonium — but , in april 2013 , it completed a draft estimate of $24.2 billion . in addition to construction costs , the estimate included operation and maintenance of the mox facility and wsb , as well as other components of the program , such as production of plutonium feedstock for the mox facility . the life - cycle cost estimate also included $5.2 billion in actual costs through fiscal year 2012: $3.4 billion for the mox facility , $265 million for the wsb , and $1.5 billion for other components of the program . in 2013 , in light of the cost increases for the plutonium disposition program's construction projects , the fiscal year 2014 budget request for nnsa stated that converting plutonium to mox fuel may be unaffordable . the budget request announced that , as a result , nnsa would slow down activities associated with the current plutonium disposition strategy during an assessment of alternative plutonium disposition strategies . as of january 2014 , this assessment had not yet been completed . to provide assistance to federal agencies in preparing cost and schedule estimates , we have compiled best practices used throughout government and industry . in march 2009 and may 2012 , we issued guides identifying the characteristics of high - quality , reliable cost and schedule estimates , respectively . specifically , the four characteristics of a high - quality cost estimate are comprehensive , well - documented , accurate , and credible , and the four characteristics of a high - quality schedule estimate are comprehensive , well - constructed , credible , and controlled . you asked us to review issues related to the construction cost increases for the mox facility and wsb and the life - cycle cost of the overall plutonium disposition program . this report examines: ( 1 ) drivers of the cost increases that nnsa identified for the plutonium disposition program's construction projects , ( 2 ) the extent to which nnsa analyzed underlying causes of the cost increases , ( 3 ) steps nnsa took under the contracts for the construction projects to hold the contractors accountable for their role , if any , in the cost increases , and ( 4 ) the extent to which nnsa's most recent estimates for the program's life - cycle cost and the cost and schedule for completing the program's construction projects met best practices for reliable cost and schedule estimates .