ibla has no deadline to respond to appeals . ibla decisions pertaining to geophysical exploration activities can be litigated in federal court . the duration of court cases and the length of any injunctions that may be issued depend on the facts and circumstances of each case . the public can challenge leasing decisions through protests , appeals to ibla , and litigation . challengers can protest the inclusion of individual land parcels in a lease sale ; such protests must be filed with the relevant blm state director during the 45-day notice period that precedes the lease sale . in some cases , the state director may not be able to decide the protest before the lease sale . however , if blm receives a protest on any parcel included in the lease sale , the protest must be resolved before issuing a lease on the affected parcel . blm is required to issue leases to the highest bidder within 60 days of receiving full payment for the lease and the first year's annual rent . according to agency officials , however , blm sometimes fails to do so because it may not have resolved pending protests within the 60-day time period . the public can appeal blm's decision to issue a lease to ibla within 30 days or challenge the decision in federal court . a leaseholder can seek approval for development activities unless a challenger appeals the decision to issue the lease to ibla and asks ibla or a federal court to halt or “stay” the activities . ibla has 45 days following expiration of the 30-day appeal period to render a decision on a stay request . at the operations stage , the public can challenge blm decisions to approve oil and gas drilling through requests for state director review , appeals to ibla , and litigation . the public may ask the state director to review a decision to approve oil and gas development projects or individual drilling permits within 20 business days of the decision , and the state director must render a decision on the request within 10 business days . the public can appeal the state director's decision to ibla and can challenge the department's decision in federal court.development companies can begin drilling activity once a state director approves a drilling permit following review . a challenger may attempt to halt drilling activity by requesting a stay from the state director or ibla , or seek an injunction in federal court . the public can challenge forest service decisions either through appeals or litigation during each stage of oil and gas development . through an appeal , the public asks the forest service to review a decision . during the planning stage , the public has either 45 or 90 days to appeal planning decisions approving , amending or revising land use plans which may identify lands as available for leasing . decisions are appealed to the next highest officer . for instance , a regional forester's decision to approve a land use plan , amendment , or revision can be appealed to the chief . a forest service official has 160 days to render a decision on an appeal .