reg . 35,301 , 35,306 ( june 17 , 2011 ) . usda's research suggests that a 5 cent increase in paid lunch prices results in a 0.55 percent decrease in the student participation rate . see usda , school nutrition dietary assessment study - iii ( alexandria , va: november 2007 ) . feedback than normal in school year 2012-2013 with concerns about the program , which some believed was in response to negative media attention . another factor that may have affected participation is the time allotted for lunch periods , according to officials in three districts we visited . sfa officials in one district noted that some of the changes to lunches , such as the requirement that students take a fruit or vegetable with their lunches , confused staff and students and led to longer lunch lines , particularly at the beginning of school year 2012-2013 . one district we visited also made significant changes to the system students use to pay for lunch , which led to longer lunch lines early in school year 2012- 2013 . one sfa director noted that if the lunch lines are too long or students otherwise do not have enough time to eat , they are more likely to look elsewhere for food or not eat at all . other decisions at the district or school level may have also affected school lunch participation in school year 2012-2013 . for example , one district we visited stopped allowing high school students to leave campus during the lunch period , which the sfa director believed helped mitigate the lunch participation declines the district experienced . in addition , states reported through our survey that 321 sfas in 42 states stopped participating in the national school lunch program in school year 2012-2013 , which directly impacted the number of students able to participate in the program nationwide . while districts may choose to leave the program for various reasons , such as low student participation , twenty - seven of these states reported that the new lunch requirements were a factor in some sfas' decisions not to participate . usda officials also noted other factors that may have influenced lunch participation , including school closures , mergers , moves , consolidation due to economic conditions , and issues with food service management companies . although school lunch participation has declined , it is likely that participation will improve over time as students adjust to the lunch changes . five of the districts we visited reported that , if the past is an indicator , participation will improve over time as students adjust to the new food items , and three noted the importance of nutrition education for students and parents to help make the transition to healthier school meals more successful . the sfa director in one district we visited that made changes to lunches prior to school year 2012-2013 in anticipation of the federal requirements initially experienced a decrease in participation , but saw participation recover in the following school year .