( see fig . in addition , some officials suggested that the impact of section 13 ( c ) on transit agencies' decisions concerning technology may be limited because many transit systems are experiencing growth . according to the american public transportation association ( apta ) , over the past 5 years , transit ridership has grown 21 percent . consequently , transit agencies may be able to adopt labor - saving technologies without dismissing or displacing employees . of the transit agencies we surveyed , 10 percent reported that they have fewer employees now than 5 years ago ; and 84 percent reported that they have more employees now than 5 years ago . the remaining transit agencies reported no change in the number of employees . the transit agencies we surveyed generally reported that section 13 ( c ) had a minimal impact in some selected areas of their operations , including their decisions to modify transit operations and their relations with their unions . however , the agencies reported a greater impact due to section 13 ( c ) on their ability to contract for transit services . thirty percent of the transit agencies we surveyed indicated that fulfilling section 13 ( c ) requirements was either somewhat or very difficult . fifty - six percent indicated that fulfilling section 13 ( c ) requirements was neither easy nor difficult , and 14 percent indicated that fulfilling the requirements was somewhat or very easy . more transit agencies we surveyed indicated that other federal requirements were burdensome . for example , 79 percent of the transit agencies indicated that complying with americans with disabilities act requirements was somewhat or very difficult . seventy - four percent of the transit agencies indicated that fulfilling disadvantaged business enterprise program requirements was somewhat or very difficult . figure 3 shows the percentage of agencies that indicated that the requirements were difficult to fulfill . in the returned questionnaires , we observed that transit agencies' responses concerning difficulties with contracting , delays in the receipt of federal grants , or fulfilling section 13 ( c ) requirements did not show any pattern regarding agency size , structure , or location . our survey respondents were provided a list of actions that fta and dol could undertake to help transit agencies with section 13 ( c ) , and agencies were asked to indicate whether the actions would be useful or not useful . more than 50 percent of the transit agencies indicated that each of the nine actions listed would be definitely or probably useful . for example , 86 percent of the transit agencies we surveyed indicated that it would definitely or probably be useful if fta were to provide information on delays in application processing . similarly , 85 percent of the transit agencies we surveyed indicated that it would be definitely or probably useful if dol were to provide reasons for delays in processing an application . eighty percent indicated that it would be definitely or probably useful if dol and fta were to provide information about section 13 ( c ) on their web sites . figure 4 shows the percentage of agencies that indicated that the actions would be useful .