( see app . ii for a sample 2002 outreach letter. ) at the end of november 2002 , ssa sent a separate mailing to about 53,000 disabled working adults who were potentially eligible for benefits under the qdwi program . medicare beneficiaries who had sources of income other than social security — such as income from employment and public and private pensions — and whose incomes were above the programs' eligibility thresholds were selected nonetheless to be sent the ssa outreach letter because ssa's data systems do not collect information on these income sources . in addition , ssa's records do not contain information about beneficiaries' private assets , making it impossible for ssa to identify whether letter recipients had assets within their states' medicare savings programs' eligibility limits — typically $4,000 for an individual and $6,000 for couples . how did enrollment in the medicare savings programs change following ssa's 2002 outreach to potential beneficiaries ? how did enrollment in these programs change in selected states following ssa's outreach , and what outreach efforts did these selected states also undertake ? to examine ssa's response to the statutory requirement for outreach to eligible low - income medicare beneficiaries , we obtained relevant documents and interviewed officials from ssa and the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , the federal agency responsible for administering the medicare savings programs . to determine how enrollment in medicare savings programs changed following ssa's outreach , we analyzed records from ssa's master beneficiary record ( mbr ) — a database that contains the administrative records of social security beneficiaries , including payments for medicare premiums — and we report the additional enrollment following the 2002 ssa outreach that was beyond what would have likely occurred in the absence of ssa's outreach . we estimated the additional enrollment increase following the ssa mailing to all letter recipients . we analyzed these enrollment changes at the national level as well as separately for all states and several demographic groups , such as beneficiaries less than 65 years of age or in certain minority groups . any difference in increased enrollment among state or demographic groups that we report was statistically significant at a 95 percent confidence level . we also obtained cms's national enrollment data for the medicare savings programs and compared enrollment trends before and after the ssa outreach . whereas the ssa mbr data we analyzed are specific to those beneficiaries who were sent ssa's mailing , the cms data also included existing beneficiaries and are not limited to the beneficiaries who were sent ssa's mailing . to assess how ssa's outreach affected enrollment in selected states and what outreach efforts these states undertook , we interviewed officials and collected data from six states — alabama , california , louisiana , new york , pennsylvania , and washington . we selected these states based on several factors , including their different levels of change in overall medicare savings programs enrollment from 2002 to 2003 , geographic diversity , relatively large populations of medicare savings programs enrollees , and availability of data on their program enrollment . it was beyond the scope of our work to examine the effectiveness of any outreach performed by states or cms separately from ssa's outreach .