executive order no . 11348 ( issued in 1967 and later amended by executive order no . 12107 in 1978 ) further requires opm to assist agencies in developing sound programs and financial plans for training and to provide advice , information , and assistance to agencies on planning , programming , budgeting , operating , and evaluating training programs . opm provides federal agencies with assistance through two primary mechanisms: guidance documents and technical assistance ( see table 1 below ) . executive training courses are one part of a foundation of executive education programs that include coaching and rotational assignments to help executives understand leadership roles and responsibilities in their respective agencies . opm reviews and certifies agencies' ses candidate development programs ( cdps ) , which are designed to train potential ses members . in particular , participants noted the following networking opportunities in executive training: participation develops personal relationships that boost confidence and build networks across and within federal agencies . one participant said relationships built with others helped make the executive feel more comfortable in an ses position , and validated that the participant was “on track” when facing difficult situations on the job . another participant emphasized that a significant amount of work in the participant's position involved relationships formed in small groups during executive training with people representing other agencies . participation builds accountability among executives within an organization . one ses candidate said that relationships formed during executive training extended into executive assignments following completion of training . the candidate said such relationships helped training participants hold each other accountable in their executive assignments , which can be a tremendous benefit to organizations . participants develop better responses to customer and stakeholder needs . multiple participants said relationships they established in executive training helped them collaborate to resolve customer issues . for example , two participants from different components in one agency said they developed a relationship during executive training that enabled them to work together to provide financial relief to an agency customer without using additional agency resources . another participant noted he completed a $400 million project with another agency before a scheduled deadline , based on trust and relationships he previously built with fellow participants in an sescdp . participation promotes interaction and relationship building with senior leadership to address organizational issues . from interaction with the postmaster general , one participant learned methods to motivate employees following “massive changes” within organizations , such as those experienced by the u.s . postal service . another participant ( who was addressing equal employment opportunity issues ) established a connection with an agency undersecretary , who allowed the participant to send staff to the undersecretary's office for shadowing assignments to better resolve equal employment opportunity issues within the participant's office . participation facilitates brainstorming solutions to previously identified issues faced by career ses and ses candidates . focus group participants in one agency discussed two cases where networking and brainstorming among executives helped solve problems and generated financial savings . one participant used a week - long training course to address implementation of a program involving overseas locations . course members helped the participant develop ideas to adjust hiring practices that , according to the participant , saved the federal government money .