this is consistent with our prior report . we asked the lobbyists we interviewed to rate various terms associated with ld - 2 reporting as being “clear and understandable,” “somewhat clear and understandable,” or , “not clear and understandable.” figure 2 shows the terms associated with ld - 2 reporting that the lobbyists were asked to rate and how they responded to each term . table 2 summarizes the feedback we obtained from the lobbying firms in our sample of reports that rated the lobbying terms as either “not clear and understandable” or “somewhat clear and understandable. the office stated that it has sufficient resources and authority to enforce compliance with lda requirements , including imposing civil or criminal penalties for noncompliance . the secretary and the clerk review the guidance semiannually . the guidance was last revised and published in december 2011 . the guidance provides definitions of terms in the lda , elaborates on the registration and reporting requirements , includes specific examples of different scenarios , and provides explanations of why certain scenarios prompt or do not prompt disclosure under the lda . in meetings with the secretary of the senate and clerk of the house , they stated that they consider information we report on lobbying disclosure compliance when they periodically update the guidance . the lda defines a lobbyist as an individual who is employed or retained by a client for compensation , who has made more than one lobbying contact ( written or oral communication to a covered executive or legislative branch official made on behalf of a client ) , and whose lobbying activities represent at least 20 percent of the time that he or she spends on behalf of the client during the quarter . lobbying firms are persons or entities that have one or more employees who lobby on behalf of a client other than that person or entity . organizations employing in - house lobbyists file only one registration . an organization is exempt from filing if total expenses in connection with lobbying activities are not expected to exceed $11,500 . amounts are adjusted for inflation and published in the lda guidance . information on which federal agencies and house ( s ) of congress the lobbyist contacted on behalf of the client during the reporting period ; the amount of income related to lobbying activities received from the client ( or expenses for organizations with in - house lobbyists ) during the quarter rounded to the nearest $10,000 ; and a list of constituent organizations that contribute more than $5,000 for lobbying in a quarter and actively participate in planning , supervising , or controlling lobbying activities , if the client is a coalition or association . the lda , as amended , also requires lobbyists to report certain contributions semiannually in the ld - 203 report . these reports must be filed 30 days after the end of a semiannual period by each lobbying firm registered to lobby and by each individual listed as a lobbyist on a firm's lobbying reports .