mandatory coverage . in particular , some stakeholders said that a federal mandate could help achieve the level of consumer participation necessary to make the private sector comfortable with providing flood insurance coverage . for example , some stakeholders said that the federal government could mandate that homeowners insurance policies include flood coverage or that all homeowners purchase flood insurance . either mandate could increase the number of homeowners purchasing flood insurance , something that could help private insurers diversify and manage the risk of their flood insurance portfolio and address concerns about adverse selection . however , the stakeholders were also concerned that private companies might oppose a mandate that homeowners policies include flood coverage , potentially raising legal issues . further , stakeholders said that some property owners — particularly those who perceived their flood risk to be low — might also resist being required to purchase flood insurance . finally , as we have reported the federal government has faced challenges with enforcing the current mandatory purchase requirement for flood insurance , which applies to properties in high - risk areas with federally regulated mortgages . if the federal government faces similar challenges with additional mandates , it might not realize the intended benefits of increased consumer participation . reinsure nfip . other stakeholders discussed nfip purchasing reinsurance from the private sector to cover exposure to catastrophic losses rather than relying on borrowing from treasury . while doing so would increase private sector involvement in flood insurance , the federal government would still play an active role in flood insurance , because nfip would still serve as the main provider of primary flood insurance coverage . however , the federal government's exposure to catastrophic losses could be reduced . on the other hand , stakeholders noted that private companies might cancel reinsurance after a catastrophic loss year , leading to uncertainty as to the degree to which the federal government's exposure would be mitigated . further , stakeholders said that nfip may need to collect additional premiums on its existing policies to pay for the reinsurance . however , given that nfip's current premium levels are insufficient , nfip may be unable to pay for this additional expense . catastrophe bonds . stakeholders said that as an alternative to reinsurance , nfip might be able to limit its exposure to large losses by transferring risk to capital markets through insurance - linked securities such as catastrophe bonds . for example , nfip could issue interest - bearing bonds to investors willing to bear the risk of losing some of their investment if flood claims exceeded a predetermined amount . like reinsurance , catastrophe bonds could help nfip manage its risk exposure , but again it would need to be able to collect adequate premiums to cover any necessary payments of principal or interest . we have previously reported that state insurance entities , as well as private sector insurers , have used catastrophe bonds to manage their risk . stakeholders with whom we spoke or who participated in our roundtable discussion said that no matter which strategies congress might choose for increasing private sector involvement in flood insurance , the federal government would likely still have some role .