structure of the analysis . our 2000 analysis estimated an annual level of net benefit to the government assuming that the transition to coins had already been completed . hence , that analysis did not fully address the initial production costs of replacing all outstanding notes with coins . for the current analysis , we determined that the mint would need to make various investments to produce substantially more new coins in relatively few years . ( 2 ) what other effects did stakeholders suggest such a replacement could have ? to estimate the net benefit to the government of replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin , we constructed an economic model with data from the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , the bureau of engraving and printing ( bep ) , and the united states mint ( mint ) . we analyzed past gao and federal reserve reports that previously estimated the net benefit to the government of such a replacement . we interviewed officials from two bureaus of the department of the treasury ( treasury ) — bep and the mint — the federal reserve , and the department of homeland security's u.s. secret service to develop the structure , inputs , and assumptions for the model . in addition , we interviewed government officials in canada and the united kingdom ( uk ) to obtain information about their experiences replacing notes with coins and used this information to develop some of the model assumptions . to determine the effects such a replacement could have , we identified industries and organizations that might be affected by changes to currency . we interviewed private entities involved in the production of materials for and processing of notes and coins ; 15 associations and companies that represent five major industries that often deal in cash — banking and financial institutions ; grocery and convenience stores ; and vending , transit , and retail businesses . we conducted this performance audit from june 2010 to march 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . these standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . appendix i contains more detailed information on our scope and methodology . to promote efficient commercial exchange and economic growth , national governments and central banks issue money , including paper notes and coins in various denominations . the federal government experiences a financial gain when it issues notes or coins because both forms of currency usually cost less to produce than their face values . as long as there is a public demand , when the government puts coins into circulation , it creates a value known as “seigniorage.” seigniorage is traditionally defined as the difference between the face value of coins and their cost of production . in addition , the face value of notes issued , net of their production costs , creates an analogous net value for the federal government .