gao - 10-22 . washington d.c.: october 30 , 2009 . cost estimates for all other types of facilities were not subjected to the goal . gao - 09-324t . washington d.c.: january 22 , 2009 . according to army officials , general cost increases in the construction industry indicated that a 15 percent cost reduction could not be achieved for most fiscal year 2009 facilities . however , because of the changes incorporated under the army's military construction transformation strategy , the officials believed that reductions could be achieved for the five specified facility types . because the army had not monitored and thus did not know to what extent it had met its cost goal , we performed an analysis and found that , while the army reduced the estimated cost and met its goal on some facility projects , it did not meet the goal on other projects . specifically , we reviewed the construction cost estimates for a non - probability sample of 75 facility projects that were in the categories subject to the goal to determine whether a 15 percent reduction was taken in the estimated cost of the facilities , as reported in each facility's project justification . the 75 facilities included 15 fiscal year 2007 facilities funded under the base realignment and closure program , 30 projects from fiscal year 2008 , and 30 projects from fiscal year 2009 for the five facility types subject to the goal . as shown in table 1 , we found that the army met its goal in 31 of the facilities ( 41 percent ) and did not meet its goal in 44 of the facilities ( 59 percent ) . however , some reduction , but less than 15 percent , was made in the estimated cost of 24 of the 44 facilities that did not meet the goal . although the army had information on the actual costs of completed military construction projects , the army did not routinely document the actual costs of the individual facilities included in the projects . for this reason , we could not determine whether any of these facilities resulted in actual savings compared to cost estimates based on dod cost estimating guidance . the following examples illustrate the achievement of the army's cost goal in selected projects we reviewed: a fiscal year 2008 army military construction project at schofield barracks , hawaii , included a barracks . according to dod military construction cost estimating guidance for that year , the project planners should have estimated $24.7 million for the cost of this barracks . however , according to the project's justification , the barracks' estimated cost was $20.9 million , which was the amount requested for funding . because the barracks' estimated cost was about $3.8 million , or about 15 percent , less than the amount based on dod guidance , the army achieved its goal in this case . a fiscal year 2009 army military construction project at fort lee , virginia , included a dining facility . according to dod military construction cost estimating guidance for that year , the project planners should have estimated $5.8 million for the cost of this facility .