ii . construction of space: cftc's office space is constructed in accordance with the terms of its office space lease agreements . construction contracts and trade subcontracts , as appropriate , are awarded based on a competitive process that results in fair and reasonable pricing . cftc's contracting officer is privy to bid information and , in consultation with cftc's architect , project manager , and other knowledgeable commission personnel , approves project pricing as well as any required contract change orders . iii . administration of leases: cftc's contracting officer is responsible for analyzing rent - related charges and authorizing payment as appropriate . the contracting officer is also responsible for addressing with the landlord any issues pertaining to lease compliance . the office of management operations is responsible for day - to - day facility operational matters and consults with the contracting officer on lease - related issues as appropriate . in addition to the contact named above , amelia bates shachoy ( assistant director ) , lindsay madison bach , dwayne curry , lawrance evans , terence lam , hannah laufe , sara ann moessbauer , minette richardson , amelia michelle weathers , and crystal wesco made key contributions to this report . this is discussed further below . b. applicability of regulations and policies: the far does not apply to the acquisition of leased office space . specifically , the scope of the far' s coverage is defined in section 1.104 as follows: “the far applies to all acquisitions as defined in: part 2 of the far , except where expressly excluded.” according to part 2.101 ( b ) , the term “acquisition” is defined as the “acquiring by contract with appropriated funds of supplies or services ( including construction ) by and for the use of the federal government through purchase or lease , whether the supplies or services are already in existence or must be created , developed , demonstrated , and evaluated.” the term “supplies” is defined as “all property except land or interest in land.” because a lease of real property , including a lease of office space , is an interest in land , it is not a “supply” and the far does not apply . the gsam is also inapplicable to the lease of office space by cftc . the gsam applies to the acquisition of leased office space by gsa and any agencies delegated independent leasing authority by gsa and so required by gsa to use the gsam . cftc's independent leasing authority was mandated by its authorizing legislation and not by gsa . accordingly the gsam is not required for use by cftc in its acquisition of office space for lease . in the absence of explicit regulatory direction , cftc has chosen to comply with aspects of these documents that facilitate the principles cited above . the gsam is used specifically for its guidance as to the considerations and findings necessary to support a lease procurement by other than full and open competition . additional guidance and processes that may be applicable to lease acquisition are contained in cftc's acquisition policy . the acquisition process for all lease awards begins with requirements definition and completion of market research .