sffas no . 5 , accounting for liabilities of the federal government , defines liability as a probable future outflow of resources due to a past government transaction or event . sffas no . 5 further states that recognition of a liability in the financial statements is required if it is both probable and measurable . effective in 1997 , sffas no . 5 defines probable as that which is more likely than not to occur ( for example , greater than a 50 percent chance ) based on current facts and circumstances . it also states that a future outflow is measurable if it can be reasonably estimated . the statement recognizes that this estimate may not be precise and , in such cases , it provides for recognizing the lowest estimate of a range of estimates if no amount within the range is better than any other amount . sffas no . 6 , accounting for property , plant , and equipment , further defines cleanup costs as costs for removal and disposal of hazardous wastes or materials that because of quantity , concentration , or physical or chemical makeup may pose a serious present or potential hazard to human health or the environment . the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) issues the dod financial management regulation containing dod's policies and procedures in the area of financial management , which require the reporting of environmental liabilities associated with the cleanup of closed , transferred , and transferring ranges in the financial statements.dod has taken the position that the cleanup of these ranges is probable and measurable and as such should be reported as a liability in its financial statements . under the presumption that active and inactive ranges will operate or be available to operate indefinitely , the dod financial management regulation does not specify when or if liabilities should be recognized in the financial statements for these ranges . the senate report accompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2000 directed dod to provide a report to the congressional defense committees , no later than march 1 , 2001 , that gives a complete estimate of the current and projected costs for all unexploded ordnance remediation . as of march 30 , 2001 , dod had not issued its report . for the purposes of the march 2001 report , dod officials had stated that they would estimate cleanup costs for active and inactive training ranges just as they would for closed , transferred , and transferring ranges . thus , the cleanup costs shown in this report would have been significantly higher than the training range liabilities reported in the financial statements , which only include estimates for closed , transferred , and transferring ranges . however , in commenting on a draft of our report , dod officials informed us that they would not be reporting the cleanup costs of active and inactive training ranges in their march report . as dod downsizing and base closures have increased in recent years , large numbers of military properties have been , and are continuing to be , turned over to non - dod ownership and control , resulting in the public being put at greater risk .