we modified the report where appropriate . the secretary of homeland security chose not to provide comments . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and the secretaries of commerce , health and human services , homeland security , and state ; the attorney general ; the u.s. trade representative ; and the director of the u.s. patent and trademark office . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4347 or yagerl@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . to address congress' concern about u.s. government efforts to protect and enforce intellectual property ( ip ) rights overseas and assist the new advisory committee headed by the intellectual property enforcement coordinator , recently created by the congress , this report evaluates u.s. government efforts to enhance protection and enforcement of ip overseas in three countries at four posts , including posts in beijing and guangzhou , china ; new delhi , india ; and bangkok , thailand . specifically , this report ( 1 ) describes the key ip protection and enforcement issues that the u.s. government has identified in china , india , and thailand ; ( 2 ) assesses the extent to which the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) ip attachés and the department of justice ( doj ) intellectual property law enforcement coordinator ( iplec ) effectively collaborated with other agencies at posts in china , india , and thailand to improve ip protection and enforcement ; and ( 3 ) evaluates the extent to which each of the four posts has undertaken interagency planning in collaborating on their ip - related activities . overall , to determine the scope of our work , we obtained documentation and interviewed cognizant officials from the departments of commerce ( commerce ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , justice ( doj ) , and state ( state ) ; and from the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) . we reviewed documentation on overseas u.s. government personnel and their ip activities , including which countries had personnel dedicated to ip issues . we collected and analyzed documentation that discussed key ip protection and enforcement issues around the world and that identified those countries where the u.s. government believes ip problems are most acute , such as documents related to the special 301 process , and other agency assessments of countries' ip laws and regulations . we determined that our scope would focus on ip efforts at the embassy / post level and that we would utilize a case study approach , focusing on selected countries .