however , these plans have not yet been developed . further , while the agency's strategic direction and vision for its data exchange environment are important , they do not substitute for the more detailed analysis that is essential to identifying the specific business and technical requirements for its data exchange programs and partners . these databases are briefly described in table 1 . master beneficiary record ( mbr ) master earnings file ( mef ) supplemental security record ( ssr ) number holder identification ( numident ) among the databases , the master beneficiary record , master earnings file , and supplemental security record databases are included in the agency's legacy database infrastructure , referred to as the master data access method , or madam . the number holder identification has recently been updated to a mor e modern system based on commercially available software . ssa also maintains various application systems that were designed and developed specifically to process data exchange transactions and that generally support multiple data exchanges . these applications provide social security number matching and verification information that supports various types of federal and state programs , such as driver's license issuance , voter registration , social services administration ( eg , food stamps ) , employment eligibility verification , and passport issuanc e. the applications accept requests for information from ssa's partners , retrieve and attempt to match or verify data from the databases against the information submitted by the partners , and then transmit responses — that is , the results of the data matching and verification — to the data excha nge partners who initiated the requests . the applications primarily match social security number , name , and date - of - birth information submitted by the partners against data stored in the databases . the request transactions are processed and the responses pro file or online , real - time processing . vided through the use of either batch ssa relies on 11 key application systems to process information reques from and provide response data to its state and federal data exchange partners . these data exchange applications provide data to programs associated with 582 of the state - level agreements and 26 of the feder level agreements — about 75 percent of the outgoing data exchange agreements that the agency supports . these 11 key data exchang e application systems process over 1 billion transactions annually . ssa's outgoing data exchange programs are funded through various sources . these include the agency's annual budget and reimbursements from the data exchange partners , which are established through the data exchange agreement process . for example , the agreement between ssa and the veterans benefits administration states that ssa will provide data at no cost . in this case , ssa's annual budget provides funds to support the administrative and systems - related activities that are required to support this agreement , such as the development of agreements and technical support for the data exchange partners . ssa receives reimbursements from a number of its external partners , including the american association of motor vehicle administrators ( aamva ) along with 2 state agencies and 14 other federal agencies , for data exchanges .