specifically , the u.s . such information was not readily available . we conducted site visits for all 36 selected firms and used investigative methods — such as interviewing firm managers , analyzing firm payroll documents , and reviewing information from investigative databases — to gather information about the firms and to determine whether the firms met hubzone requirements for principal office and 35 percent residency . we also reviewed information about each firm from the online representations and certifications application ( orca ) web site . in the course of our investigations , we found instances of hubzone firms that did not expend at least 50 percent of the personnel costs of a contract on their own personnel . although our review was not designed to evaluate this requirement , we did report those instances that we discovered in this report . to determine what actions , if any , sba has taken to reduce fraud and abuse in the program as well as the actions sba has taken on the 10 firms that we found misrepresented their hubzone status , we interviewed sba officials from the office of inspector general , hubzone program office , and the sba general counsel . we obtained and reviewed supporting documentation where appropriate . we also reviewed sba's dynamic small business web site to determine the current hubzone status of the 10 firms we identified in our july 2008 testimony . to ensure hubzone areas receive the economic benefit from the program , sba is responsible for determining whether firms meet hubzone program requirements . to participate in the hubzone program , small business firms generally must meet certain criteria established by the sba , most notably: ( 1 ) the firm must be at least 51 percent owned and controlled by one or more u.s. citizens ; ( 2 ) at least 35 percent of its employees must live in a hubzone ; ( 3 ) the principal office ( i.e. , the location where the greatest number of qualifying employees perform their work ) must be located in a hubzone ; and ( 4 ) the firm must qualify as a small business under the size standard that corresponds with its primary industry classification . in addition , once a firm receives a hubzone contract , the firm is required to abide by certain subcontracting limitations , which for most firms is to expend at least 50 percent of the personnel costs of a contract on their own employees or employees of other qualified hubzone small business concerns . our work was not designed to identify all fraud and abuse in the hubzone program or estimate its full extent for the entire population of hubzone firms . in addition , our work was not designed to determine whether the selected firms we investigated committed fraud when originally applying for hubzone status or receiving a hubzone contract award , but rather if selected hubzone firms are currently meeting hubzone requirements . we conducted our investigation from september 2008 through march 2009 in accordance with quality standards for investigations as set forth by the president's council on integrity and efficiency .