pub . 112-90 , ยง 5 ( g ) , 125 stat . generalizable sample of 27 gas transmission pipeline operators that we selected using several criteria , including the number of pipeline miles in high consequence areas , recent incidents caused by corrosion , and geographic location . we also spoke with a non - generalizable sample of 8 state pipeline safety offices that were selected based on several factors , including total pipeline mileage within the state and geographic location . we collected additional information from three pipeline operators on their experience calculating reassessment intervals and conducting reassessments . for more information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2012 to june 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the united states has a network of about 300,000 miles of gas transmission pipelines that are owned and operated by approximately 900 operators . these pipelines , which are primarily interstate , typically move gas products over long distances from sources to communities , and tend to operate at the highest pressures and have the largest diameters of any gas transmission pipelines are critical because they type of pipeline.transport nearly all of the natural gas used in the united states , which fuels about a quarter of the nation's energy needs . pipelines do not experience many of the safety threats faced by other forms of freight transportation because they are mostly underground . however , they are subject to problems that can occur over time ( such as leaks and ruptures resulting from corrosion ) or are independent of time ( such as damage from excavation , land movement , or incorrect operation ) . phmsa administers the national regulatory program to ensure the safe transportation of natural gas and hazardous liquids ( eg , petroleum or anhydrous ammonia ) by pipeline , including developing safety requirements that all pipeline operators regulated by phmsa must meet . in fiscal year 2012 , the agency's total budget was $201 million , about half of which is for pipeline safety activities . phmsa's office of pipeline safety employs over 200 staff , with about 135 of those staff involved in inspections and enforcement . in addition , over 300 state inspectors help oversee pipelines and ensure safety . pipeline operators are subject to phmsa's minimum safety standards for the design , construction , testing , inspection , operation , and maintenance of gas transmission pipelines . however , this approach does not systematically account for differences in the kinds of threats and the degrees of risk that individual pipelines face . for example , pipelines located in the pacific northwest are more susceptible to damage from geologic hazards , such as land movement , than pipelines in some other areas of the country . federal efforts to incorporate risk - based concepts into pipeline management began in earnest in the mid - 1990s .