the united states is a member of all four regimes . regime members conduct a number of activities in support of the regimes , including ( 1 ) sharing information about each others' export licensing decisions , including certain export denials and , in some cases , approvals and ( 2 ) adopting common export control practices and control lists of sensitive equipment and technology into national laws or regulations . exports of commercially supplied american - made cruise missiles , military uavs , and related technology are transferred pursuant to the arms export control act , as amended , and the international trafficking in arms regulations , implemented by state . cruise missiles provide a number of military capabilities . for example , they present significant challenges for air and missile defenses . cruise missiles can fly at low altitudes to stay below radar and , in some cases , hide behind terrain features . newer missiles are incorporating stealth features to make them less visible to radars and infrared detectors . furthermore , land - attack cruise missiles may fly circuitous routes to get to their targets , thereby avoiding radar and air defense installations . u.s. policy on the proliferation of cruise missiles and uavs is expressed in u.s. commitments to the mtcr and wassenaar arrangement . these multilateral export control regimes are voluntary , nonbinding arrangements among like - minded supplier countries that aim to restrict trade in sensitive technologies . regime members agree to restrict such trade through their national laws and regulations , which set up systems to license the exports of sensitive items . the four principal regimes are the mtcr ; the wassenaar arrangement , which focuses on trade in conventional weapons and related items with both civilian and military ( dual - use ) applications ; the australia group , which focuses on chemical and biological technologies ; and the nuclear suppliers group , which focuses on nuclear technologies . finally , uavs represent an inexpensive means of launching chemical and biological attacks against the united states and allied forces and territory . for example , the u.s. government reported its concern over this threat in various meetings and studies . the acting deputy assistant secretary of state for nonproliferation testified in june 2002 that uavs are potential delivery systems for wmd , and are ideally suited for the delivery of chemical and biological weapons given their ability to disseminate aerosols in appropriate locations at appropriate altitudes . he added that , although the primary concern has been that nation - states would use uavs to launch wmd attacks , there is potential for terrorist groups to produce or acquire small uavs and use them for chemical or biological weapons delivery . the u.s. government generally uses two key nonproliferation tools — - multilateral export control regimes and national export controls — to address cruise missile and uav proliferation , but both tools have limitations . the united states and other governments have traditionally used multilateral export control regimes , principally the mtcr , to address missile proliferation . however , despite successes in strengthening controls , the growing capability of countries of concern to develop and trade technologies used for wmd limits the regime's ability to impede proliferation .