after our investigation was complete , we returned the checks we obtained . immediately after our applications were accepted , we notified cfc officials and withdrew our charity from the campaigns in order to prevent federal employees from making donations to our fictitious charity . the results of fsi's covert testing have been used by congress and federal agency managers across the government to help strengthen homeland security and minimize fraud , waste , and abuse of taxpayer dollars . we will continue to offer this valuable service to the congress in a responsible and professional manner and provide the results of our work to agency management , where appropriate , so that they can take concrete steps to improve the federal government's operations . mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . none of the eight synthetic or adulterated urine specimens were detected by the labs . activities in this area include obtaining disaster assistance and demonstrating weaknesses in agencies' fraud prevention controls . posing as disaster victims of hurricanes katrina and rita , fsi investigators applied for federal assistance using falsified identities , bogus addresses , and fabricated disaster stories to register for assistance under the individuals and households program . despite the fact that our applications over the internet were not accepted because of data validation procedures the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) had implemented , fsi investigators successfully registered over the phone . this test demonstrated that anyone could purchase small quantities of radioactive sources for stockpiling . posing as individuals with simulated contraband including radioactive material , fsi investigators successfully crossed the northern u.s. border at locations that were unmanned and unmonitored . this test showed that the northern border is significantly vulnerable to terrorists or criminals entering the united states undetected . in 2006 , we reported on the results of covert security vulnerability testing of numerous airports across the country . during these covert tests , our investigators passed through airport security checkpoints carrying prohibited explosive components without being caught by transportation security administration ( tsa ) security officers . the details of this march 2006 report are classified ; however , tsa has authorized this limited discussion . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . posing as private citizens , fsi investigators purchased sensitive military equipment — including ceramic body armor inserts , guided missile radar test sets , and microcircuits used in f - 14 fighter aircraft — on the internet from the department of defense's ( dod ) liquidation sales contractor .