cash match requirement . a state's match cannot be less than 50 percent cash . first , we found that oit has established a process for ensuring compliance with the tftea requirement outlined in the “proportion of amounts” clause of the statute . oit officials told us they review data from the department of commerce's census bureau that show the number of exporting small and medium - sized businesses in each state , and then use these data to determine the top 10 states . according to oit officials , they use the most recent data available , with an approximately 2- to 3- year lag . oit officials told us that they planned to use available 2016 census data to determine the top 10 states for the fiscal year 2018 award cycle and then , after receiving applications , determine award amounts that would comply with this requirement . second , we found sba's process did not document that states met tftea's total match requirement before grant closeout . tftea requires that states provide matching funds , and the total match is typically 25 percent of the combined state - federal amount . at least half of the total match must be cash . matching share requirements are often intended to ensure local financial participation , and may serve to hold down federal costs . if sba determines that a state is not providing sufficient matching funds , it can withhold reimbursement for expenses incurred under the grant . figure 1 illustrates the step funding proportions described above . in our report , we identified four instances where , according to oit's documentation , states reported insufficient total matches — one in fiscal year 2015 and three in fiscal year 2016 . oit's documentation showed that these four states failed to meet the required total matching funds by about $76,000 combined over these 2 years of the program . sba told us they nevertheless had closed these grants . oit officials provided several explanations for their actions . first , oit officials told us that of these four states , two submitted additional information after the grant had closed , indicating that the states had met the matching requirement . oit officials stated that they did not verify the accuracy of the total match information before grant closure because of oit staff error . with respect to the other two states , oit initially stated that it was working with ogm to verify that the total match requirement had not been met , and how best to recover the funds . subsequently , oit reported ogm's determination that one state had in fact met the match requirement , but that the other had not . in the case of the state that did not meet the requirement , ogm determined that sba had overpaid federal funds to that state by about $19,600 . however , after contacting the state and looking into the matter further , ogm conducted a review of quarterly reporting documentation for this state , and determined that the state had in fact exceeded its required match by about $3,800 .