i for a summary of that testimony . we plan to issue a final report at a later date. ) also in november 2007 , a subcommittee of the fda science board issued a report that identified growing demands on fda , including the globalization of the industries that fda regulates . the report found that disparities between fda's responsibilities and its available resources — including human resources — have resulted in serious weaknesses that jeopardize the agency's ability to meet current and emerging regulatory responsibilities . the subcommittee's report noted that these weaknesses include inadequate inspections of manufacturers . it also emphasized that fda's information technology infrastructure is obsolete and unstable ; provides an insufficient basis to access , integrate , and analyze data ; and is subject to frequent system failures . third - party organizations have been identified as one mechanism that could help fda address shortcomings in inspection programs , beyond the programs for medical devices . the federal interagency working group on import safety recently suggested that the use of third - party organizations could provide fda with information to help the agency target its inspection resources to those products of greatest risk . in addition , we recommended that fda consider developing a third - party inspection program to help it meet its responsibilities for inspecting foreign firms importing seafood to the united states . given the recent questions regarding fda's inspection programs and suggestions that third - party organizations could supplement fda's resources , you asked for information on fda's management of its medical device inspection program . my remarks will focus on ( 1 ) our assessment of fda's program for inspecting establishments that manufacture medical devices for the u.s. market , particularly those located in foreign countries and ( 2 ) the status of fda's programs for third - party inspections of medical device manufacturing establishments . today , in a separate statement , we are also discussing the federal oversight of food safety as a high - risk area and ways in which fda can better leverage its resources . these and other recent testimonies on drug safety and food safety offer some observations on fda's inspection program capacity . to address these issues , we interviewed officials from fda's center for devices and radiological health ( cdrh ) and office of regulatory affairs ( ora ) , which each have responsibilities for managing the medical device inspection program . we reviewed pertinent statutes and regulations , as well as agency documents that provide guidance on fda's inspection requirements and programs for inspections by accredited third parties . to assess fda's program for inspecting establishments that manufacture medical devices , we obtained information from fda's device registration and listing system ( drls ) , as of september 19 , 2007 ; field accomplishments and compliance tracking system ( facts ) for fiscal year 2002 through fiscal year 2007 ; and operational and administrative system for import support ( oasis ) for fiscal year 2007 .