implementing an information security program . in addition , a department of health and human services ( hhs ) office for civil rights official familiar with health information privacy issues said that the department developed guidance on how to develop a risk - based approach for protecting electronic health information and is working with nist to develop a self - assessment tool that entities in the health sector can use to assess their security posture . information technology sector: cybersecurity guidance for the information technology sector covers a number of topics , including security management system requirements , operational security , and identity management . also , the information technology sector's 2010 sector annual report and information provided by dhs's national protection and programs directorate reference the following organizations as providing cybersecurity guidance relevant to the sector: the internet engineering task force , an international organization that develops internet standards and protocols ; iso / iec , which provides standards and practices for managing information security systems ; the institute of electrical and electronics engineers , which establishes standards and practices for managing information security systems ; and nist , which issues special publications and interagency reports . according to the chairperson of the it scc , the it sector is very complex and there is no “short list” of cyber standards . table 4 provides a summary of the comparison between the electricity subsector guidance and federal guidance , including the controls deemed not applicable by sector officials . examples of commonalities between the electricity subsector cybersecurity guidance and federal guidance , as well as the controls deemed not applicable , are described below . commonality: sp 800-53 recommends that personnel report suspected security incidents to the organizational incident response capability and report security incident information to designated authorities . the nerc cyber security standard on incident reporting and response planning contains a similar control by requiring that the responsible entity report cybersecurity incidents to the electricity sector information sharing and analysis center . commonality: sp 800-53 recommends protecting the confidentiality of transmitted information . nerc security guidelines for the electricity sector , protecting potentially sensitive information , version 1.0 , contain a similar control by specifying that , among other things , critical infrastructure owners and operators should have an information security or confidentiality policy in place as an integral part of their business - level policies and that the policy should address the production , storage , transmission , and disposal of both physical and electronic information . commonality: sp 800-53 recommends maintaining and monitoring temperature and humidity levels within the facility where the information system resides to prevent fluctuations potentially harmful to the information system . the nerc officials stated that the physical infrastructure requirements in the emergency preparedness and operations reliability standards require backup control center functionality in the event of any kind of failure of the primary control center . cyber threats can be unintentional or intentional . unintentional threats can be caused by software upgrades or maintenance procedures that inadvertently disrupt systems . intentional threats include both targeted and untargeted attacks from a variety of sources , including criminal groups , hackers , disgruntled employees , foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare , and terrorists .