gao - 12-422t . washington , d.c.: february 7 , 2012 . dhs concurred with the two recommendations . specifically , dhs concurred with the recommendation to ensure that future updates to the weight set are based on the results of assessments and stated that cbp plans to conduct analyses to ensure that future versions of the weight set result in increased effectiveness . to what extent does cbp assess the effectiveness of the national security targeting rules in ats ? to address the first objective , we obtained data from cbp for each of the 115 u.s. seaports for fiscal year 2011 on the number of ( 1 ) shipments it placed in each of three categories — high risk , medium risk , and low risk — arriving at each of the ports ; ( 2 ) container arrivals at these ports ; and ( 3 ) containers scanned at these ports using nii equipment . we selected and visited six cbp units responsible for targeting at domestic ports . specifically , these ports were selected from among the largest ports in the united states using the following criteria: ( 1 ) the percentage of maritime shipments that were scored as high risk or medium risk for national security purposes , ( 2 ) the percentage of cargo containers that were examined using nii equipment , and ( 3 ) whether a cbp official from the port participated in the most recent cbp conference to discuss changes to ats cargo targeting rules . the six targeting units we visited were responsible for targeting efforts at 15 ports that collectively received about 60 percent of the maritime shipments that arrived in the united states in fiscal year 2011 . as part of these site visits , we observed port operations , including the scanning of containers . at each location , we also interviewed cbp targeters , including those who participated in the most recent cbp conference to discuss changes to cargo targeting rules , and observed their use of ats and other tools to conduct cargo targeting activities . the results from our visits to these six targeting units cannot be generalized to ports nationwide ; however , visits to these locations allowed us to directly observe the targeting process and provided insights into how ats assigns risk scores to maritime shipments and how cbp integrates the scores into its targeting process . we synthesized the information from these site visits to describe the targeting process and also analyzed cbp policies and guidance , such as cbp's national maritime targeting policy and course materials from cbp's sea cargo targeting training . we also visited cbp's national targeting center – cargo ( ntc - c ) to interview targeters responsible for conducting national - level targeting and to observe their targeting activities . dhs office of inspector general , cargo targeting and examinations , oig - 10-34 ( washington , d.c.: jan. 6 , 2010 ) . because the reports we issued in february 2004 and august 2006 regarding cbp's targeting practices contain sensitive information , they are not publicly available . review of relevant documentation and was sufficient to address the issue of documentation of changes to the ats rules that we present in this report .