we have made recommendations similar to the panel's . for example , we have recommended that the administrator of ofpp work with agencies to periodically evaluate how well agencies understand pba and how they can apply it to services that are widely available in the commercial sector , particularly more unique and complex services . the panel's concern that agencies are not properly managing pba contracts is also consistent with our work on surveillance of service contracts . in a march 2005 report , we found that proper surveillance of service contracts , including pbas , was not being conducted , leaving dod at risk of being unable to identify and correct poor contractor performance . accordingly , we recommended that the secretary of defense ensure the proper training of personnel in surveillance and their assignment to contracts no later than the date of contract award . we further recommended the development of practices to help ensure accountability for personnel carrying out surveillance responsibilities . we have also found that some agencies have attempted to apply pba to complex and risky acquisitions , a fact that underscores the need to maintain strong government surveillance to mitigate risks . the third area the panel reviewed was interagency contracting . the panel found that reliance on interagency contracts is significant . this has been a long - standing issue . regarding competition , we have stated that competition is a fundamental principle underlying the federal acquisition process . nevertheless , we have reported numerous times on the lack of competition in dod's acquisition of goods and services . for example , we noted in april 2006 that dod awarded contracts for security guard services supporting 57 domestic bases , 46 of which were let on an authorized sole - source basis . the sole - source contracts were awarded by dod despite recognizing it was paying about 25 percent more than previously paid for the contracts awarded competitively . the second area the panel reviewed was improving the implementation of performance - based acquisitions . the panel reported that performance - based acquisition ( pba ) has not been fully implemented in the federal government even though omb has encouraged greater use of it — setting a general goal in 2001 of making performance - based contracts 40 percent or more of all eligible service acquisitions for fiscal year 2006 . the panel reported that agencies were not clearly defining requirements , not preparing adequate statements of work , not identifying meaningful quality measures and effective incentives , and not effectively managing the contract . the panel noted that a cultural emphasis on “getting to award” still exists within the government , an emphasis that precludes taking the time to clarify agency needs and adequately define requirements . the panel recommended that ofpp issue more explicit implementation guidance and create a pba “opportunity assessment” tool to help agencies identify when they should consider using pba contracts . like the panel , we have found that agencies have faced a number of issues when using pba contracts .