the congressional notification process is shown in figure 4 . the congressional notification process consists of four steps , and the guidance states that the departments should complete all congressional notification requirements simultaneously . dod retransferring request: while dod is to seek written approval from defense committees and subcommittees to retransfer funds from the defense - wide operation and maintenance accounts into the gscf account , state is not required to submit a retransferring request to congress to transfer its funds . congressional notification: both state and dod are to notify congress of their intent to transfer funds and intent to initiate activities . the project identification phase is shown in figure 1 . waiting period: state and dod are to wait 30 days during the congressional notification period before executing a gscf project . congressional approval: gscf projects may not begin execution until after the 30-day notification period expires and congress approves dod's retransferring of funds . implementation plan development: state and dod are to establish a program steering group — jointly led by the deputy assistant secretary of state and deputy assistant secretary of defense from the relevant state and dod regional bureaus — to provide policy guidance and oversight to the planning effort and to determine the lead organization responsible for drafting the detailed implementation plan . in july 2014 , state and dod sent congressional notifications for two additional projects . specifically , for one project — a national guard capacity - building project in ukraine — state and dod transferred $19 million for the full cost of the project . for the other project — the counter boko haram project — the departments initially transferred $10 million in fiscal year 2012 . originally , this project was a counterterrorism and border security project in nigeria but was put on hold because of evolving conditions on the ground . state and dod subsequently rescoped the project to include cameroon , chad , and niger for the purpose of improving cross - border security cooperation with nigeria to counter boko haram . we also interviewed state and dod officials about their management of the gscf projects , reasons for the delays in gscf projects , and whether state and dod clearly defined time frames or track gscf projects . we interviewed officials , or when appropriate obtained documentation , from the organizations listed below: bureau of political - military affairs office of congressional and public affairs office of security assistance office of u.s. foreign assistance bureau of african affairs bureau of east asian and pacific affairs bureau of european and eurasian affairs bureau of near eastern affairs office of the under secretary of defense for policy office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) defense security cooperation agency joint staff u.s. africa command u.s. central command u.s. european command u.s. northern command u.s. pacific command office of defense cooperation bangladesh joint u.s. military assistance group philippines u.s. southern command u.s. special operations command we conducted this performance audit from april 2014 to november 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .