these responsibilities are consistent with leading practices . according to the fraud risk framework , agency managers can show commitment to combating fraud by creating a structure with a dedicated entity to lead fraud risk management activities and coordinate antifraud initiatives across the agency . in addition , leading practices call for the designated antifraud entity to , among other things , serve as the repository of knowledge on fraud risks and controls and lead or assist with trainings and other fraud - awareness activities . since the oafp was established , the office has performed several of these activities . for example , the oafp has taken steps to coordinate antifraud initiatives across ssa by gathering information about progress on the initiatives , and has helped create antifraud training materials for the agency . although these and other actions are generally consistent with leading practices in fraud risk management , the oafp faced challenges during its first 2 years to fully establish itself within the agency . specifically , the oafp faced challenges related to a lack of consistent leadership and established institutional relationships . however , recent actions , if sustained , may help to address these challenges: lack of consistent leadership: until recently , the oafp had not had a permanent leader who provided accountability for the agency's antifraud initiatives . when the oafp was established , ssa designated the oafp associate commissioner as the agency's chief fraud prevention officer . according to ssa officials , from the summer of 2015 until september 2016 , two senior executive service ( ses ) candidates served successive 6-month periods as the oafp's acting associate commissioner . in september 2016 , a third ses candidate was appointed as the acting associate commissioner of the oafp . upon confirmation as a member of the ses , he became the oafp's permanent associate commissioner and assumed the role of ssa's chief fraud prevention officer in october 2016 , according to ssa officials . lack of established institutional relationships: the oafp is a relatively new , small office that is still building relationships and establishing its role across the agency for which it is charged with overseeing fraud risk management efforts . according to ssa officials , the process of building relationships across the agency will likely require additional time to become more fully implemented . according to a senior oafp official , the risk - assessment effort is on hold because the oafp is focusing its staff resources on developing its data - analytics system . however , information on the relative likelihood and impact of fraud risks identified through a fraud risk assessment can help ensure that the data - analytics system is appropriately targeted and that the oafp's resources are focused on ssa's most significant fraud risks . moreover , although ssa has several control activities that seek to prevent , detect , and respond to fraud in its disability programs , it has not developed and documented an antifraud strategy to guide its design and implementation of these activities and help ensure it has sufficient and appropriate controls in place to mitigate its most significant fraud risks , as called for in leading practices .