( app . i provides a detailed discussion of our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) the un system includes the general assembly , the secretariat , peacekeeping missions throughout the world , and separately administered funds , programs , and specialized agencies that have their own governing bodies . the general assembly established the separately administered funds and programs with responsibility for particular issues , such as children ( united nations children's fund ) or the environment ( united nations environment program ) , that are funded mainly by voluntary contributions . while separately administered , these entities are under the authority of the secretary - general , who appoints the heads of each entity , but they have their own governing bodies instead of being governed by the general assembly . in contrast , the heads of the specialized agencies are elected by their own governing bodies , and these autonomous agencies do not fall under the authority of the secretary - general and therefore are not within oios's purview . oios is part of the secretariat and is under the authority of the secretary - general , who reports to the general assembly . according to its mandate , oios's purpose is “to assist the secretary - general in fulfilling his internal oversight responsibilities in respect of the resources and staff of the organisation,” and oios's chief executive , the under - secretary - general for internal oversight services , reports directly to the general assembly . the secretary - general has therefore stated that oios is mandated to provide oversight only of activities that fall under the secretary - general's authority . these include activities of the secretariat in new york , geneva , nairobi , and vienna ; the un's five regional commissions ; peacekeeping missions and humanitarian operations ; funds and programs administered separately under the authority of the secretary - general ( including the office of the united nations high commissioner for refugees , the united nations environment program , the united nations human settlements program , and the office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights ) ; and other entities that have requested oios services such as the united nations convention to combat desertification and the united nations framework convention on climate change . in addition to the oios mandate , the financial regulations and rules of the united nations designate oios as the financial management internal auditor for the un . oios is composed of the office of the under - secretary - general , an executive office , and three divisions , namely , internal audit , investigations , and inspection and evaluation . figure 1 provides the number and location of staff for each of these divisions as of september 2011 . appendix ii provides additional information on oios's locations and staffing . the internal audit division provides assurance and advice designed to improve and add value to the un's operations . internal audits bring a systematic approach to evaluating and improving the effectiveness of risk management , control , and governance processes . the inspection and evaluation division assists un intergovernmental bodies and program managers in assessing the relevance , efficiency , effectiveness , and impact of un secretariat programs .