infrastructure . we and cbp officials have also identified limitations in infrastructure as a significant challenge to implementing a biometric exit capability at airports as well as at land poes . for example , cbp officials pointed out that u.s. airports generally do not have designated and secure exit areas for conducting outbound immigration inspections , nor are there checkpoints for travelers to pass through where their departure is recorded by a u.s. immigration officer and where biometric information could be captured . according to cbp officials , for a biometric exit program to be effective , the collection of biometric information must take place at the gate or on the jetway to ensure that the traveler actually departs the country . to address these challenges , cbp intends to use the information gained from the pilot programs to identify biometric exit technology and processes that are effective in the airport environment and minimize the impact on passenger flow and airport operations . at land poes , there are also longstanding infrastructure and operational challenges to implementing a biometric exit capability to collect traveler information upon departure from the united states . in 2006 we reported that establishing a biometric exit capability at land poes faced a number of challenges , including space constraints complicated by the logistics of processing high volumes of visitors and associated traffic congestion . for example , travelers may arrive at land poes on foot or via a variety of vehicles — including cars , trucks , trains , buses , ferries , and bicycles — and many land poes do not have sufficient space to deploy equipment and staff for obtaining biometric information from individuals leaving the country . given the current capabilities of biometric capture devices , applying biometric capabilities to vehicle passengers would be more difficult than doing so for those crossing on foot , because , according to cbp officials , biometric capabilities currently available would require all passengers to stop and exit their vehicle to be photographed or scanned . in addition to the large amount of space this process would require , dhs officials stated that it would cause extensive delays at vehicle poes . cbp officials said they intend to use the information from the pedestrian exit field test at otay mesa to inform any future solution . the officials also told us that they entered into an agreement with oak ridge national laboratory beginning in june 2016 to explore options for applying biometric capabilities to vehicle passengers exiting the country . given these challenges , cbp does not plan to implement a biometric exit capability at land poes until 2020 . staffing . in addition , cbp officials stated that implementing a biometric exit capability will likely require additional cbp officers at each poe . the biometric exit pilot programs we observed required cbp staff to assist travelers with using the biometric technology and also for any enforcement actions that may be needed . however , cbp officials noted that they are exploring biometric exit capabilities that minimize the involvement of cbp officials , either by having the collection of biometric information done automatically through facial recognition technology or using airline personnel to process passengers .