gao - 06-163 . washington , d.c.: december 9 , 2005 . project - based rental assistance: hud should streamline its processes to ensure timely housing assistance payments . gao - 06-57 . washington , d.c.: november 15 , 2005 . hud provides both capital and operating funding . in addition , hud has provided selected agencies with grants under the hope vi program to demolish and revitalize severely distressed public housing and provide community and supportive services . hud provides guidance to phas to supplement its regulations and explicitly convey required program policies and procedures . based on our past work , we have made recommendations to hud to improve the clarity and timeliness of its guidance to phas , and to improve its oversight of the program . phas are responsible for managing public housing in accordance with hud regulations and requirements . they are also required to develop and submit plans detailing the agency's goals and strategies for reaching these goals . further , phas that receive hope vi grants are required to provide residents with supportive services . a list of these reports appears at the end of this statement . traditionally , hud's role has been to provide phas with funding , guidance , and oversight . our work has identified challenges that the agencies face in carrying out their responsibilities , including difficulty with hud's data systems and lack of resources for hiring and training staff . while we have not reviewed the extent to which capital markets can play a role in the public housing system , our examination of the hope vi program and other work has identified examples of leveraging federal funds with funds from a variety of other public and private sources . hud encourages phas to use their hope vi grants to leverage funding from other sources to increase the number of affordable housing units developed at project sites . the examples we have found include private funding for both capital projects and the provision of supportive services . phas may utilize community service organizations to assist public housing residents . work we have done on federal housing programs that benefit the elderly , as well as recent work focused on public housing for the elderly and residents with disabilities , identified examples of supportive services being offered or provided to public housing residents . such services may be provided through hud grants as well as through partnerships between phas and community - based nonprofit organizations . under the u. s. housing act of 1937 , as amended , congress created the federal public housing program to provide decent and safe rental housing for eligible low - income families , the elderly , and persons with disabilities . hud administers the program with phas , typically local agencies created under state law that manage housing for low - income residents at rents they can afford . agencies that participate in the program contract with hud to provide housing to eligible low - income households and , in return , receive financial assistance from hud . public housing comes in all sizes and types , from scattered single - family houses to high - rise apartments . in 1992 , congress established the hope vi program , which is administered by hud .