human sources . the human fda sources that predict draws upon include fda officials who compile and report data based on their knowledge of products , firms , and other elements of imported shipments , such as country of origin . for example , certain predict rules use fda's knowledge and experience to determine the inherent risk of certain food products , and certain other predict rules draw from data reported by fda entry reviewers about the past record of products or firms . according to fda officials , predict also uses data from sources outside of fda , including domestic sources , such as databases from states and other federal agencies . for example , predict uses data from cbp . specifically , cbp collects entry data from importers for products being imported into the united states and electronically transfers the data to fda . predict also uses data from other federal agencies , such as from nmfs . nmfs maintains a list of approved seafood establishments , based on its fee - for - service inspections , on its website and may provide this list electronically to fda upon request . however , fda only requests information from nmfs on an occasional , as - needed basis . for example , fda requested information from nmfs in 2010 during the gulf of mexico oil spill . more recently , fda requested nmfs audit reports and facility approvals for certain overseas locations . fda officials told us that predict also uses data from foreign sources , such as foreign governments . specifically , fda's domestic and overseas offices obtain information from foreign regulatory counterparts on an occasional , as - needed basis about food safety in their respective countries and provide summary information to ora that may be used in predict . fda officials told us that the agency may receive nonpublic information from foreign governments only in cases where formal arrangements called confidentiality commitments are in place . of the more than 230 entities from which the united states imports food , fda has 39 foods - related cooperative arrangements with 24 foreign governments — including 1 arrangement with the european union , which has 28 member countries . fda officials told us that they are in the process of developing additional cooperative arrangements . an fda office that is involved in obtaining information from foreign regulatory counterparts is oip , which has offices in the united states and abroad that help obtain foreign scientific and regulatory information by coordinating with foreign regulators or accessing foreign media sources . one country covered by oip's office of regional and country affairs is japan . in march 2011 , after a 9.0 magnitude earthquake and subsequent tsunami in japan , the fukushima daiichi nuclear power plant suffered extensive damage . the office of regional and country affairs coordinated with the japanese government to identify japanese exports that have a high risk of contamination . as a result , fda issued import alert 99-33: “detention without physical examination of products from japan due to radionuclide contamination.” this alert informs fda field personnel that they may detain without physical examination certain food shipments from japan .