however , these limits are not specific to ssns . see appendix i for more information on these laws . we reviewed selected legislative documents of 18 states and found that at least 6 states have enacted their own legislation to restrict either the display or use of ssns by the private sector . notably , in 2001 , california enacted senate bill ( sb ) 168 , restricting private sector use of ssns . agencies responsible for collecting and maintaining data for statistical programs that are required by statute , make use of ssns . in some cases , these data are compiled using information provided for another purpose . for example , the bureau of the census prepares annual population estimates for states and counties using individual income tax return data linked over time by ssn to determine immigration rates between localities . ssns also provide government agencies and others with an effective mechanism for linking data on program participation with data from other sources to help evaluate the outcomes or effectiveness of government programs . in some cases , records containing ssns are sometimes matched across multiple agency or program databases . the notice will contain information that could be useful to individuals choosing a health plan , doctor , or other service provided . patients will be generally asked to sign or otherwise acknowledge receipt of the privacy notice . public sector entities also rely extensively on ssns . these agencies often obtain ssns for compliance with federal laws and regulations and for their own agencies' purposes . we found that federal , state , and county government agencies rely extensively on the ssn to manage records , verify benefit eligibility , collect outstanding debt , conduct research and program evaluations , and verify information provided to state drivers' licensing agencies . given that ssns are often the identifier of choice among individuals seeking to create false identities , these agencies are taking steps to safeguard ssns . yet despite these actions , ssns appear in records displayed to the public such as documents that record financial transactions or court documents . in a previous report , we proposed that congress consider developing a unified approach to safeguarding ssns used in all levels of government and particularly those displayed in public records , and we continue to believe that this approach has merit . all users must have a permissible purpose under the fcra to obtain a consumer report ( 15 usc 1681b ) .