va agreed with our recommendations . in a july 2018 testimony we concluded that va had updated its plan and taken some steps to address aspects of these four recommendations , but further steps were needed . my statement today addresses va's recent progress in implementing the four recommendations in our march 2018 report , what aspects of those recommendations va has yet to address , and the risks these gaps pose for successful implementation of appeals reform . for this statement , we reviewed va's most recent progress reports on its appeals reform plan , dated august and november 2018 , and information we received from va officials about steps taken to implement our march 2018 recommendations . we assessed va's schedules and supporting documentation against applicable best practices in gao's schedule assessment guide . we also interviewed va officials and reviewed information related to va's progress in addressing related recommendations from work that we conducted prior to enactment of the act . the work upon which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . va's process for deciding veterans' eligibility for disability compensation begins when a veteran submits a claim to va. staff in one of vba's 57 regional offices assist the veteran by gathering additional evidence , such as military and medical records , that is needed to evaluate the claim . based on this evidence , vba decides whether the veteran is entitled to compensation and , if so , how much . a veteran dissatisfied with the initial claim decision can generally appeal within 1 year from the date of the notification letter sent by vba . under the current appeals process ( now referred to by va as the legacy process ) , an appeal begins with the veteran filing a notice of disagreement . vba then re - examines the case and generally issues a statement of the case that represents its decision . a veteran dissatisfied with vba's decision can file an appeal with the board . in filing that appeal , the veteran can indicate whether a board hearing is desired . before the board reviews the appeal , vba prepares the file and certifies it as ready for board review . if the veteran requests a hearing to present new evidence or arguments , the board will hold a hearing by videoconference or at a local vba regional office . the board reviews the evidence and either issues a decision to grant or deny the veteran's appeal or refers the appeal back to vba for further work . according to va's appeals plan , va intends to implement the act by february 2019 , by replacing the current appeals process with a process offering veterans who are dissatisfied with vba's decision on their claim five options . specifically , we reported that the plan did not ( 1 ) establish timeliness goals for two of the three board options ( i.e.