taking no action . kcp determined that taking no action did not align with nnsa's overall complex transformation goals or commitments that nnsa's deputy administrator made to congress to modernize the facility . according to kcp officials , taking no action would also result in annual operating costs that are about $100 million higher than necessary beyond fiscal year 2013 , over half of which would be related to facility maintenance . renovating adjacent gsa facilities . kcp determined that renovating adjacent gsa facilities was feasible and the least costly alternative in terms of construction costs , but it posed several problems . for example , renovating the 70-year - old facility would require extensive modification of electrical , heating , and cooling systems , which would require moving , penetrating , or bypassing concrete walls , floors , and ceilings . kcp officials stated that this would be difficult and time - consuming , and the considerable expense would be of questionable worth for such an old facility . also , the adjacent facility is located in an area susceptible to flooding . further , kcp officials stated that this option presented schedule risks . for example , multiple tenants in the gsa facility would need to relocate , and any delays in their relocations could cascade to the renovation process . purchasing or leasing other available facilities in the kansas city area . kcp officials stated that they could not identify any other facilities in the region that were adequate for the kcp mission . in light of these constraints , nnsa officials determined that building a new facility was the best option . to identify a specific location for the new facility , kcp officials also told us that they considered nearby sites as well as sites outside of the kansas city area . in particular , nnsa's office of transformation asked science applications international corporation — a support contactor — to prepare an independent assessment of moving the nonnuclear production facilities from kcp to another site in the nuclear weapons complex . in examining seven other active nnsa sites in the nuclear weapons complex , the study determined that albuquerque , new mexico , presented the highest potential for cost savings because sandia — the primary design laboratory for nonnuclear components – – has a location there . however , the study concluded that constructing the new facility in albuquerque would not allow nnsa to recover the cost of moving the operation — reaching a “break even” point — by the end of the period considered in the study — about 20 years . the study also determined that relocating operations away from kansas city would be expensive because staff would have to relocate , new staff would have to be trained , and critical expertise would be lost . ultimately , based on kcp's analysis , nnsa decided to build its new facility on an available site in kansas city about 8 miles from the existing facility that is not on a flood plain . to determine how to finance the construction of the new facility , kcp analyzed options to determine which best met nnsa's goals and presented acceptably low risks .