a provision of h.r . 2881 would allow airports to increase pfcs to a maximum of $7 , while an s. 1300 provision would retain the cap at $4.50 . increasing the cap on pfcs would generate more revenue , especially for larger airports . a $7 pfc could generate nearly $2 billion in additional revenues for airports assuming all airports imposed the maximum pfc ( see table 2 ) . ( 3 ) what issues could affect the overall cost of nextgen ? my remarks are based on recent gao reports and testimonies on faa's current funding structure , funding options that might address those concerns , and nextgen . for these reports and testimonies , we reviewed relevant literature , examined faa data and forecasts , and interviewed faa and other government agency officials , aviation industry group representatives , and academic and financial experts . in addition , for this statement , we analyzed provisions of the reauthorization proposals dealing with funding faa and nextgen and discussed them with faa officials and aviation industry group representatives . we conducted our work during july 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . although there have been fluctuations in its funding sources , faa has been supported by the current structure for decades . the agency is primarily funded by the trust fund ( 82 percent ) — which receives revenues from a series of excise taxes paid by users of the national airspace system — and by general fund revenues . these excise taxes are associated with purchases of airline tickets and aviation fuel , as well as the shipment of cargo , and are scheduled to expire september 30 , 2007 . trust fund revenues are available for use subject to appropriation . including interest earned on its balances , the trust fund received about $11.2 billion in 2006 . in addition , about $2.6 billion was appropriated for fiscal year 2006 from the general fund for faa operations . table 1 shows the distribution of trust fund revenues for 2005 by source . the trust fund was established by the airport and airway revenue act of 1970 to help fund the development of a nationwide airport and airway system and to fund investments in air traffic control facilities . it provides all of the funding for three of faa's four accounts , including ( 1 ) the facilities and equipment ( f&e ) account , which funds technological improvements to the air traffic control system ; ( 2 ) the research , engineering , and development ( re&d ) account , which funds research on issues related to aviation safety , mobility , and the environment as well as most of faa's contribution to jpdo ; and ( 3 ) the airport improvement program ( aip ) , which provides grants for construction and safety projects at airports . in addition , at various times during its history , the trust fund has provided all or some portion of the funding for faa's operations account . in 2006 , expenditures from the trust fund totaling $11.2 billion were made among the four accounts as shown in figure 1 .