gao - 14-367 . washington , d.c.: may 1 , 2014 . ( see app . i for details on the status of each of the 24 recommendations we have made concerning the doe loan programs ) . in 2007 , 2008 , and 2010 — which covered the early stages of the lgp — we made 15 recommendations to address numerous issues where doe had moved forward with the program before key elements were in place . doe implemented 11 of our 15 recommendations from this period . for example: in our february 2007 report , we found that doe's actions had focused on expediting program implementation — such as soliciting preapplications for loan guarantees — rather than ensuring the department had in place the critical policies , procedures , and mechanisms necessary to better ensure the program's success . we made five recommendations addressing these concerns . doe agreed with and implemented all 5 of these recommendations by establishing key policies and procedures and issuing final program regulations , among other things . in contrast , in our july 2010 report , we found that , among other things , doe had favored some applicants by , for example , deviating from its stated review procedures . doe did not concur with — and has not taken actions to address — our recommendation that it take steps to ensure that its implementation of the lgp treats applicants consistently . as congress expanded the doe loan programs to include 1705 projects and atvm , we issued additional reports in 2011 , 2012 , and 2014 highlighting our concerns about doe making loans and disbursing funds without having sufficient expertise and performance measures , among other things . our reports included recommendations to address these issues from february 2011 through may 2014 . to date , doe has implemented four of the nine recommendations but has not addressed the remaining five . for example: in february 2011 , we found that doe was using atvm staff with largely financial , and not technical , expertise to evaluate the progress of projects to produce more fuel - efficient passenger vehicles and their components . we recommended that doe accelerate efforts to engage sufficient engineering expertise to verify that borrowers are delivering projects as required by the loan agreements . doe implemented our recommendation by changing its budgeting practices for monitoring atvm loans to better ensure that funds would be available to engage independent engineering expertise ; doe also changed its policy for engaging technical expertise to align with the title xvii lgp policy .  also in our february 2011 report , we found that doe did not have sufficient performance measures that would enable the department to fully assess whether the atvm program had achieved its program goals , including protecting taxpayers' financial interests . we recommended that doe develop sufficient and quantifiable performance measures for its program goals . doe disagreed with this recommendation and took no steps to implement it . as a result , congress does not have important information on whether the funds doe has spent so far are furthering the program's goals and , consequently , whether the program warrants continued support .