iii ) . both of these programs were operating at the time of our review . these steps range from developing a recovery plan for the abb in 1991 to planning to determine , in 2017 , whether fws will ( 1 ) keep the abb on the endangered species list ; ( 2 ) reclassify the species' status from endangered to threatened , also known as downlisting ; or ( 3 ) delist the abb . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to determine what is known about fws's compensatory mitigation strategies and how fws has used in - lieu fee programs and conservation banks for the abb , we reviewed agency documentation related to compensatory mitigation , including agency guidance and policies . we conducted a site visit in april 2016 to fws's oklahoma ecological services field office , which is fws's lead field office for the abb , and the tallgrass prairie preserve in oklahoma , where the nature conservancy has conserved abb habitat . we requested data from fws regarding all current fws in - lieu fee programs for endangered and threatened species . we checked the data we received for missing data and other errors and determined that the data were not sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we also reviewed related documentation from fws and other federal agencies , such as the bureau of land management , the oklahoma department of transportation , and conservation organizations involved in the in - lieu fee programs . we interviewed representatives from the american burying beetle conservation bank and the muddy boggy conservation bank , which both operate for the conservation of the abb . we also analyzed fws data on the number of conservation banks for all species listed under the esa , which is reported in the u.s. army corps of engineers' regulatory in - lieu fee and bank information tracking system ( ribits ) . to assess the reliability of data in ribits , we interviewed agency officials and reviewed agency documentation and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . appendix i contains a more detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from november 2015 to december 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . this section discusses the organization of fws , the provisions of the esa , and the life cycle of the abb . among its duties , fws is responsible for administering the esa for certain species , including terrestrial species , such as the abb .