they vary in a number of respects . for example , 2 are large ( the university of phoenix has nearly 170,000 students and the university of maryland university college has nearly 30,000 ) , while 5 have fewer than 1,000 students . six of the 14 are private for - profit schools , 5 are private nonprofit schools , and 3 are public . thirteen of the schools are in education's demonstration program , and without the waivers provided under this program , 8 of the 13 would be ineligible to participate in federal student aid programs because 50 percent or more of their students are involved in distance education . one school that is not part of the demonstration program faces a potential problem in the near future because of its growing distance education programs . what has education's demonstration program revealed with respect to the continued appropriateness of these restrictions ? to what extent do accreditation agencies include distance education in their reviews of schools or programs ? as they evaluate distance education and campus - based programs , to what extent do accreditation agencies assess student - learning outcomes ? to address the two questions about current statutory and regulatory restrictions on federal aid , we obtained information from education and other experts on how many of the over 6,000 postsecondary institutions had been affected by these provisions or might be affected in the future — that is , schools that might reach the limitations on the size of their distance education programs if their growth in this area continues . we interviewed officials at each of the institutions whose eligibility for the student aid programs had been affected or could be affected by the restrictions to determine the extent to which their ability to offer federal student aid to their students had been impacted . we also interviewed officials at education who are responsible for assessing distance education issues and reviewed monitoring reports on participating institutions involved in the demonstration program and annual reports to the congress . to address questions related to the work of accrediting agencies , we focused on the policies of seven accrediting agencies that collectively are responsible for more than two - thirds of all distance education programs . we evaluated the extent that the agencies assess student learning outcomes using criteria that we had developed in a variety of past work addressing performance and accountability issues . we conducted our work between october 2002 and february 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for further explanation of our approach and methodology . distance education is a growing force in postsecondary education , and its rise has implications for the federal student aid programs . studies by education indicate that enrollments in distance education quadrupled between 1995 and 2001 . all seven agencies had a policy stating that the standards they would apply in assessing a school's distance education programs would be the same as the standards used for assessing campus - based programs . by the 2000-2001 school year , nearly 90 percent of public 4-year institutions were offering distance education courses , according to education's figures .