ii. ) in california , the average period for approval was 14 months , excluding smaller plants that were approved under the state's temporary 21-day emergency siting process . approvals for large plants — those with generating capacity of more than 200 megawatts — took about 16 months . pennsylvania has no single state agency specifically responsible for approving new power plant projects . as with other industrial projects , power plant developers must work through ( 1 ) the pennsylvania department of environmental protection to obtain air quality and water quality permits and ( 2 ) local government agencies to obtain zoning and other land - use permits . in addition , developers in eastern or central pennsylvania would have to obtain permits from the delaware river basin commission or the susquehanna river basin commission , respectively , for access to river water . if applicable , federal and state agencies review the application for compliance with the endangered species act . ( see app . iii. ) the primary permit needed for approval to construct a power plant is the air quality permit , and from 1995 through 2001 , the average time needed to obtain this permit was about 14 months . approvals for plants larger than 200 megawatts took about 13 months . similarly , texas has no single state agency specifically responsible for approving new power plant projects . instead , the texas natural resource conservation commission is responsible for approving environmental permits and in some cases , municipal governments regulate land use through the zoning process . if applicable , federal and state agencies review the application for compliance with the endangered species act . ( see app . iv. ) for plants approved from 1995 through 2001 , developers obtained an air quality permit — the primary permit required — in 8 months in texas . approvals for plants larger than 200 megawatts also took about 8 months . table 1 shows the time it has taken to complete the approval process in each of the three states . as the table shows , the time to complete the review process was less predictable in california than in the other two states — approval for 5 of california's 21 medium - to large - scale projects took 18 months or longer . the gas - fired power plants now being built emit nitrogen oxides , which directly contribute to ozone pollution . to control these emissions , air pollution control requirements for these power plants vary according to the planned location and the amount of the plants' emissions , as well as whether a state has stricter standards than the federal standards . in general , large power plants planned for an area that does not meet federal air quality standards — known as non - attainment areas — must obtain a non - attainment new source review permit . this permit requires a new power plant to install the most advanced pollution control equipment and offset the new plant's emission of pollutants by reducing emissions elsewhere in the area .