this requirement may pose problems for some states . before the events of september 11 , 2001 , odp required states to develop homeland security strategies that would provide a roadmap of where each state should target grant funds . to assist the states in developing these strategies , state agencies and local jurisdictions were directed to conduct needs assessments on the basis of their own threat and vulnerability assessments . the needs assessments were to include related equipment , training , exercise , technical assistance , and research and development needs . in addition , state and local officials were to identify current and required capabilities of first responders to help determine gaps in capabilities . in fiscal year 2003 , odp directed the states to update their homeland security strategies to better reflect post - september 11 realities and to identify progress on the priorities originally outlined in the initial strategies . as required by statute , completion and approval of these updated strategies were a condition for awarding fiscal year 2004 grant funds . odp has also revised its approach on how states and localities report on grant spending and use . several factors could affect how these things are done in the future . for example , recent congressional proposals have addressed the most appropriate means to allocate grant funds to states . in addition , the issuance of homeland security presidential directive 8 ( hspd - 8 ) in december 2003 — calling for , among other things , a new national preparedness goal and performance measure that pertained to “all hazards” — placed first responder grant programs , including those managed by odp , into a broader context that is to consider the nation's readiness to respond to all major events , including natural disasters as well as acts of terrorism . we are currently conducting a review of dhs's implementation of hspd - 8 and expect to issue our report in the summer of 2005 , looking at how dhs is working with state and local governments and first responders to implement it . my statement today provides information on the history and evolution of the two largest grant programs , particularly with respect to odp grant award procedures ; timelines for awarding and transferring grant funds ; and accountability for effective use of grant funds . my comments are based on our report on the management of first responder grant programs as well as updated information on dhs's progress since the report's issuance in addressing its challenges . the department of justice established the odp in 1998 within the office of justice programs to assist state and local first responders in acquiring specialized training and equipment needed to respond to and manage terrorist incidents involving weapons of mass destruction . odp , which was transferred to dhs upon its creation in march 2003 , has been a principal source of domestic preparedness grant funds . these grants are a means of achieving an important goal — enhancing the ability of first responders to prevent , prepare for , respond to , and recover from terrorist incidents with well - planned and well - coordinated efforts that involve police , fire , emergency medical , public health , and other personnel from multiple jurisdictions .