attorneys and u.s . probation offices . in seattle , gsa had to redesign the courthouse to include three more courtrooms when it could not locate the new courthouse adjacent to the existing courthouse as planned . under the new plan , the circuit courtrooms remained in the existing courthouse building and the bankruptcy courts were included in the new building . this change was required after gsa was unable to reach an agreement with the city of seattle on relocating the city library , which was located on the preferred site . the scope of two courthouse projects increased to provide for historic preservation work that gsa had not anticipated when it requested design funding for the projects . the original design concept for the erie courthouse project called for the preservation and incorporation of a historic public library building into the courthouse design . according to gsa officials and the project files we reviewed , additional preservation work was required when an old clothing store on the site became eligible for historic status . rather than demolish the store as originally planned , gsa incorporated it into the project design . this decision increased the project's total cost by about $1.3 million . procuring the gulfport project site , as discussed above , was contingent on preserving a historic high school . this requirement increased the scope of work for both the design and construction phases because , as shown in figure 5 , three of the old school's four exterior walls had to be preserved . according to our analysis of gsa data , preserving the exterior walls and retrofitting a new structure within the walls of the old school increased the project's design costs by 14 percent . changes in tenants' space requirements increased the scope of work for three of the projects we reviewed . marshals service ( usms ) provides security for the federal judiciary , including physical protection of courthouses and prisoner transport , and was a tenant in each of the courthouses we reviewed . attorneys offices are also often located in courthouse facilities . in cleveland and seattle , the u.s . attorneys offices initially resisted relocation to the new courthouses because they preferred their current leased spaces . in addition , for the seattle u. s. attorneys , there were questions of whether they would have to move again at a later date as the courts' space needs grew . in denver , the usms revised its plans for the amount of office space it would occupy in the new courthouse . for these three projects , gsa had to redesign space to meet the tenant agencies' needs . according to gsa's project manager , to preserve the cleveland project's schedule , the project moved forward after an agreement could not be reached with the u.s . attorneys office on the design of its space . attorneys determined that the original space was not large enough and received authorization from the department of justice for additional space in the courthouse . this change required five floors of the courthouse to be redesigned to meet the u.s . attorneys office's requirements .