that case is ongoing . according to pilots' representatives , this fund is important to help fund capital improvements , particularly through the winter months , but they also recognize that additional clarity could be provided about its intended uses and potential limitations . in november 2018 , the coast guard issued guidance to each of the pilotage association's presidents regarding the reporting and uses of the working capital fund . specifically , the coast guard directed the associations to segregate revenues generated by this fund and place them into a separate account at least once per quarter , and further clarified that funds from this account could be applied only toward capital projects , infrastructure improvements / maintenance , and non - recurring technology purchases necessary for providing pilotage services . in 2016 , the coast guard initiated changes to its rate - setting methodology regarding how it estimates projected vessel traffic for each district and the corresponding hours worked for related pilotage services . citing a recommendation issued by the great lakes pilotage advisory committee in 2014 , the coast guard initially proposed using a rolling average of 5 years of historical shipping data to estimate traffic volume as part of its ratemaking calculations for the 2016 shipping season . however , based on public comments received on the 2016 notice of proposed rulemaking , the coast guard increased this number to 10 years of historical data . according to the coast guard , this change was implemented to further reduce rate volatility and help remedy traffic overestimates that occurred in the past , largely based on industry projections . given the increasing volume of actual great lakes - seaway vessel traffic in recent years , shipping industry stakeholders contend that the 10-year rolling average used for rate - setting calculations represents an underestimate of traffic volume . responding to the 2018 notice of proposed rulemaking , industry commenters asserted that the 10-year average included a period of substantially depressed traffic volume caused by the recession in 2008-2009 , which if used to estimate future traffic volume could result in increased pilotage rates . see table 1 for a summary of the variance between actual traffic volumes during the 2017 great lakes - seaway shipping season compared with the estimates calculated using a 10-year rolling average . in the november 2018 complaint , shipping industry organizations argued that the coast guard's use of 10 years of traffic data , in contrast with the shorter periods used to determine expenses and manning levels , was arbitrary and capricious , among other things , and that case is ongoing . the process and sources used by the coast guard to develop a target compensation benchmark for great lakes pilots have been subject to ongoing disagreement among stakeholders . prior to 2016 , the coast guard used compensation data for first mates on domestic great lakes vessels as the basis for comparison . enhanced transparency of the working capital fund . members of the shipping industry also identified an issue related to the “working capital” component of the rate - setting process .