no analytical or documentary support was provided . in estimating the cost for the autonomous inspection and repair and rescue mission capabilities , nasa used a 30 to 50 percent uncertainty factor because of the very high uncertainty in the cost of developing and conducting a mission that is not adequately defined — i.e. , nasa's estimate of $425 million plus 50 percent equals the $638 million upper range shown in the table above for these two items added together . as with the other estimates for which we requested analytical and documentary support , nasa was not able to provide it because the agency could not do a risk analysis without a design solution , according to a nasa official . nasa could not provide the requested information . further , nasa recognizes that there are many uncertainties that could change the current estimate . the 2004 nasa cost estimating handbook states that cost analysts should document the results of cost estimates during the entire cost estimating process and that the documentation should provide sufficient information on how the estimate was developed so that independent cost analysts could reproduce the estimate . according to the handbook , the value of the documentation and analysis is in providing an understanding of the cost elements so that decision - makers can make informed decisions . to accomplish our work , we visited nasa headquarters , washington , d.c. ; and goddard space flight center , maryland . we performed our review from march through september 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . staff making key contributions to this report were jerry herley , erin schoening , karen sloan , and jonathan watkins . the board's 15 return to flight recommendations necessary to implement before the shuttle fleet can return to flight primarily address the physical causes of the accident and include eliminating external tank debris shedding and developing a capability to inspect and make emergency repairs to the orbiter's thermal protection system . nasa publishes periodic updates to its plan for returning the shuttle to flight to demonstrate the agency's progress in implementing the caib recommendations . the most recent update is dated august 27 , 2004 . this update identifies the first shuttle flight as occurring in spring 2005 . nasa does not currently have a definitive cost estimate for servicing the hubble telescope using the shuttle . the agency focused on safety concerns related to a servicing mission by the space shuttle in deciding not to proceed , and did not develop a cost estimate . at our request nasa prepared an estimate of the funding needed for a hubble servicing mission by the space shuttle . nasa could not provide documented support for its estimate . the agency recognizes that there are many uncertainties that could change the estimate . nasa has now begun to explore the costs and benefits of various servicing alternatives , including robotic servicing , which should enable nasa to make a more informed decision regarding hubble's future . at our request nasa began development of an estimate of the funding needed for a shuttle servicing mission to the hubble .