relocation . the settlement act mandated that onhir submit a report , including a detailed plan , to congress concerning the relocation of households and members of each tribe from lands partitioned to the other tribe . onhir stated that it has no authority to require any person to leave the land that was awarded to the other tribe . the act instructed that the relocation process be completed 5 years after the relocation plan took effect . the report and plan , which onhir transmitted to congress in april 1981 , provided details on relocation of households and their members , including generating names of those residing on the partitioned lands and identifying sites for relocation , among other things . the relocation was scheduled to be completed by july 1986 . specifically , the relocation benefits include $130,000 , adjusted to current construction and housing development costs , for a household of three or fewer and $136,000 for a household of four or more to obtain a decent , safe , and sanitary replacement home , in addition to moving expenses and , within the first few years , bonus payments provided within the first years following the relocation plan . because there were far fewer hopi households residing on lands partitioned to the navajo nation , almost all of the households relocated ( about 99 percent ) have been for navajo families . resettlement land taken into trust for the navajo nation . the settlement act as amended authorizes and directs the secretary of the interior to take certain lands into trust for the navajo nation , which would become part of the navajo reservation . the 1980 amendments to the settlement act required the border of any parcel taken into trust to be within 18 miles of the navajo reservation's then boundary . most of the lands taken into trust in arizona pursuant to the settlement act as amended are known as the new lands . navajos living on hopi partitioned lands could choose to relocate to the new lands , as well as other areas on the navajo reservation or off - reservation . administration and use of acquired trust land . pursuant to the settlement act as amended , onhir administers these lands taken into trust for the navajo nation until relocation is complete . in contrast , interior administers other land the federal government holds in trust for indian tribes , including the navajo nation . in addition , the settlement act as amended requires the lands taken into trust for the navajo nation to be used solely for the benefit of navajo families — known as relocatees — that at the time of the settlement act's enactment had been residing on lands partitioned to the hopi . leasing of acquired trust land . the navajo and hopi indian relocation amendments of 1988 transferred responsibility for issuing leases and rights - of - way for housing and related facilities on the new lands from interior to onhir . in july 1990 , onhir issued procedures for the leasing of new lands , including homesite and business leases , in section 1810 of its management manual . onhir's regulations specify that the agency's operation is to be governed by a management manual .