child maltreatment 2001 . washington , d.c. , 2003 . u.s. department of health and human services , administration for children and families , administration on children , youth and families , children's bureau . child welfare outcomes 1999: annual report . washington , d.c. , n.d.. u.s. department of health and human services , office of inspector general . adoption and foster care analysis and reporting system ( afcars ) : challenges and limitations . washington , d.c. , march 2003 . child welfare and juvenile justice: federal agencies could play a stronger role in helping states reduce the number of children placed solely to obtain mental health services . gao - 03-397 . washington , d.c.: april 21 , 2003 . child welfare: hhs could play a greater role in helping child welfare agencies recruit and retain staff . we obtained and reviewed 23 reports . the remaining reports were not available for review because hhs has not yet completed the report or shared the results with the state . most of the sacwis reports were considered drafts since many states are in the process of resolving issues with completing their systems . we reviewed afcars assessment reports from 6 of the 8 states assessed by hhs — arkansas , connecticut , new mexico , texas , vermont , and wyoming . hhs conducted reviews in delaware and west virginia after we completed our analysis . we did not review any of the eight pilot review reports since these were not final reports and hhs plans to conduct official reviews in these states . these afcars assessment reports were analyzed to understand the breadth of on - site assistance hhs provides to states during the review and to identify common data collection and reporting difficulties among states . finally , we talked with officials in 6 of the 8 states that had an afcars review about their experiences during the review and child welfare experts . to identify practices state and local child welfare agencies are using to help ensure the accuracy , timeliness , and completeness of child welfare data we interviewed state and local child welfare officials on our site visits and inquired about the practices they are employing . we also included questions on practices and lessons learned in our survey . in addition , we spoke with numerous child welfare experts , including individuals from the national resource center for information technology in child welfare , the child welfare league of america , and the american public human services association . in addition to those named above , leah dewolf and rachel seid made key contributions to this report . avrum ashery , patrick dibattista , barbara johnson , valerie melvin , and rebecca shea also provided key technical assistance . the american public welfare association . statewide automated child welfare information systems: survey of state progress . washington , d.c. , july 1997 . the american public welfare association . child welfare information systems: some concepts and their implications . washington , d.c. , july 1994 . the american public welfare association . survey of state child welfare information systems: status of afcars and sacwis . washington , d.c. , april 1995 .