credible . we found the hpib cost estimate partially met the best practices associated with being credible . a credible cost estimate should analyze the sensitivity of the program's expected cost to changes among key cost - driving assumptions and risks . it should also quantify the cost impact of risks related to assumptions changing and variability in the underlying data used to create the cost estimate . credible cost estimates should also be cross - checked internally and reconciled with an independent cost estimate that is performed by an outside group . these two best practices ensure that the estimate has been checked for any potential bias . our review of the hpib cost estimate determined it partially met the best practices for being credible due to the following: exclusions of major costs from sensitivity analysis and risk and uncertainty analysis . the cost estimators conducted sensitivity analysis as well as risk and uncertainty analysis on only a small portion of the total lifecycle costs . for both the sensitivity analysis and risk and uncertainty analysis , we found that navsea only modeled cost variation in the detail design and construction portion of the program and excluded from its analyses any risk impacts related to the remainder of the acquisition , operating and support , and disposal phases , which altogether comprise about 75 percent of the lifecycle cost . production design . generating work instructions that show detailed system information and including guidance for subcontractors and suppliers , installation drawings , schedules , material lists , and lists of prefabricated materials and parts . shipbuilding best practices we identified in 2009 found that design stability is achieved upon completion of the basic and functional designs . without performing a sensitivity analysis on the entire life cycle cost of the three ships , it is not possible for navsea to identify key elements affecting the overall cost estimate . further , without performing a risk and uncertainty analysis on the entire life cycle cost of the three ships , it is not possible for navsea to determine a level of confidence associated with the overall cost estimate . by not quantifying important risks , navsea may have underestimated the range of possible costs for about three - quarters of the entire program . lack of applied correlation in the risk and uncertainty analysis . in its independent assessment of the hpib cost estimate , the dhs cost analysis division similarly found that the results of the risk and uncertainty analysis may understate the range of possible cost outcomes for the hpib . the dhs assessment noted that navsea did not use applied correlation — which links costs for related items so that they rise and fall together during the analysis — in its cost model . according to a joint agency handbook on cost risk and uncertainty , applied correlation helps to ensure that cost estimates do not understate the possible variation in total program costs . omitting applied correlation when assessing a cost estimate for risk can cause an understated range of possible program costs and create a false sense of confidence in the cost estimate .