we have previously issued two reports in response to this provision . subsequently , section 880 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2019 included a provision that we report on the number of instances where civilian agencies used the lpta process for contracts exceeding $5 million , as well as provide an explanation of how acquisition officials considered the six criteria in making a determination to use the lpta process . this report , which addresses both provisions , describes ( 1 ) the status of regulatory changes required by the defense and civilian provisions for using the lpta process ; and ( 2 ) the extent to which dod and selected civilian agencies used the lpta process to competitively award contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more in fiscal year 2018 , and what they bought using this process . to address both objectives and select the dod components and civilian agencies included in our scope , we used data from the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) to identify the dod components and civilian agencies that awarded the highest number of contracts and orders in fiscal year 2018 that were reported as competitively awarded and valued at $5 million or more . for dod , we focused our review on the top four dod components — army , navy , air force , and defense logistics agency ( dla ) — which accounted for about 5,400 — or about 88 percent — of all dod contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more that were reported as competitively awarded in fiscal year 2018 . for civilian agencies , we focused our review on the top five agencies — the departments of veterans affairs ( va ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and agriculture ( usda ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) — which accounted for about 3,000 — or about 66 percent — of all civilian agency contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more that were reported as competitively awarded in fiscal year 2018 . to describe the status of regulatory changes required by the defense and civilian provisions for using the lpta process , we obtained information on agency officials' efforts to amend the dfars and the far . we determined that all the data we used were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . when using the lpta process , the agency specifies the evaluation factors that establish the requirements of acceptability in the solicitation . firms submit their proposals and the agency determines which of the proposals meet those requirements . no trade - offs between cost or price and non - cost factors ( for example , technical capabilities or past performance ) are permitted . non - cost factors are rated on an acceptable or unacceptable basis . the award is made based on the lowest priced , technically acceptable proposal submitted to the government . in contrast , agencies may elect to use the trade - off process in acquisitions where the requirement is less definitive , more development work is required , or the acquisition has a greater performance risk .