iii. ) transplant specific purpose funds are used to support program overhead costs ( infrastructure and maintenance ) associated with organ transplants performed at vatcs . ( see table 9 in app . iii. ) according to vha data , over this 5-year period , 50 of these transplants were authorized using title 38 u.s.c . § 1703 ( “non - va medical care program” ) . the remaining three were funded using the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 ( choice act ) — totaling approximately $411,000 of the $7.9 million . va has reported that while the choice act allows vha to provide an eligible veteran transplant care at a transplant center in the community , generally at medicare rates , organ procurement is only partially covered at medicare rates . this has resulted in community providers being less willing to provide transplant services for vha patients through community care programs . from fiscal years 2014 through 2018 , vatcs received 10,494 referrals from vha medical centers . appendix i: department of veterans affairs transplant centers providing solid organ transplants ( printable ) . we analyzed national transplant survival rates by organ type using data from the scientific registry of transplant recipients . all transplant facilities across the united states , including department of veterans affairs transplant centers , provide data to this database . table 4 shows the national transplant survival rates by organ for fiscal years 2014 through 2018 . annually , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) allocates most of its appropriations for health care services to the veterans integrated service networks within the veterans health administration ( vha ) through a model called the veterans equitable resource allocation ( vera ) . the vera model is designed to fund patient care based on a methodology that develops set , or “capitated,” rates for different groups or categories of veterans with similar resource needs based on the complexity of their medical conditions . see figure 2 for an overview of the five steps . step 1: initial screening and referral . a veteran seeking an organ transplant begins the process by having an initial screening at a referring vha medical center . if vha medical center providers determine that the veteran is a potential candidate for an organ transplant , they may prepare a formal referral to a vatc . to prepare a referral , the providers use an organ - specific checklist and other tools developed by vha's national surgery office with input from other experts in the field to perform a standard set of assessments of the veteran's clinical , social , and mental health status . in addition , vha officials told us that the initial screening includes an assessment of the veteran's social and family support ; for example , identifying a caregiver who can accompany and stay with the veteran throughout the transplant process . in addition , there are organ - specific criteria , such as negative tobacco smoking screens for veterans seeking a heart transplant , and up - to - date dialysis information for liver and kidney transplant candidates . vha officials noted that the providers may consult with staff at a vatc as needed during the initial screening phase .