( app . ii contains education's comments on a draft of our report ) . gpra is intended to shift the focus of government decisionmaking , management , and accountability from activities and processes to the results and outcomes achieved by federal programs . new and valuable information on the plans , goals , and strategies of federal agencies has been provided since federal agencies began implementing gpra . under gpra , annual performance plans are to clearly inform the congress and the public of ( 1 ) the annual performance goals for agencies' major programs and activities , ( 2 ) the measures that will be used to gauge performance , ( 3 ) the strategies and resources required to achieve the performance goals , and ( 4 ) the procedures that will be used to verify and validate performance information . these annual plans , issued soon after transmittal of the president's budget , provide a direct linkage between an agency's longer - term goals and mission contained in its strategic plan and its day - to - day activities . annual performance reports are to subsequently report on the degree to which performance goals were met . the issuance of the agencies' performance reports , due by march 31 , represents a newer and potentially more substantive phase in the implementation of gpra — the opportunity to assess federal agencies' actual performance for the prior fiscal year and to consider what steps are needed to improve performance and reduce costs in the future . education's mission is to ensure equal access to education and to promote educational excellence throughout the nation . this year's interim performance report listed the following four department - wide strategic goals: ( 1 ) help all children reach challenging academic standards so that they are prepared for responsible citizenship , further learning , and productive employment ; ( 2 ) build a solid foundation for learning for all children ; ( 3 ) ensure access to postsecondary education and lifelong learning ; and ( 4 ) make education a high - performance organization by focusing on results , service quality , and customer satisfaction . for each goal , education has established various objectives , and for each objective there were indicators with which to measure its progress . additionally , in the interim fiscal year 2000 program performance report , education presents program data for about 180 education programs . this program report includes some information on planned fiscal year 2002 performance ( eg , program - level targeted goals ) and a section explaining how education plans to address some of the management challenges identified by gao and others . where applicable , in addition to the information in the interim performance report , we used indicator data from the interim program performance report to help assess education's progress in achieving the selected outcomes . additionally , we used the management challenges section to help identify progress and planned activities in this area . this section discusses our analysis of education's performance in achieving the six selected key outcomes . we will not be able to discuss strategies that education has in place to achieve these outcomes because education has not yet provided this information .