access controls . physical access controls and authentication requirements limit , block , or detect inappropriate access to data , equipment , and facilities . these controls help to reduce the chances of data systems being used for malicious purposes and protect the systems from unauthorized modification , loss , or disclosure . for example: the gsa alaska telecommunications services contract states that the physical access point to the telecommunications closet must be limited to personnel with appropriate identification . in addition , this contract requires the contractor to follow agency security procedures , such as having personnel sign into and out of physical locations and abide by escort procedures . further , the contractor is required to ensure that all employees have identification that meets specific federal guidelines . the contract also states that subcontractors are subject to personal identity verification , and are to comply with applicable standards . the cms call center operations contract requires a multifactor authentication — which requires two pieces of identifying information to log in — for call center employees to remotely access sensitive government - owned data on computer systems . in addition , the contract requires all employees who have access to data systems and personally identifying information to pass a background check . further , the contract reduces the ability of employees to copy or transmit a customer's personal information by requiring the contractor to ensure a secure floor that prohibits cell phone usage or note taking on paper . according to the cms officials , the call center employees are required to leave all personal items , such as cell phones , in lockers , and the scripts they reference during calls are laminated . in addition , the supervisor on duty checks desks to ensure personal items are not present . according to cms officials these steps help protect callers' sensitive data , such as their medical information . the disa contract for the day - to - day operations for the dod information network states that the contractor must have a plan in place that includes physical security and protection of the system infrastructure . security management controls . these controls establish a framework and continuous cycle for assessing data systems for security weaknesses , implementing security procedures , and monitoring the procedures to ensure adequate protection of sensitive or critical resources . a variety of security management control requirements were included in the selected contracts . for example: the gsa networx contract , which provides a variety of network services to the federal government , states that a contractor must comply with fisma and nist standards . according to a gsa contracting official , contractors have to show that their information systems are adequately protected against cybersecurity threats before performing any services on a task order . government officials will certify the system once they agree the system is adequately protected . this certification occurs after a contract has been awarded , but before work begins . according to a government official , these systems are periodically reviewed and monitored to ensure the systems stay protected .