no causality . our econometric approach can establish correlations between state work search overpayment rate estimates and the factors we analyzed , but it cannot establish causal relationships . this limitation is especially important when it comes to interpreting the relationship between work search overpayment rate estimates and the fraction of cases for which bam auditors investigated job contacts . bam investigations can only detect work search overpayments , not prevent them , because bam investigators are reviewing cases after the payment has already been made . preventing work search overpayments is the only way to reduce the work search overpayment rates . thus , the relationship between investigation of claimant - provided contacts and work search overpayment rates likely reflects not a causal relationship but an equilibrium relationship in which claimants who know that their job contacts will be investigated are more likely to search for work , all else being equal . nongeneralizability . our results do not generalize to other time periods with different labor market conditions , different rules and regulations about unemployment insurance , or other differences . omitted variables . as discussed above , we have excluded from our models some state practices that may be associated with work search overpayments because those variables were not included in the bam data . for example , we do not account for the fact that , according to dol , some states require claimants to engage in more work search activities than other states , which could affect the likelihood that a claimant receives a work search overpayment . in addition , according to dol , some states require claimants to report their work search activities in order to continue receiving benefits , which might prevent some work search overpayments from occurring . we have also likely excluded some relevant claimant characteristics as well . for example , total income for a claimant's household and a claimant's number of dependents may affect their work search efforts . however , variables describing a claimant's household income and composition are not included in the bam data and thus are omitted from our analysis . to the extent that these factors are correlated with the factors we included , our estimates of the relationships between work search overpayment rates and the included factors could be biased . measurement error . our variables may have been measured with error , which could bias our coefficient estimates . if the measurement error is random , our coefficient estimates would be biased down , but if the measurement error is systematic , then we cannot say whether our coefficient estimates would be biased down or up . our baseline specification suggests that some state practices are associated with state work search overpayment rates estimates ( see column 1 of table 7 ) . we used the 10 percent level of significance as our threshold for statistical significance because we have a relatively small number of observations ( 259 ) . state work search overpayment rate estimates were higher in states with more cases with claimants who were required to search for work .