fig . 5 shows an example of a dp dhl packstation . customers can sign up for delivery ( free of charge to both the sender and the receiver ) and have their identity verified in person by the post . when customers want to receive parcels at a packstation , they can give the packstation as the delivery address ( instead of their home address ) . the parcel is then delivered to the packstation and the customers are notified via text message or e - mail that they have a package . what major initiatives have foreign posts implemented to improve or enhance their retail networks and what have been the results ? what modernization strategies have foreign posts used that could help inform usps and congress as they consider proposals to improve usps's financial condition and customer service ? to address our three objectives , we employed a case study approach and selected from among industrialized countries six countries based on changes in delivery and retail networks , innovations and technology ( from a literature review ) , rank of broadband usage per 100 inhabitants , nature of business or diversification , convenience and cost of travel , country population , location and size of the country , number of delivery points in 2008 ( last year data were available ) , and 2008 mail volume ( last year data were available ) . we used this information to select countries that have made changes to adapt to the changing use of mail and communication . usps generally agreed with our conclusion that it must pursue modernization and that modernization could be more quickly and effectively instituted if legal and political barriers are removed . usps suggested that we use the word “improve,” rather than “modernize” , when discussing its retail and delivery networks . usps believes some stakeholders interpret modernize to mean automate . further , usps stated that many of its modernization and optimization efforts in the areas of delivery , networks , access , and products and services have been underway for some time and that political barriers have slowed these efforts . we recognize that usps has made changes to its retail networks by transitioning to alternative retail locations , and we are evaluating these efforts in an ongoing review . however , in this report we focused not only on delivery and retail changes made by foreign posts , but also on the strategies used to address resistance to change . we thus use the term modernization to emphasize much more than automation . usps also stated that incremental steps are not going to get the usps where it needs to be to serve its customers in the 21st century . usps listed some modernization efforts it described as similar to those mentioned in this report . finally , we share usps's view that there is an urgent need for actions that will restore its financial viability and modernize it to meet the challenges of the 21st century . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the postmaster general , the chairman of the postal regulatory commission , and other interested parties .