this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . irs is in the process of taking corrective action . another key element of an effective information security program is to develop , document , and implement risk - based policies , procedures , and technical standards that govern security over an agency's computing environment . if properly implemented , policies and procedures should help reduce the risk that could come from unauthorized access or disruption of services . technical security standards provide consistent implementation guidance for each computing environment . developing , documenting , and implementing security policies are the important primary mechanisms by which management communicates its views and requirements ; these policies also serve as the basis for adopting specific procedures and technical controls . in addition , agencies need to take the actions necessary to effectively implement or execute these procedures and controls . otherwise , agency systems and information will not receive the protection that the security policies and controls should provide . a basic element of cryptography is encryption . encryption can be used to provide basic data confidentiality and integrity by transforming plain text into cipher text using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . irs policy requires the use of encryption for transferring sensitive but unclassified information between irs facilities . the national security agency also recommends disabling protocols that do not encrypt information , such as user id and password combinations , transmitted across the network . irs did not always ensure that sensitive data were protected by encryption . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact gregory wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or nancy kingsbury at ( 202 ) 512-2700 . we can also be reached by e - mail at wilshuseng@gao.gov and kingsburyn@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the persons named above , gerard aflague , bruce cain , larry crosland , mark canter , denise fitzpatrick , david hayes ( assistant director ) , nicole jarvis , jeffrey knott ( assistant director ) , george kovachick , kevin metcalfe , eugene stevens , and amos tevelow made key contributions to this report . although irs had an initiative underway to encrypt its laptops , certain data were not encrypted . for example , at two data centers , administrator access to a key irs application contained unencrypted data logins . these unencrypted logins could reveal usernames , passwords , and other credentials . by not encrypting data , irs is at increased risk that an unauthorized individual could gain unwarranted access to its systems and / or sensitive information . to establish individual accountability , monitor compliance with security policies , and investigate security violations , it is crucial to determine what , when , and by whom specific actions have been taken on a system .