elizabeth a . field , director , ( 202 ) 512-2775 or fielde1@gao.gov . in addition to the contact above , the following are key contributors to this report: kristy williams ( assistant director ) , tida barakat reveley ( analyst in charge ) , austin barvin , ronnie bergman , vincent buquicchio , william carpluk , juliee conde - medina , mae jones , jordan tibbetts , kelly rubin , monica savoy , and john van schaik . military housing: preliminary recommendations to strengthen dod's oversight and monitoring of privatized housing . gao - 20-471t . washington , d.c.: march 3 , 2020 . resident responses to the question that asks: “would you recommend privatized housing ? ” results should indicate how many tenants responded “yes,” “no,” or “don't know.” however , instead of asking whether residents would recommend privatized housing , the military departments' annual resident satisfaction survey asked residents the following: “how much do you agree or disagree with the following statement , ‘i would recommend this community to others. '” the difference in the wording between the question asked of residents and the question reported to congress is notable , as a resident's satisfaction with his or her community and inclination to recommend it to others may not be reflective of satisfaction with either the privatized housing unit or privatized housing in general . we also found differences in how the military departments interpreted responses to the question they asked . when asked whether they would recommend their community to others , residents were provided the following response categories on a scale of five to zero: ( 5 ) strongly agree , ( 4 ) agree , ( 3 ) neither agree nor disagree , ( 2 ) disagree , ( 1 ) strongly disagree , and ( 0 ) not applicable , no opinion , don't know , or no answer . however , we found that the ways in which the military departments translated these responses into the “yes,” “no,” or “do not know” categories differed across the military departments , and in the case of the army differed from year to year . for the fiscal years 2015 through 2017 reports , navy officials told us they counted responses reported in categories 5 ( strongly agree ) and 4 ( agree ) as “yes,” responses in categories 2 ( disagree ) and 1 ( strongly disagree ) as “no,” and responses in categories 0 ( not applicable , no opinion , don't know , or no answer ) and 3 ( neither agree nor disagree ) as “don't know.” for the same time period , air force officials told us they counted responses in categories 5 ( strongly agree ) , 4 ( agree ) , and 3 — neither agree nor disagree — as “yes,” responses in categories 2 ( disagree ) and 1 ( strongly disagree ) as “no,” and responses in category 0 ( not applicable , no opinion , don't know , or no answer ) as “don't know.” if 3 had not been counted as “yes,” the reported resident satisfaction rate would have been lower .