the reasons behind some of these changes are clear . for example , the sharp decrease in the department of commerce's estimate ( from more than 38 million hours to about 10 million hours ) appears to be almost entirely attributable to the completion of the decennial census . the reasons for other changes are less immediately apparent . as i will discuss later , the sharp decrease in the dot estimate was caused by the expiration ( and subsequent pra violation ) of a single information collection . however , changes in agencies' bottom - line burden - hour estimates do not tell the whole story , and can be misleading . it is also important to understand how the agencies accomplished these results . oira classifies modifications in agencies' burden - hour estimates as either “program changes” or “adjustments.” program changes are the result of deliberate federal government action ( eg , the addition or deletion of questions on a form ) , and can occur as a result of new statutory requirements , agency - initiated actions , or through the expiration or reinstatement of oira - approved collections . adjustments are not the result of deliberate federal government action , but rather are caused by factors such as changes in the population responding to a requirement or agency reestimates of the burden associated with a collection of information . for example , if the economy declines and more people complete applications for food stamps , the resultant increase in the department of agriculture's ( usda ) paperwork estimate is considered an adjustment because it is not the result of deliberate federal action . in recent icbs , oira has indicated whether fluctuations in agencies' burden - hour estimates were caused by program changes or adjustments . the fiscal year 2001 burden estimates that we obtained from oira and risc in preparation for this hearing also contained those two categories and are presented in table 1 . analysis of those data helps explain what drove the changes in agencies' bottom - line burden - hour estimates . for example , almost all of the marked decline in the department of state's estimate was due to adjustments . also , the more than 40 million burden - hour increase in the sec estimate was primarily driven by adjustments . therefore , the department of state cannot claim credit for having proactively reduced the paperwork burden that it imposes on the public , and the sec may not be responsible for the increase that it reported . in contrast , table 1 shows that the more than 37 million burden - hour decrease in dot's bottom - line paperwork estimate was entirely driven by a more than 40 million - hour program change reduction . however , the table does not indicate what specific type of action precipitated this or any other program change — new statutes , agency actions , or reinstated / expired collections . although dot's icb submission did not provide further clarification , oira staff told us that the reduction was caused by the expiration ( and subsequent pra violation ) of the agency's “hours of service” information collection .