guidelines for poultry processing . this document , published by osha in september 2004 , offers practical recommendations for employers to reduce the number and severity of musculoskeletal disorders throughout the industry . in developing the guidelines , osha reviewed existing ergonomics practices and programs , state osha programs , as well as available scientific information . osha also consulted with stakeholders , such as the national turkey federation , to gather information on the ergonomic problems present in the poultry - processing environment and the practices that have been used successfully in the industry . because usda inspectors are a constant federal presence in plants , osha has established agreements with usda , the latest of which is meant to improve compliance in meat and poultry plants . in 1994 , usda and osha jointly revised an existing memorandum of understanding between the agencies that established a process and framework for ( 1 ) training usda meat and poultry inspection personnel to improve their ability to recognize serious workplace hazards within the meat and poultry industry , ( 2 ) reinforcing procedures for meat and poultry inspection personnel to report unsafe and unhealthy working conditions to which they are exposed to the appropriate authorities , ( 3 ) instituting new procedures for usda's meat and poultry inspection personnel to refer serious workplace hazards affecting plant employees to osha , and ( 4 ) coordinating possible inconsistencies between osha's job safety and health standards and usda's sanitation and health standards . according to the agreement , osha's training of usda inspectors would not be expected to supplant osha expertise in identifying serious workplace hazards . in addition , usda inspectors would not be trained to recognize and refer serious workplace hazards affecting plant employees that tend to arise only after protracted , cumulative exposure , such as those related to repetitive motion and noise . according to usda officials , the memorandum was revised after a devastating poultry plant fire in 1991 that killed 25 workers . according to reports about the fire , the plant's fire doors had been padlocked from the outside by the factory owner , who had locked the doors as a “loss control technique” to prevent workers from stealing product . a usda poultry inspector was often present at the plant and testified at a congressional hearing on the fire that he knew the doors were regularly locked in violation of safety codes and had reported this to plant officials . he did not , however , contact osha . although the purpose of the revised memorandum of understanding was to educate usda inspectors on recognizing and referring workplace hazards , the agencies' efforts to implement the agreement , such as providing training to usda inspectors and evaluating the effectiveness and impact of the training , have lapsed . according to osha officials , although the agency put together training materials for usda inspectors , only one training session was held , and only a small number of individuals were trained . usda officials we spoke to confirmed this , and stated that not a lot of effort was made to train inspectors .