gao - 12-330 . washington , d.c.: april 2 , 2012 . the directorates provide guidance to the regions and to states . gao - 10-10 . washington , d.c.: october 15 , 2009 . at the same time , osha affords significant autonomy to its 10 regions to both conduct enforcement activities through their area offices and to monitor enforcement by state - run programs within their regions . while osha's regional offices work with osha's national directorates , they report to the assistant secretary of labor for occupational safety and health ( see fig . osha uses a variety of methods to monitor the progress of federal and state enforcement efforts , and monitors federal enforcement efforts more frequently than those of states . for federal enforcement , osha national officials monitor regional office activities based on the goals it sets in collaboration with regional officials each year — including the number of worksite inspections each region is expected to complete — and report progress quarterly to the department of labor . osha national officials monitor regional offices' progress toward meeting these goals by reviewing their performance measures and holding weekly conference calls with regional administrators to discuss performance and other issues . regional officials generally monitor their area offices' progress toward meeting goals by also reviewing inspection activity reports submitted weekly by each area office , and through meetings , typically by phone , with area office managers held at least every other week to review the data . inspection activity reports provide information on , among other things , the number and type of inspections completed , violations found , and penalties assessed . some regions also hold in - person meetings a few times a year with all area office managers to review their progress . these reports and meetings are the primary ways officials keep track of each region's progress toward meeting its goals . for example , in fiscal year 2012 , 7 out of 10 osha regional offices met or exceeded their annual goal for conducting inspections ( see fig . to monitor state enforcement efforts , osha regional and area officials also review performance reports and meet with state officials to monitor their progress toward meeting their inspection and other goals , but they do so less frequently for state - run programs than for federal enforcement efforts . osha regional and area offices work directly with states to set inspection goals , taking into account staffing and funding levels in each state . regional officials told us that some state - run programs face funding challenges . for example , hawaii recently reported problems in carrying out its program due to lack of state staffing resources and funds . states generally have primary responsibility for monitoring the performance of their state - run programs , subject to oversight by osha . states are afforded flexibility in setting their own goals as long as they report their activities across a range of performance measures , such as the percentage of programmed inspections that find certain types of violations , and the average number of violations per inspection .