doj did not comment . alien smuggling along the southwest border is a growing threat to the security of the united states and mexico due , in part , to the expanding involvement of mexican drug trafficking organizations and aliens who illegally enter the region from countries of special interest to the united states such as afghanistan , iran , iraq , and pakistan . violence associated with alien smuggling has also increased in recent years , particularly in arizona . in october 2007 , the national drug intelligence center reported that the success of expanding border security initiatives and additional border patrol resources are likely obstructing regularly used smuggling routes and fueling an increase in violence , particularly against law enforcement officers in arizona . we reported in may 2010 and testified in july 2010 , that ice may be missing an opportunity to leverage techniques used by the arizona attorney general to disrupt alien smuggling operations . specifically , an arizona attorney general task force seized millions of dollars and disrupted alien smuggling operations by following cash transactions flowing through money transmitters that serve as the primary method of payment to those individuals responsible for smuggling aliens . by analyzing money transmitter transaction data , task force investigators identified suspected alien smugglers and those money transmitter businesses that were complicit in laundering alien smuggling proceeds . an overall assessment of whether and how these techniques may be applied by ice in the context of disrupting alien smuggling could help ensure that it is not missing opportunities to take additional actions and leverage resources to support the common goal of countering alien smuggling . we recommended that ice assess the arizona attorney general's financial investigations strategy to identify any promising investigative techniques for federal use . ice concurred with our recommendation and outlined specific steps it was taking to implement it . in january 2011 , the secretary of homeland security announced a new direction in deploying technology to assist in securing the border , ending the sbinet program as originally conceived because it did not meet cost - effectiveness and viability standards . since fiscal year 2006 , dhs had allocated about $1.5 billion for sbinet that would provide a mix of sensors , radars , and cameras on fixed towers that could gather information along the border and transmit this information to terminals in command centers to provide agents with border situational awareness . our previous reports on cbp's sbi program have outlined program challenges and delays . specifically , the initial segment of sbinet technology , project 28 , encountered performance shortfalls and delays , including the following: users were not involved in developing the requirements , contractor oversight was limited , and project scope and complexity were underestimated . program uncertainties , such as a lack of fully defined program expectations , continued to delay planned sbinet deployments following project 28 . in addition , the deployment of related infrastructure , such as towers and roads , experienced challenges , such as increased costs , unknown life - cycle costs , and land acquisition issues .