and in the far . dcaa's use of its authority has been addressed in two court decisions involving newport news shipbuilding and dry dock company . the decisions are generally known as newport news i and newport news ii , both decided in 1988 . in the first case ( newport news i ) , the court held that dcaa's statutory subpoena power could not be used to access internal audits not tied to a specific contract or proposal . in the second case , ( newport news ii ) , the court held that dcaa could subpoena company tax returns and other materials , which were directly relevant to an audit and would allow dcaa to corroborate the company's computation of direct and indirect costs.for additional information on dcaa's access authorities and the newport news cases , see appendix iv . all of the companies we reviewed generally followed the institute's standards for organizing their internal audit departments . these organizational standards include maintaining independence and objectivity , constructing a risk - based audit plan , employing and maintaining a skilled , professional audit staff , and completing an external assessment . similarly , based on our examination of internal audit reports and audit documentation ( generally referred to as workpapers ) , we found that the majority of companies followed the standards for performing individual audits . these standards include assessing risks during audit planning , including the risk of fraud , obtaining evidence for findings to include testing and documenting evidence , and following up on audit issues . however , some companies did not provide sufficient information on how they conduct individual audits for us to determine if the standards for performance were met . figure 1 shows the applicable institute standards and the number of companies in our review that followed them . our analysis indicates that five of the seven companies we evaluated generally conformed to five institute standards for internal audit organizations . the remaining two companies did not provide for an external quality assurance review as required under the institute's standards . the five standards are: independence and objectivity — according to the organizational charts of the seven selected companies , their vice presidents of internal audit , also called the chief audit executives ( cae ) , report directly to the audit committees of the board of directors for matters related to internal audits . we then asked to examine all 520 reports . six of the seven companies agreed to provide us their audit reports . we reviewed 470 reports to determine the findings , corrective actions , and any connection to a dcaa audit . we also requested that each company provide us with workpaper sets from five internal audits , which we selected based on a nongeneralizable random sample . five of the seven companies agreed to provide us access to their workpaper sets . we examined the 25 sets of documents to verify that the workpapers contained evidence for the findings and corrective actions identified in the internal audit reports . the seven companies we reviewed are listed in our full scope and methodology in appendix i , together with details on the extent to which the companies provided us with the information we requested .