ii. ) exhibit 53 . the purpose of the exhibit 53 is to identify all it investments — both major and nonmajor organization . information included on agency exhibit 53s is designed , in part , to help omb better understand what agencies are spending on it investments . the information also supports cost analyses prescribed by the clinger - cohen act . as part of the annual budget , omb publishes a report on it spending for the federal government representing a compilation of exhibit 53 data submitted by the 26 agencies . — and their associated costs within a federal exhibit 300 . the purpose of the exhibit 300 is to provide a business case for each major it investment and to allow omb to monitor it investments once they are funded . agencies are required to provide information on each major investment's cost , schedule , and performance . according to omb guidance , a major investment is a system or acquisition requiring special management attention because of its importance to the mission or function of the agency , a component of the agency , or another organization ; is for financial management and obligates more than $500,000 annually ; has significant program or policy implications ; has high executive visibility ; has high development , operating , or maintenance costs ; is funded through other than direct appropriations ; or is defined as major by the agency's capital planning and investment control process . display of these data is intended to allow omb , other oversight bodies , and the general public to hold the government agencies accountable for results and progress . since the dashboard has been implemented , we have reported and made recommendations to improve the data accuracy and reliability . in 2010 and 2011 , we reported on the progress of the dashboard and made recommendations to further improve how it rates investments relative to current performance . capital programming guide , supplement to omb circular a - 11 , part 7 ( july 2012 ) ; omb memorandum m - 10-27 ( june 2010 ) , requires agencies to establish a policy for performing oas on steady state investments as a part of managing and monitoring investment baselines . a comparison of current performance with a pre - established cost areas for innovation in the areas of customer satisfaction , strategic and business results , and financial performance ; indication if the agency revisited alternative methods for achieving the same mission needs and strategic goals ; consideration of issues , such as greater utilization of technology or consolidation of investments to better meet organizational goals ; an ongoing review of the status of the risks identified in the investment's planning and acquisition phases ; identification of whether there is a need to redesign , modify , or terminate the investment ; an analysis on the need for improved methodology ( i.e. , better ways for the investment to meet cost and performance goals ) ; lessons learned ; cost or schedule variances ; recommendations to redesign or modify an asset in advance of potential problems ; and overlap with other investments .