trust can be fostered in a variety of ways . for example , officials at nifc suggested that trust among staff from the different wildland fire agencies was fostered through joint activities that provided opportunities for face - to - face interaction , such as interagency training and national or regional conferences . trust can also be a function of shared interest or background in an area . in the case of nifc , although staff have different agency affiliations , most of them have field experience fighting fires . fostering an interagency culture , according to nifc staff we interviewed , can help facilitate collaborative efforts across agency boundaries and enhances a cohesive working relationship among staff from the different federal agencies with wildland fire responsibilities . for example , the agencies at nifc reinforce a common interagency culture by hiring staff who have had experience and feel comfortable working in an interagency environment . an interagency environment , according to one official , is reinforced at nifc in a variety of ways , including staff wearing a common interagency badge and co - location of staff by functional areas rather than by agency , reflecting the integrated staffing . federal agencies engaged in collaborative efforts need to create the means to monitor and evaluate their efforts to enable them to identify areas for improvement . reporting on these activities can help key decision makers within the agencies , as well as clients and stakeholders , to obtain feedback for improving both policy and operational effectiveness . to monitor and report on the status of achieving the healthy people 2010 objectives , hhs holds progress reviews in which the federal agencies with lead responsibilities for a focus area report on the progress towards achieving the objectives . other federal agencies that do work related to the focus area also participate in these meetings . the agencies discuss the data trends , barriers to achieving the objectives , strategies undertaken to overcome barriers , and alternative approaches to attain further progress . a summary report of the progress review , including contact information , is made available to the public through the healthy people website . additionally , hhs conducts a midcourse review to assess the status of the overall healthy people objectives and identify the significant health trends and gaps in preventive health issues . as the midcourse review could result in the modification of the healthy people 2010 objectives , the proposed revisions to the objectives will be made available for public comment . federal wildland fire agencies assess fire operations through “after action” reviews . according to interagency policy and standards , after each wildland fire incident , the wildland fire agencies should conduct reviews with personnel from different agencies along functional areas — for example , the incident management team and smokejumpers ( firefighters who use parachutes to get to the fire ) . as part of these reviews , personnel who worked on the incident discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the operations and determine what can be learned from it . personnel assess what was planned , what actually happened , why , and what can be done to improve wildland fire management .