( see table 1. ) we also found that the lowest - cost plan options available in a county were available on an exchange in a majority of the counties included in our analysis . premium variation based on health status or gender was effectively prohibited . ppaca does not require insurers to offer plans through the state or federal exchanges . similarly , it does not require consumers to purchase plans through the exchanges ; however , there are incentives for many consumers to do so . for example , certain consumers earning from 100 to 400 percent of the federal poverty level are eligible to receive premium tax credits that can reduce premium costs , but only for plans purchased through an exchange . similarly , certain consumers earning from more than 100 percent to 250 percent of the federal poverty level are eligible to receive additional subsidies that help them pay for the out of pocket costs , but only for silver plans purchased through an exchange . we selected the consumer categories to represent the broad range of consumers who would shop for individual market insurance . they included nonsmoking: individuals , aged 19 ; individuals , aged 30 ; families of four , parents aged 40 ; couples aged 55 ; and individuals , aged 64 . we also conducted analyses at the state and county level that focused on plans offered through an exchange for these same categories of consumers . our analyses focused on two categories of plans — exchange plans ( plans that were available on an exchange ) and all plans ( whether or not they were available on an exchange ) — for both 2014 and 2015 . our analyses do not reflect the entire universe of insurers' premiums for plans sold on the sbes or plans not sold through exchanges , because the data for plans sold on the sbes or plans not sold through exchanges in the plan finder database were incomplete . because of this , we made certain exceptions in our reporting and only reported data for states for which we had sufficiently reliable data , as follows: for our analysis of the numbers of health insurance plans available to individual market consumers and how they changed from 2014 to 2015 , we excluded from our analyses states where the percentage of plans that reported premium data was less than 70 percent of the universe of plans in either of the 2 years . we also excluded the state of virginia from our analyses because the 2014 ffe data for that state included data that appeared to be erroneous . after these exclusions , our analyses of all plans included data from 28 of the 50 states and the 1,886 counties within those states , and our analysis that was limited to exchange plans included data for 38 of the 50 states and the 2,613 counties within those states . for our analysis showing the range of health insurance premiums in 2014 and 2015 by county and year , we applied the same exclusions noted above for all comparisons of data across years . the higher the av percentage , the lower the expected enrollee cost sharing .