( app . i summarizes the performance measures that fta uses in applying the criteria to develop these ratings. ) as figure 1 shows , once the individual criterion ratings are completed , fta assigns summary project justification and local financial commitment ratings by combining the individual criterion ratings . ( table 1 shows the ratings for the seven projects recommended for new starts funding in fiscal year 2002. ) as table 1 shows , two of the seven proposed projects received “highly recommended” ratings on the basis of their strong cost - effectiveness , good transit - supportive land - use policies , and a demonstrated local financial commitment to build and operate the projects . for instance , the proposed san diego county / oceanside - escondido rail project received a medium - high rating in mobility improvements because it is expected to serve 15,100 average weekday boardings in 2015 , including 8,600 new daily riders . according to fta , it will also help to eliminate the heavy congestion of northern san diego county along the route 78 corridor , saving 700,000 hours of travel time a year compared to the tsm alternative . in developing the summary project justification rating , fta gives the most weight to the criteria for transit - supportive land use , cost - effectiveness , and mobility improvements . for the summary local financial commitment ratings , the measures for the proposed local share of capital costs and the strength of the capital and operating finance plans are given equal consideration . fta combines the summary project justification and local financial commitment ratings to create an overall rating for the project of “highly recommended,” “recommended,” or “not recommended.” to receive a “highly recommended” rating , a project must have summary ratings of at least medium - high for the project justification and local financial commitment . to receive a rating of “recommended,” the project must have summary ratings of at least medium . a project is rated as “not recommended” when either summary rating is lower than medium . in preparing its new starts proposal each year , fta gives first preference to projects with existing grant agreements . following that , consideration is given to projects with an overall rating of “recommended” or higher . however , some projects rated as “highly recommended” or “recommended” may not meet fta's “readiness” test for funding ; fta uses a number of milestones to determine whether a project is sufficiently developed for a grant agreement . for example , fta determines whether the necessary real estate has been acquired , utility arrangements have been made , and local funding sources are in place . according to an fta official , this ensures that there are no “red flags” signaling that the project has outstanding issues it must address .