( recommendation 6 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in written comments that are reproduced in appendix iv , dod concurred with our recommendations . dod officials provided separate oral technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in its response , dod provided new information on a timeline for completing the outstanding section 911 requirements . specifically , dod updated its internal deadline for submission of the organizational strategy to the secretary of defense from july 2019 to august 2019 . dod also stated that it plans to issue the guidance on cross - functional teams and training for cross - functional team members , their supervisors , and presidential appointees by september 2019 and complete its report on the successes and failures of cross - functional teams by november 2019 . we updated our first five recommendations to reflect this information . establishing these timelines is an important step forward in meeting the statutory requirements under section 911 as well as addressing our recommendations . as part of our next and final audit of dod's implementation of section 911 requirements , we will assess the extent to which the department has met these new internal deadlines and fully addressed our recommendations in this report . fully addressing these outstanding requirements will strengthen dod's ability to effectively implement its cross - functional teams and advance a collaborative culture within the department . table 1 identifies our four prior reports on dod's implementation of section 911 and the status of the five recommendations from those reports . section 911 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 requires the secretary of defense to take several actions . table 2 summarizes these requirements , the due date , and the date completed , if applicable , as of june 2019 . in february 2018 , we reported on eight leading practices for implementing effective cross - functional teams . table 3 identifies these leading practices and their related key characteristics . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dod is up to 21 months late in fully addressing five remaining requirements of section 911 related to dod's organizational strategy and cross - functional teams , as shown in figure 1 and discussed below . specifically , dod has not fully addressed the following statutory requirements: 1 . issue an organizational strategy: dod has not issued its organizational strategy , which as of june 2019 is 21 months past the statutorily required issuance date of september 1 , 2017 . in january 2019 , we reported that ocmo officials had revised the draft organizational strategy , incorporating , among other things , the criteria that distinguish cross - functional teams established under section 911 from other types of cross - functional working groups , committees , integrated product teams , and task forces , as required by section 918 ( b ) of the john s. mccain ndaa for fiscal year 2019 . the revised draft of the organizational strategy also includes steps dod plans to take to advance a collaborative culture .