postal service . as a result , plcy developed an e - commerce strategy for , among other things , the shipping of illegal items and how to provide information to u.s. customs and border protection before parcels are shipped to the united states from abroad . in accordance with the ndaa , as plcy leads , conducts , and coordinates policy and strategy , it is to do so in a manner that promotes and ensures quality , consistency , and integration across dhs and applies risk - based analysis and planning to departmentwide strategic planning efforts . the ndaa further provides that all component heads are to coordinate with plcy when establishing or modifying policies or strategic planning guidance to ensure consistency with dhs's policy priorities . in addition to the roles plcy plays that are directly related to leading , conducting , and coordinating policy and strategy , the office is responsible for select operational functions . for example , plcy is charged with operating the real id and visa waiver programs . the ndaa also conferred responsibilities to plcy that had not been responsibilities of the dhs office of policy prior to the ndaa's enactment . among other things , the ndaa charged plcy with responsibility for establishing standards of reliability and validity for statistical data collected and analyzed by the department , and ensuring the accuracy of metrics and statistical data provided to congress . in conferring this responsibility , the act also transferred to plcy the maintenance of all immigration statistical information of the u.s. customs and border protection , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement , and u.s . citizenship and immigration services . plcy has established five performance goals: build departmental policy - making capacity , coordination , and foster the unity of effort , mature the office as a mission - oriented , component - focused organization that is responsive to dhs leadership , effectively engage and leverage stakeholders , enhance productivity and effectiveness of policy personnel through appropriate alignment of knowledge , skills , and abilities , and accountability , transparency , and leadership . plcy officials stated that the office established the performance goals in fiscal year 2015 and they were still in effect as of fiscal year 2018 . as previously discussed , dhs has eight operational components . dhs also has six support components . although each one has a distinct role to play in helping to secure the homeland , there are operational and support functions that cut across mission areas . for example , nearly every operational component has , as part of its security operations , a need for screening , vetting , and credentialing procedures and risk - targeting mechanisms . likewise , nearly all operational components have some form of international engagement , deploying staff abroad to help secure the homeland before threats reach u.s. borders . finally , as shown in figure 2 , different aspects of broad mission areas fall under the purview of more than one dhs operational component . plcy is responsible for coordinating three key dhs strategic efforts: the qhsr , the dhs strategic plan , and the resource planning guidance .