opm had no comments . dod partially concurred with our recommendation to consider incorporating key collaboration practices to sustain and enhance collaboration when developing and finalizing its spouse employment guidance . while dod said it looked forward to incorporating collaboration practices as the seco program matures , dod stated that it has already taken initial action in this area . for example , dod cited the advisory group it created , as well as partnerships developed with various organizations . our report recognizes dod's efforts . we shared our list with dod officials , who agreed with our assessment that these are the primary programs that provide employment services to spouses . our first objective is focused primarily on the three new seco programs , but we note that spouses can also use the military services' employment assistance programs , and we discuss coordination across the seco and military services' programs . as we identified the programs to examine , we conducted further interviews with officials involved in each of dod's spouse employment programs , both at dod headquarters and with each of the military services ( air force , army , marine corps , and navy ) . we requested more detailed information , such as on the programs' purposes , budgets , services they provide , and coordination . in examining coordination among the programs , we consulted gao's prior work that identified practices that can help federal agencies enhance and sustain collaboration . to obtain additional perspectives , we interviewed two advocacy groups who support military families , and we visited employment assistance programs at three military installations in the washington - d.c. area . these installations are: fort meade ( army and navy programs ) , joint base andrews ( air force ) , and henderson hall ( marine corps ) . during our visits to these installations , we spoke with local program officials , and we spoke to military spouses in three of the four services . we developed a preliminary list of programs that included the three programs under dod's spouse education and career opportunities ( seco ) initiative , as well as the employment assistance programs that the military services have long operated . the information we obtained from these installations is not generalizable . to identify the steps dod has taken to assess the effectiveness of its spouse employment programs , we interviewed dod officials to obtain information on how dod is currently measuring effectiveness , as well as its plans to conduct evaluations or collect data on performance . we also reviewed documents dod provided , including internal and external reports , strategic planning documents , and descriptions of existing and potential performance measures . in assessing dod's performance measures , we consulted with gao's prior work that identified attributes of successful performance measures and described requirements for reporting on performance under the government performance and results act , as amended . we also assessed the reliability of the data used for dod's performance measures by interviewing officials knowledgeable about the data and reviewing relevant documents . based on our work , we determined that the data used for the performance measure on the military spouse employment program are of questionable reliability , and we discuss this in our report .