we removed all such cases . soi assigns each donation reported in form 8283 section b to one of 19 different property - type categories . donations in five of these categories ( real estate except conservation easements , land , conservation easements , façade easements , and art and collectibles ) need qualified appraisals unless they come from a business's stock in trade , inventory , or property held primarily for sale to customers in the ordinary course of its trade or business . we believe that this exception is not likely to apply to properties in the first four of these five categories . to identify donations of art and collectibles that potentially could have qualified for the exception , we did the following: 1 . for those filers who made a donation in this category , we used data from soi's 1040 tax files to determine whether they had a schedule c business in any of the following listed industry:  art dealers     beverage and tobacco product manufacturing ( wineries are independent artists jewelry stores jewelry , watch , etc. , wholesalers included in this category )  beer , wine , and liquor stores  beer , wine and distilled spirits wholesalers 2 . we assigned any of these filers that had at least one schedule c in one of these industries a code that indicates that they potentially had an exception . donations in two property categories , corporate stock and mutual funds , are excepted from needing qualified appraisals if they have readily available market quotations or are less than $10,000 . this exception can also apply to securities , such as bonds , that are reported in the “other securities and investments” category . we had no way of reliably identifying which of the securities in these categories had readily available quotations , so we did not attempt to identify individual donations as being excepted or not . however , within the “securities and other investments” category , we did identify bond donations using the taxpayers' descriptions of their donations on line 5 ( a ) and assigned them a code indicating that they were potentially excepted , which distinguished them from other donations in that category that were not excepted . donations in the categories that do not involve securities may qualify for the inventory exceptions , and vehicle donations can be excepted under additional special conditions . aside from the “other and unknown” category , donations in the nonsecurities categories , taken individually , account for very small shares of the total value of noncash contribution deductions . the “other and unknown” category accounts for about 6 percent to about 9 percent of the total value of deductions , depending on the year . in some of these cases the type of property donated is truly unknown because the description simply indicates that the donation was made by a partnership owned by the taxpayer . the remaining donations are of such variety that it would be difficult to apply the approach that we have set out above for identifying donations that potentially qualified for the inventory exception . after we completed all of steps described above , we grouped form 8283 filers into the following categories: 1 .