these activities are not discussed in the performance plan . additionally , some indicators that were previously identified as potential interagency indicators are not so designated in the 2002 performance plan . the plan does not provide information on hud's reason for dropping these items or discuss the impact , if any , on hud's achievement of its goals . we have also reported on the importance of interagency coordination on community growth issues and that opportunities exist for federal agencies to improve their coordination . we reported that the large number of federal programs that fund economic development activities and the large number of federal agencies that administer the programs can reduce communities' flexibility in pursuing reinvestment projects . hud's programs were among those most frequently mentioned as helpful to community revitalization , but the plan makes limited mention of hud's coordination activity with other agencies on these interagency issues . in general , even where coordination activity is discussed , the plan does not discuss the specific contribution of other agencies to the achievement of hud's goals . we have identified two governmentwide high - risk areas: strategic human capital management and information security . regarding human capital , we found that the fiscal year 2000 performance report does not explain hud's progress in resolving human capital challenges . however , it does provide information on the steps hud is taking to implement a resources estimation and allocation process and develop a framework to begin addressing human capital issues . we found that hud's fiscal year 2002 annual performance plan does not include specific goals or measures to address strategic human capital management ; however , it has three performance measures pertaining to human capital issues . these three measures are that ( 1 ) hud employees are more satisfied with the department's performance and work environment , ( 2 ) hud will implement the new resource estimation and allocation process , and ( 3 ) hud will improve the diversity of the workforce . we clarified our report to note that the performance report includes measures that relate to aspects of hud's 2020 management reform , such as for the new centers , but it generally does not include goals that relate to the specific issues raised by the oig . our observation on hud's performance measure to obtain clean audit opinions was included in the report to explain why we did not include this measure in our analysis of hud's efforts to address its management challenge related to financial systems . although we do not consider it a measure that helps evaluate hud's progress toward improving its systems or addressing it management challenges , this should not be construed as a criticism of hud's decision to include the measure in its gpra documents , if it finds the measure useful . we believe the report recognizes that hud has included strategies and performance measures that address aspects of reducing fraud , waste , and error in its programs , and our analysis of hud's progress included most of the measures hud cites in its letter .