equity . whether disadvantaged groups can effectively use the infrastructure . public access . whether there are safeguards to ensure public access to essential infrastructure . consumer rights . whether projects provide safeguards for consumers , especially those for which the government has a high level of duty of care or are most vulnerable . safety and security . whether projects provide assurance that community health and safety will be secured . privacy . whether projects adequately protect users' rights to privacy . similarly , the government of new south wales , australia , also formally considers the public interest before entering into public - private partnerships . public interest focuses on eight factors that are similar to victoria's: effectiveness in meeting government objectives , vfm , community consultation , consumer rights , accountability and transparency , public access , health and safety , and privacy . the public interest evaluation is conducted up front prior to proceeding to the market and is updated frequently , including prior to the call for detailed proposals , after finalizing the evaluation of proposals , and prior to the government signing contract documents . additionally , foreign governments have also used quantitative tests to identify and evaluate the public interest and determine if entering into a project as a public - private partnership is the best option and delivers value to the public . in general , vfm evaluations examine total project costs and benefits and are used by some governments to determine if a public - private partnership approach is in the public interest for a given project . vfm tests are often done through a psc , which compares the costs of doing a proposed public - private partnership project against the costs of doing that project through a public delivery model . vfm tests examine more than the financial value of a project and will examine factors that are hard to quantify , such as design quality and functionality , quality in construction , and the value of unquantifiable risks transferred to the private sector . vfm tests are commonly used in australia , the united kingdom , and british columbia , canada . pscs are often used as part of vfm tests . generally speaking , a psc test examines life - cycle project costs , including initial construction costs , maintenance and operation costs , and additional capital improvement costs that will be incurred over the course of the concession term . a psc can also look at the value of various types of risk transfer to the private sector , whereby the more risk transferred to the private sector the more value to the public sector . for example , in the united kingdom , use of the pscs is mandated for all public - private partnership projects at both the national as well as local levels . british columbia , canada , also conducts a psc for all public - private partnership proposals that compares the full life - cycle costs of procuring the proposed project as a public - private partnership , compared with a traditional design - bid - build approach . the british columbia psc not only compares the project costs but also evaluates the value of various risks .