( app . ii contains opm's comments on a draft of our report ) . attention to strategic human capital management is important because building agency employees' skills , knowledge , and individual performance must be a cornerstone of any serious effort to maximize the performance and ensure the accountability of the federal government . because strategic human capital management is a pervasive challenge across the federal government , we recently identified it as a governmentwide high - risk area.addressing the federal government's human capital challenges is a responsibility shared by many parties in addition to the individual agencies . for example , we noted that opm and the office of management and budget have substantial roles to play in fostering a more results - oriented approach to strategic human capital management across the government . opm's sustained commitment and attention will be particularly critical to making a real difference in the way federal agencies manage human capital . it is likely that opm will continue moving from “rules to tools,” and that its most valuable contributions in the future will come less from traditional compliance and approval activities than from its initiatives for assisting agencies as a strategic partner . opm's revised 5- year strategic plan , issued in september 2000 , supports this changed focus . gpra is intended to shift the focus of government decision - making , management , and accountability from activities and processes to the results and outcomes achieved by federal programs . new and valuable information on the plans , goals , and strategies of federal agencies has been provided since federal agencies began implementing gpra . under gpra , annual performance plans are to clearly inform the congress and the public of ( 1 ) the annual performance goals for agencies' major programs and activities , ( 2 ) the measures that will be used to gauge performance , ( 3 ) the strategies and resources required to achieve the performance goals , and ( 4 ) the procedures that will be used to verify and validate performance information . these annual plans , issued soon after transmittal of the president's budget , provide a direct linkage between an agency's longer - term goals and mission and day - to - day activities . annual performance reports are to subsequently report on the degree to which performance goals were met . the issuance of the agencies' performance reports , due by march 31 , represents a new and potentially more substantive phase in the implementation of gpra — the opportunity to assess federal agencies' actual performance for the prior fiscal year and to consider what steps are needed to improve performance and reduce costs in the future . opm's mission is to support the federal government's ability to have the best workforce possible to do the best job possible .