available . this information will be used to help broadband providers apply for future infrastructure funding to build capacity across the state of wyoming . sbdd ? massachusetts technology park corporation dba mtc ( ? mass broadband institute ? ) the goal of the massachusetts broadband mapping project is to develop detailed and accurate statewide broadband availability and infrastructure datasets to support the development and updating of a national broadband map that will be made available to the public . this goal will be accomplished by: developing collaborative relationships and data sharing agreements with broadband providers to develop a broadband availability database ; validating and enhancing the provider database through the analysis of cable strand maps , dsl - equipped central office and remote terminal locations and wireless tower locations and various modeling methods based on the transport technology ; verifying broadband availability in the field through a grassroots , civic engagement component using industry experts , partner organizations , and public participation and ; making the data easily accessible and useable through an innovative web - based map library , data repository , and searchable broadband map . the mbi will collect , integrate , verify and submit five substantially complete datasets to ntia in the first quarter of 2010 with subsequent semi - annual updates . a wireline broadband availability dataset will include availability , technology and speed of wireline broadband services by census block or street segment . a wireless broadband availability dataset will include availability , technology , speed and spectrum of wireless broadband services by census block or street segment . a residential broadband speed dataset will include average nominal speed for residential broadband users for each broadband service by metropolitan and rural statistical areas . a middle - mile infrastructure dataset will include location , ownership , technology , capacity and typical speeds of interconnect points between broadband provider services and the internet . a community anchor institution dataset will include address , current broadband subscribership , technology and typical speed for each community anchor institution in the state ( eg , public safety entities , medical and healthcare facilities , libraries , state and local government entities , schools , community colleges and other higher education buildings ) . the massachusetts broadband planning project will identify barriers and assets to the deployment of broadband infrastructure and broadband adoption and then develop and implement innovative solutions to overcome barriers and best utilize assets .