investment of funds . this includes imprudent investments , those prohibited by the plan document or failure of the plan administrator to offer a diversified menu of investment options in a 401 ( k ) plan . loans or sales to parties in interest and / or the use of plan assets for personal or company use . this includes prohibited transactions related to self - dealing ( a fiduciary acting in its own interest ) ; dual loyalties ( representing adverse parties ) ; or receipt of consideration from a third party , also known as kickbacks . ebsa also focuses some of its enforcement efforts on compensation arrangements between pension plan sponsors and service providers hired to assist in the investment of plan assets . ebsa's consultant / adviser project ( cap ) , created in october 2006 , is focused on identifying conflicts of interest and the receipt of indirect , undisclosed compensation by pension consultants and other investment advisers . its investigations determine whether the receipt of such compensation violates erisa because the adviser or consultant used its status with respect to a benefit plan to generate additional fees for itself or its affiliates . according to an ebsa official , the agency has not yet taken enforcement action against consultants or advisers or 401 ( k ) plan fiduciaries . however , the official told us that by implementing this initiative , ebsa has demonstrated its concern about the receipt of indirect , undisclosed compensation by fiduciary consultants and advisers doing business with 401 ( k ) plans . cap also seeks to identify potential criminal violations , such as kickbacks or fraud . in addition to its enforcement efforts , ebsa works to educate and assist employers ( particularly small employers ) , auditors and other service providers in understanding and complying with their obligations under the law and related regulations and procedures , including those related to 401 ( k ) plans . ebsa also has a program called the voluntary fiduciary correction program ( vfcp ) , which allows plan officials to disclose and correct certain violations without penalty . in fiscal year 2007 , 1,303 401 ( k ) vfcp applications were received by ebsa's regional offices , and over $20.7 million was restored to 401 ( k ) plans as a result of this program . according to ebsa , virtually all transactions under the vfcp program are related to fiduciary issues . since our november 2006 report , ebsa has made progress on three regulatory initiatives to improve the transparency of fee and expense information to participants , plan sponsors and fiduciaries , government agencies and the public . it began these initiatives , in part , amid concerns that participants were not receiving information in a format useful to them when making investment decisions and that plan fiduciaries were having difficulty getting needed fee and compensation arrangement information from service providers to fully satisfy their fiduciary obligations .