gao - 04-685t . washington , d.c.: april 23 , 2004 . child and family services reviews: better use of data and improved guidance could enhance hhs's oversight of state performance . gao - 04-333 washington , d.c.: april 20 , 2004 . child welfare: improved federal oversight could assist states in overcoming key challenges . figure 2 depicts these results . one official from pennsylvania commented that because of the state's budget shortfall , no additional funds were available for the state to implement its improvement plan , so most counties must improve outcomes with little or no additional resources . a massachusetts official reported that fiscal problems in his state likely would lead the state to lay off attorneys and caseworkers and to cut funding for family support programs . while state officials acknowledged that they do not have specific estimates of pip implementation expenses because they have not tracked this information in their state financial systems , many states indicated that to cope with financial difficulties , they had to be creative and use resources more efficiently to fund pip strategies . of the 26 states responding to a question in our survey on pip financing , 12 said that they were financing the pip strategies by redistributing current funding , and 7 said that they were using no - cost methods . in an example of the latter , oklahoma officials reported pursuing in - kind donations from a greeting card company so that they could send thank - you notes to foster parents , believing this could increase foster parent retention and engagement . aside from funding challenges , states also reported that pip implementation has been affected by staff workloads , but these comments were mixed . in wyoming , for example , caseworkers told us that their high caseloads would prevent them from implementing many of the positive action steps included in their improvement plan . in contrast , oklahoma caseworkers told us that the improvement plan priorities in their state — such as finding permanent homes for children — have helped them become more motivated , more organized , and more effective with time management . acf officials expressed uncertainty about how best to monitor states' progress and apply estimated financial penalties when progress was slow or absent , and 3 of the 5 states we visited reported frustration with the limited guidance acf had provided on the pips quarterly reporting process . for example , 4 regional offices told us that they did not have enough guidance on or experience with evaluating state quarterly reports . some regional offices told us they require states to submit evidence of each pip action step's completion , such as training curricula or revised policies , but one acf official acknowledged that this is not yet standard procedure , although the agency is considering efforts to make the quarterly report submission procedures more uniform . moreover , acf staff from 1 region told us that because pip monitoring varies by region , they were concerned about enforcing penalties .