we did not make this change . ii ) . oia 1997 and 1998 data show that fas migrants surveyed migrated to guam , hawaii , and the cnmi at different points in time . we have modified the text to note that hawaii has estimated $86 million in compact impact costs , but has received no compensation to date . we agree , and have recommended in a previous report that future compact economic assistance include specific measures ( including grant requirements ) that will ensure the effectiveness of , and accountability over , future spending . see foreign assistance: u.s. funds to two micronesian nations had little impact on economic development ( gao / nsiad - 00-216 , sept. 22 , 2000 ) . the following are gao's comments on the letter from the government of the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands dated august 29 , 2001 . we added text in footnote 21 on p. 15 , stating: “further , cnmi government officials have reported that it is far more cost effective to hire a fas citizen , given the immigration filing expenses and other costs associated with hiring other foreign workers.” 2 . the report does not suggest that fas migrant health costs are unimportant in the cnmi . as shown in table 1 , the cnmi had the highest number of combined pre - compact migrants from the fsm , the rmi , and palau present in 1998 ( 1,192 , compared to 730 for guam and 610 for hawaii ) . at the time of the oia surveys in 1997 and 1998 , the cnmi had received and retained slightly more migrants from the fsm , the rmi , and palau ( combined ) for several years prior to 1985 . the following are gao's comments on the letter from the government of guam dated august 30 , 2001 . the data we present on p. 17 of the report regarding the impact of fas migrants on guam , hawaii , and the cnmi include public safety costs . we acknowledge that fas migrants create impact on the criminal justice system in guam . for example , in guam , where fas migrants make up about 5 percent of the population , 12 percent of the cost of the corrections system was attributed to fas migrants in fiscal year 2000 . fas migrants represented 26 percent of all convictions in fiscal year 1999 / 2000 in guam . we did not separately discuss this area of impact in our report because it is smaller than the impact reported on the health and education systems . for example , for fiscal year 2000 public safety costs estimated by guam was 6 percent of the total impact amount , compared with 54 percent for education and 40 percent for health and welfare . reviewing the impact immigration to guam from countries other than fas nations was beyond the scope of this report . the issues of economic development and employment opportunities in the fsm and the rmi have been addressed in a prior gao report . in this review , we reported that the considerable funds provided to the fsm and the rmi under the compact had resulted in little economic development .