administrative support . one practice was to assign one or more individuals to perform or monitor administrative duties related to idea . according to state special education officials from our site visits , many of the larger school districts hire due process clerks to handle logistics . these are teachers who may continue to teach part time or take on the special education administrative role full time . this frees special education teachers from some of the required paperwork . some participants from our focus groups said that having administrative clerks reduced the time and burdens associated with administrative tasks . one educator from a focus group said hiring a paraprofessional to set up all iep meetings , contact parents , and send out meeting notices proved helpful in reducing administrative burden . another participant noted the importance of everyone who works with a special education student collaborating to make a plan so that the student can make progress . in addition , one participant stated that , to reduce burdensome redundancies created by the “dual - track” paperwork systems for special education and general education , those working with a student should have a conversation and reach agreement on whether special education or general education is in that student's best interests . we provided a draft of this report to the department of education for review and comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , education neither agreed nor disagreed with our findings . education also provided technical comments that were incorporated , as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of education , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff should have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0580 or nowickij@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the objectives of this report were to examine ( 1 ) what education and states have done to implement selected provisions of the law to help minimize the burden associated with administrative and paperwork requirements under the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , ( 2 ) stakeholder views about idea's administrative and paperwork requirements , and ( 3 ) the steps education and others have taken to minimize idea - related burden . to address our first objective , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and published studies . we interviewed officials from education and organizations representing education stakeholder groups , including special education administrators at the state and district levels , parents of students with disabilities , and educators .