and transforming the department . for example , we identified the need for dhs to link workforce planning efforts to the department's strategic and program - specific planning efforts to identify current and future human capital needs , including the size of the workforce ; the deployment of the workforce across the department and its components ; and the knowledge , skills , abilities , and diversity needed for the agency to meet its goals and objectives . in our most recent update of the high - risk list in february 2011 , we reported that the department needed to link workforce planning to its strategic and program - specific planning efforts to identify current and future human capital needs to address dhs's challenges within the department's management functions and in integrating those functions across the department . in january 2011 , dhs issued its initial integrated strategy for high risk management , which included key management initiatives ( eg , workforce strategy , workforce planning and balanced workforce , and outreach and targeted recruitment ) to address challenges identified for each management area — human capital , financial , information technology , acquisition , and management integration . dhs provided updates of its progress in implementing these initiatives in later versions of the strategy in june 2011 , december 2011 , and june 2012 . we reported in september 2012 that successfully achieving and sustaining progress in these management areas would demonstrate the department's ability and ongoing commitment to addressing its high - risk designation in this implementation and transformation area . we have reported that strategic workforce planning includes five leading principles that address aligning an organization's human capital program with its current and emerging mission and programmatic goals , and developing long - term strategies for acquiring , developing , and retaining staff to achieve programmatic goals . the process for strategic workforce planning , along with a description of the five associated leading principles , is shown in figure 1 . move mouse over the phase title to get more information on the phases . the department created bwpmo within ochco in march 2010 and issued its balanced workforce strategy in 2010 . the balanced workforce strategy refers to the department's effort to identify the appropriate balance of federal and contractor employees required to support critical agency functions . for example , we reported in december 2011 , as a result of the balanced workforce efforts , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) hired 12 individuals in watch officer support positions , which involve collecting information and monitoring domestic events that affect air passenger security , positions that had previously been filled by contractors . program officials said they plan to convert the remaining contractor positions to positions for federal employees in the near future . further , we reported that dhs developed the balanced workforce strategy in response to congressional concerns about the department's use of contracted services and our 2007 report on its use of professional and management support services . bwpmo issued the balanced workforce strategy in 2010 and subsequently developed an automated tool to help components perform the necessary analysis to determine the appropriate mix of federal employees versus contractors .