gao - 13-561 . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2013 . see appendix i for further details . to determine how selected dhs components define their m&a activities and how they would go about identifying spending associated with these activities , we interviewed officials representing two of dhs's eight support components — departmental management and operations ( dmo ) and the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) — and six of dhs's seven operational components — the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the u.s. coast guard , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , and the u.s. secret service ( usss ) . we selected these eight components based on the amount of their budget authority ( totaling nearly 88 percent of dhs's fiscal year 2013 budget authority ) ; their mission , whether operational or support ; and date established , whether before or after the inception of dhs . to determine the extent to which m&a data are available from fiscal years 1999 through 2013 , we interviewed officials from the eight selected components about their ability to provide m&a spending data during the time frame . how have select dhs components defined and identified their m&a activities and spending , and to what extent are m&a data available from fiscal years 1999 through 2013 ? how has dhs identified m&a spending department - wide , and to what extent has dhs defined m&a activities and taken steps to enhance efforts to collect m&a data ? to address the first objective , we analyzed dhs's congressional budget justifications , budget execution reports , and budget - in - briefs , as well as presidential budgets and appropriations legislation from fiscal years 2004 through 2013 to understand how m&a activities are defined and accounted for within components' appropriations accounts . we sought to independently identify components' m&a activities and related spending , but were unable to because of various challenges . in particular , sources of federal budget data do not define and distinguish all m&a spending from other types of spending . moreover , in cases where groupings of budget data , such as appropriation accounts , are largely m&a , the activities contained in those groupings do not include all m&a activities and are not consistent from year to year . we did not obtain available data from the components because the data would not be comparable . while the results of our interviews cannot be generalized across all dhs components , these interviews allowed us to obtain perspectives on how selected components define and would identify m&a spending , as well as the availability of their m&a data since fiscal year 1999 . to address the second objective , we examined dhs's two efforts to identify its spending on specific m&a activities — dhs's efficiency review ( er ) — an effort to identify opportunities to improve efficiency and streamline decision making through a series of initiatives — and the obama administration's campaign to cut waste — a government - wide specifically , we analyzed all effort to reduce administrative spending .