dod did not provide any additional comments . dod's written comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix iii . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; the director of the defense contract management agency ; the director of the defense logistics agency ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . the reasons for the nonconformance varied for each part . most of the 15 contracts we reviewed included federal acquisition regulation clause 52.246-2 , inspection of supplies — fixed price , which states that the prime contractor shall tender to the government for acceptance only supplies that have been inspected in accordance with the inspection system and found by the contractor to be in conformity with contract requirements . this contract clause also states that the contractor is not relieved of its oversight responsibility when government quality assurance over subcontractors is required . the remaining contracts included other quality clauses or did not specify quality requirements because the contractors had quality systems that had been previously approved by the procuring contracting officers . dcma also performed reviews of subcontractors' certifications to the prime contractor that the parts and processes produced by the subcontractor were manufactured in accordance with the contract requirements . dcma quality assurance specialists periodically reviewed third - party certifications and contractors' documents related to site visits , receiving inspections , and other oversight of subcontractors . these reviews provided a technique for dcma to determine whether the contractors' quality assurance systems were adequate for oversight of subcontractors . eleven of these contracts were judgmentally selected: three from information provided by the navy and air force on nonconforming parts and 8 from dcma . more detailed information about our scope and methodology is contained in appendix i . we conducted our review from november 2003 through october 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the federal acquisition regulation is the primary regulation for use by all federal agencies in acquiring supplies and services . sections 46 and 52 , which discuss and set forth quality assurance and contract clauses , respectively , provide guidance in determining quality assurance responsibilities . inspections involving kind , count , and condition are inspections intended to visually identify and verify the quantity and exterior appearance of a part to determine if it visually meets contract specifications . during fiscal year 2003 , dcma was responsible for government source inspection for approximately 273,000 contracts . the federal acquisition regulation requires that contracts include inspection and other quality requirements that will protect the interest of the government . it also provides guidance in establishing which clauses to include in the various types of contracts . the clauses included in each contract dictate the type and level of quality assurance oversight to be performed . dcma quality assurance specialists are expected to follow the inspection and acceptance provisions in each contract in determining whether they are required to perform quality assurance oversight .