, functions ) . irs agreed with our recommendations . treasury's inspector general for tax administration has also recently reported on investment management issues at irs: in july 2010 , the organization reported on irs's process to manage and control it investments . it reported that irs had recently merged its investment management activities into the strategy and capital planning office , and stated that this office was in the process of updating irs's capital planning and investment control process guide , developing desk guides for business cases and data calls , and identifying the steps for implementing a systematic investment selection , monitoring , and review process . an organization should effectively oversee its it projects throughout all phases of their life cycles . an investment board should observe each project's performance and progress toward predefined cost and schedule expectations as well as each project's anticipated benefits and risk exposure . this does not mean that a departmental board should micromanage each project to provide effective oversight ; rather , it means that the departmental board should be actively involved in all it investments and proposals that are high cost or high risk or have significant scope and duration and , at a minimum , should have a mechanism for maintaining visibility of other investments . the board should also employ early - warning systems that enable it to take corrective actions at the first sign of cost , schedule , and performance slippages . according to the itim , effective project oversight requires , among other things , ( 1 ) having written policies and procedures for management oversight ; ( 2 ) developing and maintaining an approved management plan for each it project ; ( 3 ) making up - to - date cost and schedule data for each project available to the oversight boards ; ( 4 ) having regular reviews by each investment board of each project's performance against stated expectations ; and ( 5 ) ensuring that corrective actions for each underperforming project are documented , agreed to , implemented , and tracked until the desired outcome is achieved . ( the complete list of key practices is provided in table 7. ) irs has executed all seven key practices associated with effective project oversight . the agency has developed written policies and procedures for management oversight of its investments . these include ( 1 ) a tiered escalation guide that outlines the process for elevating a project to a higher level of control or governance for review , mitigation , and resolution when resolution cannot be reached at a project's respective level of control or governance , and ( 2 ) written procedures and a template for conducting milestone exit reviews to assess a project's readiness for moving to the next phase of its life cycle or exiting a milestone . in addition , the agency has adequate resources for overseeing it projects that lend support to the meg , irs's highest governance board for overseeing projects during the control phase . to support the meg , irs has lower - level governance bodies — escs , organizational level governance boards , and management level governance boards — for overseeing the agency's it investments .