rebates . pbms shared with the fehbp plans certain rebates that a drug manufacturer provides a pbm associated with their fehbp business , although the extent to which the pbms retained a portion of these rebates varied , depending on the contracts negotiated between the plans and pbms . we estimate the rebates retained by the pbms we reviewed represented less than half of one percent of total plan drug spending . the plans we reviewed varied as to whether they reimbursed pbms separately for administrative services in exchange for a larger share of contractual rebates or they received less of the contractual rebates and were charged low or no fees for administrative services . how are pbms compensated for services provided to fehbp plans ? to respond to these questions , we examined the use of pbms by three fehbp plans: blue cross and blue shield ( bcbs ) , government employees hospital association ( geha ) , and pacificare of california . together , these plans accounted for about 55 percent of the 8.3 million people covered by fehbp as of july 2002 and represented various plan types and pbm contractors . bcbs contracted with the two largest pbms in the united states for its pharmacy benefit services — medco health solutions , a subsidiary of the pharmaceutical company merck & co. , inc. , and advancepcs . geha contracted with medco health solutions and pacificare of california contracted with prescription solutions , another subsidiary of pacificare health systems . we reviewed contracts between the pbms and plans , financial statements regarding payments made between the plans and pbms , and retail and mail - order prices for selected drugs from the fehbp plans we reviewed and the pbms with which they contracted . we also obtained pricing information from retail pharmacies , interviewed officials at the office of personnel management ( opm ) , and associations representing pbms and retail pharmacies , and reviewed studies regarding the use of pbms and prescription drug payments . specifically: to assess whether pbms achieve cost savings , we obtained april 2002 prices for 18 drugs that the three fehbp plans paid to their pbms for retail and mail order prescriptions . we compared these prices to cash prices that customers would pay at retail pharmacies in california , north dakota , washington , d.c. , and the virginia and maryland suburbs of washington , d.c. , and to medicaid reimbursement rates in these locations . in addition , we obtained plan and pbm data on drug manufacturers' rebates that pbms pass on to plans and any estimated savings resulting from certain pbm intervention techniques such as drug utilization reviews and prior authorization . to examine the effect of pbm services on enrollees' access to drugs and out - of - pocket costs , we reviewed plan documents ; compared the plans' retail pharmacy networks to the number of licensed retail pharmacies in california , the district of columbia , maryland , north dakota , and virginia ; and compared the number of drugs and therapeutic classes included on the plans' formularies with the national formulary for the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .