gao - 06-15 . state , usaid , and dod have taken steps to evaluate the progress of their tsctp efforts and plan to conduct a holistic evaluation of tsctp within a year . this assistance supports the professionalization of militaries globally through training and education activities , primarily in the united states . courses in africa are not focused on counterterrorism but may include counterterrorism topics as part of efforts to professionalize and establish relationships with foreign militaries . these funds are state - approved and dod - implemented . peacekeeping operations — authorizes the president to furnish assistance to friendly countries and international organizations for peacekeeping operations and other programs carried out in furtherance of the national security interests of the united states . outside of funds dedicated for tsctp programs , peacekeeping operations funds have been used to support security sector reform in the region , such as in mali for fiscal year 2014 . in fiscal year 2013 , peacekeeping operations funds not dedicated for tsctp were used to train and equip african troops deploying to the african union mission in mali , which has since transitioned into a united nations mission . development assistance — authorizes the president to provide assistance for various purposes , including agricultural development , education and human resources development , grant assistance for microenterprises , and a development fund for africa , among other purposes . outside of funds dedicated for tsctp programs , usaid has used development assistance funds to transfer financial resources to developing countries as well as to help countries solve development problems . nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs — authorizes the president to provide antiterrorism assistance , nonproliferation and export control assistance , and other assistance to foreign countries for various purposes . outside of funds dedicated for tsctp programs , state has provided nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs – funded assistance to support additional activities designed to enhance the antiterrorism skills of friendly countries by providing training and equipment and other programs run by state's bureau of counterterrorism , including its counterterrorism engagement , counterterrorism finance , countering violent extremism , and regional strategic initiative programs . state has provided some funding from this account to the department of justice to implement activities , such as providing resident legal advisers and training in criminal investigative techniques to select tsctp countries . economic support fund — authorizes the president to assist countries and organizations in order to promote economic or political stability . outside of funds dedicated for tsctp programs , state has used the economic support fund to support its countering violent extremism program and the interagency center for strategic counterterrorism communications , while usaid has used it for programs and activities to counter violent extremism in the sahel region . international narcotics control and law enforcement — authorizes the president to assist foreign countries and international organizations to control narcotics and other controlled substances , or for other anticrime purposes .