two of these are complete . unlike project evaluations , ilab does not require impact evaluations , but conducts them to obtain information on what types of interventions are effective in reducing child labor and can be used as the basis for replicating successful activities . impact evaluations seek to answer cause - and - effect questions . their purpose is to determine whether a program has an impact and to quantify how large the impact is . for example , impact evaluations often involve randomly assigning eligible individuals or children to two groups , one of which participates in the program or activity that is being evaluated ( treatment group ) , while the other does not ( control group ) . the random assignment ensures that the two groups are statistically the same , and any difference seen later can be attributed to one group having participated in the program and the other not . thus , impact evaluations measure program effectiveness typically by comparing the outcomes of the two groups . officials said that these indicators and targets were developed by better work . each project has numerous individual indicators and targets . for the most recent project time period available ( varying between the end of 2012 and the end of 2013 ) , we counted the number of indicators with targets for each of 6 projects , determined for how many of those indicators the target was met or exceeded , and determined how many projects achieved various levels of success in meeting or exceeding their targets ( see fig . we also reviewed the ilab cooperative agreement template and attestation engagement reports . for 5 projects , the projects met or exceeded the targets for more than 50 percent of their indicators with targets . one project met or exceeded the targets for 14 percent of its indicators with targets , meaning it did not meet the targets for 86 percent . we compared the date the grantee certified the financial report with the date ilab project managers accepted it to determine whether the project manager was in compliance with ilab's guidance . further , we analyzed the financial reports to determine the amount of cash the grantee reported as of june 30 , 2013 . to assess the reliability of the financial reports , we interviewed dol officials about the e - grants system and asked about discrepancies we found during our review . we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining the timeliness of acceptance of the financial reports and the amount of cash balances . in addition , we interviewed ilab officials to understand the processes for financial monitoring of cooperative agreements . to the extent necessary , we compared the information obtained with gao's standards for internal control in the federal government . specifically , dol reported that the child labor office is incorporating into its operation manual the same standard that the trade and labor office has recently established — which is for project managers to accept or reject quarterly financial reports within 30 days after the reports are due .