gao - 13-278 . washington , d.c.: march 22 , 2013 . ( see app . i for additional information on the regulatory status of types of cbrn medical countermeasures in the sns for the pediatric population. ) although hhs can provide information on the proportion of sns countermeasures that can be used by children , it cannot provide information on the funds invested in procuring these countermeasures . hhs does not separately track the funds that it has invested in the acquisition and development of pediatric medical countermeasures because it does not account separately for investments related to the different populations . hhs procures cbrn medical countermeasures for the sns based on , among other things , the list of material threats to the nation , public health response and medical consequence assessments , and available resources . since 2004 , barda has invested over $4 billion of project bioshield's special reserve fund , which supports advanced development and manufacturing of potential cbrn medical countermeasures , in contracts to support medical countermeasure development in healthy and at - risk populations , including the pediatric population . in addition , between 2009 and 2012 , cdc's budget to maintain or acquire licensed cbrn medical countermeasures for the sns was over $1.5 billion ; however , no funds were specifically designated exclusively for products to be used only by the pediatric population . hhs faces economic , regulatory , scientific , and ethical challenges in its efforts to develop and acquire cbrn medical countermeasures for children in an emergency . despite these challenges , hhs is taking steps to focus on the pediatric population and develop pediatric formulations of existing medical countermeasures . hhs faces a variety of interrelated challenges in developing and acquiring pediatric cbrn medical countermeasures , including economic , regulatory , scientific , and ethical issues that impede the ability of hhs to address the needs of children during a cbrn incident . economic challenges facing hhs include the high failure rate of research , development , approval , and licensure of most drugs , vaccines , and diagnostic devices . agency and industry officials told us that the risk of failure in developing countermeasures for children is even higher than the risk in developing them for the adult population . this risk , as well as a lack of a commercial market for most cbrn medical countermeasures , has made it difficult for hhs to attract companies willing to invest in such development and has therefore impeded hhs's ability to acquire the needed countermeasures . in addition , various reports have stated that insufficient economic incentives are available to encourage the private sector to invest millions of dollars to develop potential new pediatric medical countermeasures.desirable to have oral liquid formulations available for young children who cannot swallow pills , it is not always practical to develop and acquire them for the sns because such countermeasures for children can be more costly to procure and maintain , have shorter shelf lives , and may exceed manufacturer capability , as opposed to alternatives such as pill crushing and mixing that can be explored for all but the youngest children .