mark yoder . irs has been aware of this issue . its own study in 2005 found less than half of payroll tax cases in which irs assessed the business owner or officer a tfrp had a lien filed to protect the interest of the government , and only 27 percent of tfrp assessments that were under a year old had a lien filed . as the previously discussed case study illustrates , the timeliness of lien filing is critical in such cases to protect the government's interest in the owner's personal property and to encourage the owners / officers to make the business compliant . irs is taking some steps to address these issues . for example , irs is investigating the feasibility of routing payroll tax cases that might otherwise be sent to the queue through the acs process to have a lien filed . an overview of each of these tools follows . among irs's tools to collect outstanding taxes is its ability to use the property of a taxpayer as security for an outstanding tax debt . this is accomplished by filing a notice of federal tax lien . the lien serves to protect the interest of the federal government and as a public notice to current and potential creditors of the government's interest in the taxpayer's property . although the tax lien exists under the law even before a notice is filed , the lien is perfected when irs provides notice of its interest by filing the lien with a designated office , such as a local courthouse in the county where the taxpayer's property is located . if the service does not file a notice of federal tax lien ( nftl ) with a state or local recording office where the taxpayer's property is situated , the government will have a more junior position to other creditors who have perfected their judgments or security . irs reported filing more than 680,000 tax liens in fiscal year 2007 . since a lien encumbers taxpayer property and because federal tax liens appear on commercial credit reports , irs's ability to file a lien is a powerful tool in enforcing the tax laws . filing a lien prevents the taxpayer from selling an asset , with clear title , without first paying off the outstanding tax debt . levies are legal seizures of tax debtors' assets to satisfy tax delinquencies . a levy is different from a lien in that a lien is a claim used as security for the tax debt , while a levy actually takes the property to satisfy the tax debt . generally , irs is authorized to levy property of the tax debtor in the possession of a third party , such as bank accounts , federal payments , and wages . irs records indicate that it filed over 3.7 million levy actions against tax debtors for property held by third parties in fiscal year 2007 . irs also may seize and sell real or personal property held directly by the tax debtor , such as business assets like business equipment , cars , or paintings .