interoperability can be achieved at different levels . at the highest level , electronic data are computable ( that is , in a format that a computer can understand and act on to , for example , provide alerts to clinicians on drug allergies ) . at a lower level , electronic data are structured and viewable , but not computable . the value of data at this level is that they are structured so that data of interest to users are easier to find . at still a lower level , electronic data are unstructured and viewable , but not computable . with unstructured electronic data , a user would have to find needed or relevant information by searching uncategorized data . beyond these , paper records can also be considered interoperable ( at the lowest level ) because they allow data to be shared , read , and interpreted by human beings . however , my discussion today focuses only on the three levels of electronic interoperability . certification helps assure purchasers and other users of health it systems that the systems will provide needed capabilities ( including ensuring security and confidentiality ) and will work with other systems without reprogramming . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the use of information technology ( it ) to electronically collect , store , retrieve , and transfer clinical , administrative , and financial health information has great potential to help improve the quality and efficiency of health care and is critical to improving the performance of the u.s. health care system . historically , patient health information has been scattered across paper records kept by many different caregivers in many different locations , making it difficult for a clinician to access all of a patient's health information at the time of care . lacking access to these critical data , a clinician may be challenged to make the most informed decisions on treatment options , potentially putting the patient's health at greater risk . the use of electronic health records can help provide this access and improve clinical decisions . electronic health records are particularly crucial for optimizing the health care provided to military personnel and veterans . while in military status and later as veterans , many dod and va patients tend to be highly mobile and may have health records residing at multiple medical facilities within and outside the united states . making such records electronic can help ensure that complete health care information is available for most military service members and veterans at the time and place of care , no matter where it originates . key to making health care information electronically available is interoperability — that is , the ability to share data among health care providers . interoperability enables different information systems or components to exchange information and to use the information that has been exchanged . this capability is important because it allows patients' electronic health information to move with them from provider to provider , regardless of where the information originated .