business type . eda officials expect that the itm program will be open to only manufacturers producing , using , or commercializing innovative technologies . all four comparable programs allow such manufacturers to participate , and two of the programs — the usda biorefinery , renewable chemical , and biobased product manufacturing assistance program and the doe loan guarantees for innovative energy technologies program — are intended to support specific types of innovative technologies . according to an eda analysis of sba 7 ( a ) loan data , roughly 11 percent of the loans made under sba's 7 ( a ) program from october 1991 through march 2014 were to manufacturers in subsectors identified as innovative . usda officials estimated that about 25 percent of the agency's business and industry program loan guarantees are issued to manufacturers . maximum allowable loan amount . according to eda officials , the itm program will guarantee loans of up to $15 million . three of the four comparable programs are able to guarantee loans of at least $15 million . maximum guaranteed portion of loan . the maximum loan guarantee percentage allowed under the itm program is 80 percent . each of the four comparable programs also allows for a loan guarantee percentage of 80 percent , but the percentages can vary depending on loan amounts or total project costs . permitted uses of funds . the itm program , according to eda officials and program documents , will allow funds to be used to purchase land , buildings , and equipment , just like the four comparable programs we examined , but permissible uses of funds vary somewhat across programs . all four of the other programs also allow funds to be used for working capital or startup costs , though the itm program will not , according to eda officials and program documents . table 3 provides a more detailed comparison of the itm program , as currently designed , and the sba 7 ( a ) program on which the itm program is largely modelled . appendix i provides a comparison of the itm program to all four comparable programs we examined . eda officials acknowledged that the itm program is potentially duplicative with other federal loan guarantee programs in a number of respects . for example , early - stage companies may not be able to demonstrate financial strength by providing a consistent history of profitability . sba officials stated that eda did not specifically seek information from them on how to target the itm program so as not to duplicate the efforts of sba's loan guarantee programs . as a result , eda has not taken full advantage of sba officials' expertise regarding the types of small manufacturers that receive support through the 7 ( a ) program and those that do not , to help identify potential capital access gaps . sba officials said that they spend a significant amount of time trying to determine potential applicants not being served by their loan guarantee programs . officials said they use internal sba data and information gathered from industry representatives to inform discussions on the topic . sba officials said that new and early - stage businesses are the most challenged in terms of capital access .