costs to employers . additional administrative costs associated with setting up and managing payroll - deduction iras may be a barrier for small employers , particularly for those without electronic payroll processing . according to labor , costs to employers are significantly influenced by the number of ira providers an employer must remit contributions to on behalf of employees . as such , labor's guidance allows employers to select a single ira provider for all employees . also , under labor's guidance , an ira sponsor may reimburse the employer for the actual costs of operating a payroll - deduction ira as long as such costs do not include profit to the employer . small business groups told us that costs could also be influenced by the number of employees participating in the program and whether an employer has a payroll processing system in place to make automatic deductions and direct deposits to employee accounts . several experts told us that many small employers lack electronic , or automatic , payroll systems , and these employers would be subject to higher management costs for offering payroll - deduction iras . moreover , representatives from small business groups and other experts told us that providing health care insurance is a more pressing issue to many small employers than providing a retirement savings opportunity . although experts reported that payroll - deduction iras represent costs to employers , we found that opinions on the significance of those costs varied . experts advocating for expanded payroll - deduction iras reported that most employers would incur little to no costs since most employers already make payroll deductions for social security and medicare , as well as federal , state , and local taxes . further , experts said that individuals with low - balance iras would be inclined to make early withdrawals and be subject to additional income taxes . experts also reported that because the incentives for tax - deferred ira contributions are based on marginal tax rates , lower - income individuals receive a lower immediate tax subsidy than higher income individuals . two experts told us that policymakers should begin their evaluation of payroll - deduction iras by calculating how much savings is required for an adequate standard of living in retirement , and then determine what role payroll - deduction iras could play in reaching that level . we found that employer - sponsored sep and simple iras can help small employers and their workers to save for their retirement , but several factors may discourage small employers from offering these iras to their employees . experts said the higher contribution limits and flexible employer contribution options of sep and simple iras offer greater savings benefits to employers and employees than payroll - deduction iras . for example , the 2007 simple contribution limit of $10,500 per year for individuals under age 50 is more than twice the amount allowed in 2007 in payroll - deduction iras . in 2007 , sep iras allowed employers to contribute the lesser of 25 percent of an employee's compensation or up to $45,000 .