smaller grants . while some non - r01 equivalent ( non - r01e ) grants may match or exceed the amount of some r01e grants , they are generally of a lesser amount and , for purposes of this report , are therefore referred to as “smaller” grants . according to nih , in fiscal year 2016 , smaller grants were , on average , amounts that ranged from about $61,000 to about $1.1 million total . these grants provide limited funding for a relatively short period of time to support a variety of exploratory or developmental projects , including pilot or feasibility studies , collection of preliminary data , and secondary analysis of existing data . career development grants . about 41 percent of doctoral graduates and 45 percent of postdoctoral fellows supported by this program entered careers in academic research or teaching compared to about 43 percent of the u.s. doctoral degree workforce . in 2011 , the national institute on aging evaluated its research supplement program and found that the nih research grant applicant success rate of former participants from 2002 to 2010 was about 21 percent . the average research grant success rate for national institute on aging grants was about 18 percent during this same period . in 2016 , nih's chief officer of scientific workforce diversity established a 5-year strategic plan that describes the agency's five workforce diversity goals and supporting objectives . the strategic plan includes goals and objectives that apply to both extramural and intramural investigators . during the course of our audit work , nih updated this plan to describe progress made on each of its diversity goals , which are to: expand scientific workforce diversity as a field of inquiry , build and implement evidence related to diversity outcomes , understand the role of sociocultural factors in biomedical recruitment sustain nationwide workforce diversity with seamless career transitions , and promote the value of scientific workforce diversity . nih officials provided us with performance measures that its scientific workforce diversity office will use to gauge the agency's progress in achieving each of its five strategic plan's goals . however , these items outline the particular areas that nih plans to evaluate , rather than provide quantitative metrics , evaluation details , or time frames associated with any of the areas by which to evaluate progress in fulfilling the goals of the strategic plan . for example , for the first scientific workforce diversity goal “expand scientific workforce diversity as a field of inquiry” one of the performance measures is “number of publications stored in the scientific workforce diversity office's online database.” neither the strategic plan nor the additional documentation that nih provided specifies a quantitative metric for the number of publications to be stored in its database and the time frame for doing so . similarly , for the second scientific workforce diversity goal , to “build and implement evidence related to diversity outcomes” one of the performance measures identified by nih is to compare the large grants awarded to african american or black scientists to those received by scientists who are white or from other racial and ethnic groups .