pretexting is difficult to detect and is likely to be underreported . many officials told us that pretexting was a common practice , especially among private investigators . according to many law enforcement officials we spoke with , crimes involving pretexting are particularly difficult to prove , and it was unlikely that pretexting would be reported or prosecuted as a single crime . if a pretexter is clever in his or her fraud scheme and successful in obtaining financial information , the financial institution is unaware that it was fooled into providing information . often there is a time lag before victims of pretext calling suffer financial loss , and they may not be aware of how their financial information was obtained . according to law enforcement officials we spoke with , offenders using fraud to access financial information are generally detected as part of a larger crime , such as credit card , identity theft , or other bank fraud . an increase in related crimes , although not directly correlated to pretext calling , may be a possible indication of the prevalence of fraudulent access to financial information . for example , the number of sar filings by the banks related to check fraud , debit and credit card fraud , false statement , and wire transfer fraud continued to increase from 1998 to 1999 , according to the october 2000 report by the bank secrecy act advisory group . as stated previously , more time and experience are needed to assess the efficacy and adequacy of the remedies contained in subtitle b regarding fraudulent access to financial information . therefore , we are not making any recommendations for additional legislation or regulatory actions . during our consultations with representatives from ftc , the federal banking agencies , ncua , sec , and federal and state enforcement agencies and insurance regulators , we obtained their views about the efficacy and adequacy of the subtitle's other provisions . some federal and state officials and representatives from consumer and privacy groups we contacted had some suggestions regarding possible changes to subtitle b provisions , which are presented below . as discussed earlier , we did not evaluate how practical these suggestions were since we found no consensus on these issues . these suggestions reflect the continued concerns and issues raised by ftc staff and the privacy and consumer groups with whom we spoke . ftc staff and some state officials suggested that states be allowed to take enforcement actions for violations of subtitle b provisions . according to these ftc staff and state officials , this would allow the states to augment the federal resources used to enforce compliance with the subtitle b prohibition against pretext calling . earlier versions of the house and senate bills that were the basis for subtitle b contained provisions that provided for state actions for injunctive relief or for recovering damages of not more than $1,000 per violation . these provisions were subsequently eliminated in the house and conference versions of the legislation . ftc staff stated that the additional resources of the state attorneys general would be particularly helpful in enforcing compliance by some of the smaller information brokers that may otherwise escape detection or monitoring .