( see fig . 1 for an overview of va's process for convening and conducting aib investigations. ) convening an aib investigation involves determining its need , scope , and board composition . va handbook 0700 states that a convening authority may determine whether an aib investigation is needed based on several factors , including the results of a preliminary investigation , any other ongoing investigation , or the type of matter being investigated . a preliminary investigation is an informal process whereby readily available information is collected , for instance by obtaining witness statements . according to one convening authority , an aib investigation would likely be convened after a preliminary investigation if , for example , conflicting witness accounts were provided during this initial investigation . a convening authority may also determine that another ongoing review into the matter , such as root cause analysis or peer review , meets va's needs without convening an aib . moreover , aibs are not to investigate matters that may be criminal in nature without the convening authority first coordinating with federal and state law enforcement authorities , including va's office of inspector general . a convening authority also determines the scope of the investigation and composition of the aib . an investigation's scope — the matter to be investigated — may be focused on a specific incident involving alleged employee misconduct or a broader systemic matter . for example , among the investigation reports we reviewed , one aib investigated alleged physical and verbal abuse of a patient by a va nursing assistant ( an employee misconduct matter ) , while another investigated the facts and circumstances surrounding the death of a patient , including whether changes to policies and procedures were effectively communicated to staff and monitored ( a systemic policy matter ) . in determining the composition of the aib — the number and qualifications of members to be appointed — va handbook 0700 states that aibs generally should be comprised of one to three members , and the members are to be selected primarily based on their expertise and investigative capability , as well as their objectivity and impartiality . convening authorities we interviewed — medical center directors — said they typically appoint three members to ensure that aibs include a subject matter expert and at least one member with investigative experience or training . moreover , three of these convening authorities have appointed aib members from outside their medical center when necessary to ensure the board's impartiality . finally , if the convening authority determines that an aib is needed , it documents the aib's scope and member composition in a charge letter , which officially authorizes the aib investigation . during the course of the investigation , the convening authority may amend the charge letter , to change the scope of the investigation or composition of the aib , among other things . for example , a convening authority included in our review initially charged an aib to investigate an incident involving sexual harassment , but later expanded the investigation's scope to also include an incident involving reprisal against the individual who reported the harassment .