while the basis ( i.e. , formula or share ) of the split of combined profits is established before profits are realized , the split is applied to actual , combined profits resulting from the transaction . the subsidiary has sufficient profits to absorb the cost . if the recall occurs , chockolet incurs the risk of a reduction or cessation of the royalty payments and damage to the value of its brand . while irs has a plan for how it will collect cbc data , a decision is pending on whether to establish a new database to store cbc data or use an existing fatca platform . according to irs officials , their strategy for assessing transfer pricing risk is still evolving and will influence the decision . irs still needs to decide how to use cbc data in conjunction with other international data . irs officials said they expect the cbc costs will be less than the cost of implementing fatca because cbc information is exchanged only between tax authorities , while fatca information is exchanged with individual banks as well as tax authorities . in addition to developing systems to collect , store , and exchange cbc reports , implementation costs also include integrating cbc data with existing irs applications used in transfer pricing risk assessment , developing form 8975 and its instructions , online taxpayer assistance , and staff training . irs officials said they do not have an estimate for these costs and will be in a better position to provide an estimate after the irs information technology team develops its plan for filing and processing the cbc form . according to these officials , these costs are routine for implementing tax regulatory changes that involves a new irs form , and that the costs for cbc are not expected to be significantly different . irs will also incur some additional operational costs for annually collecting , exchanging , and using cbc . these operational costs will be affected by the number of cbc reports irs receives from u.s. and non - u.s. mnes in addition to the number of cbc reports from u.s. mnes that irs will need to transmit to other tax authorities . irs estimated about 2,200 u.s. mnes would meet the $850 million threshold for filing cbc reports . irs will need to transmit the cbc reports of these u.s. mnes to the tax jurisdictions in which the respective mnes have business operations . based on beps cbc reporting requirements , irs will receive cbc reports from non - u.s. mnes with business operations in the united states , although these cbc reports will come from the respective tax jurisdictions of the foreign parent entity . the european commission estimates around 5,000 non - u.s. mnes meet the beps €750 million threshold for cbc reporting . if all these large non - u.s. mnes have business operations in the united states , irs could potentially be receiving about 5,000 cbc reports from other tax jurisdictions . however , there is no reason to assume that all non - u.s. mnes have operations in the united states .