independent laboratories . these laboratories generally receive lower private - payer rates than other types of laboratories , according to industry officials we interviewed . market reports we reviewed noted that about half of the independent laboratory market is dominated by two national laboratories and that these national laboratories provide more competitive pricing by performing a large volume of tests at one time . medicare accounted for a smaller proportion of the revenue earned by these two national laboratories ( 12 percent ) , compared to other laboratories , according to another market report we reviewed . in contrast , a different market report noted that smaller , independent laboratories tend to earn more of their revenue from medicare ( 34 percent ) . hospital - outreach laboratories . these hospital - affiliated laboratories typically receive relatively higher private - payer rates , according to industry officials we interviewed . although hospital - outreach laboratories perform tests similar to other laboratories , they can obtain above - average payment rates by leveraging the market power of their affiliated hospital when negotiating rates with private payers , according to industry officials and market reports . cms removed or replaced data from four reporting entities that appeared to have or confirmed having reported revenue — which is the payment rate multiplied by the volume of tests paid at that rate — instead of payment rates . we estimated that if cms had included these data that clfs expenditures from 2018 through 2020 would have increased by 7 percent . cms removed data it determined were reported in error including duplicate submissions and submissions with payment rates of $0.00 . we estimated that removing these data will change clfs expenditures from 2018 through 2020 by less than one percent . cms identified four other types of potentially inaccurate data that it determined would not significantly impact medicare payment rates or expenditures and did not exclude them from calculations of median private - payer rates . cms considered the following potentially inaccurate data to have met its reporting requirements: 1. data from 57 entities that reported particularly high rates in at least 60 percent of their data , 2. data from 12 entities that reported particularly low rates in at least 50 percent of their data , 3. data with payment rates that were 10 times greater than the 2017 national limitation amounts or 10 times less than these amounts , and 4. data from laboratories that may not have met the $12,500 low - expenditure threshold or that reported data from a hospital npi instead of a laboratory npi . we found that each of these four types of potentially inaccurate data would have changed estimated medicare clfs expenditures from 2018 through 2020 by 1 percent or less if cms had instead excluded the data . to conduct this analysis , we recalculated medicare rates after excluding each type of data and estimated medicare expenditures assuming 2016 rates of utilization .