fema . fema officials at the usvi , regional , and headquarters level are responsible for overseeing the usvi's implementation of federal recovery programs . specifically , once fema obligates grant funding for a project , fema officials on the ground in the usvi are responsible for the day - to - day monitoring of individual projects using a variety of tools . for example , fema officials stated they use the information included in quarterly progress and financial reports to help ensure that subrecipients are in compliance with applicable federal requirements and that potential problems are identified and addressed in a timely manner . usvi . as the recipient of federal disaster funding , the usvi is responsible for providing oversight over the public assistance program and hazard mitigation grant program to ensure they are implemented in compliance with applicable laws and regulations , as well as fema policies and guidance . following the 2017 hurricanes , the usvi took steps to address its responsibilities for receiving grant funding through these programs , including by: ( 1 ) developing administrative plans , ( 2 ) designating two territorial entities to manage the administration of disaster recovery funding , and ( 3 ) establishing the new office of disaster recovery . first , as required by fema , the usvi developed administrative plans for the public assistance program and hazard mitigation grant program to ensure that subrecipients are in compliance with the conditions of these grant programs . these plans outline programmatic and project monitoring activities as well as the financial and administrative procedures for both programs . the plans require , among other things , the usvi to submit quarterly progress and financial reports on the status of projects to fema and describe the usvi's specific roles and responsibilities for implementing and overseeing these two programs . second , the governor of the usvi designated two territorial entities to manage and oversee the implementation of recovery programs — the virgin islands territorial emergency management agency as the programmatic manager and the governor's authorized representative as the grant administrator for all federal recovery funding in the usvi . among other responsibilities , these entities are responsible for ensuring that public assistance program and hazard mitigation grant program participants are in compliance with all programmatic and administrative requirements . for example , the virgin islands territorial emergency management agency is responsible for , among other things , preparing and submitting quarterly progress and financial reports to fema for certain public assistance program projects and for all hazard mitigation grant program projects . in addition , the governor's authorized representative is responsible for ensuring the territory's compliance with all requirements outlined in the fema - approved administrative plans . third , in february 2019 , the usvi's new office of disaster recovery assumed responsibility for overseeing the public assistance program and hazard mitigation grant program , including tracking and reporting on the progress of individual projects and overseeing the submission of reimbursement requests for completed work . the office is also responsible for monitoring and publicly reporting the status of federal recovery funding at http: / / www.usviodr.com / .