cost . the cost estimate that informed the program's $9.8 billion cost baseline — which includes life cycle costs for the acquisition , operations , and maintenance of three polar icebreakers — substantially met our best practices for being comprehensive , well - documented , and accurate . but the estimate only partially met best practices for being credible . the cost estimate did not quantify the range of possible costs over the entire life of the program , such as the period of operations and support . as a result , the cost estimate was not fully reliable and may underestimate the total funding needed for the program . we recommended that the program update its cost estimate to include risk and uncertainty analysis on all phases of the program life cycle , among other things . subsequently , in december 2019 , we found that while the coast guard updated the cost estimate in june 2019 to inform the budget process , the estimate did not reflect cost changes resulting from the contract award two months prior . coast guard officials acknowledged these cost risks and plan to address them as part of the next update to the program's cost estimate . coast guard officials told us that they plan to update the cost estimate by the end of february 2020 . schedule . the coast guard's initial planned delivery dates of 2023 , 2025 , and 2026 for the three ships were not informed by a realistic assessment of shipbuilding activities . rather , these dates were primarily driven by the potential gap in icebreaking capabilities once the coast guard's only operating heavy polar icebreaker — the polar star — reaches the end of its service life . in addition , our analysis of selected lead ships for other coast guard and navy shipbuilding programs found the icebreaker program's estimated construction time of 3 years to be optimistic . an unrealistic schedule puts the coast guard at risk of not delivering the icebreakers when promised . as a result , the potential gap in icebreaking capabilities could widen . we recommended that the program develop a realistic schedule , including delivery dates , and determine schedule risks during the construction phase of the program . in response , the coast guard is now tracking additional schedule risks for the program and is in the process of updating its program schedule . further , in december 2019 , we found that the contract delivery date for the lead ship , may 2024 , is 2 months after the delivery date in the program's schedule baseline . coast guard officials said they plan to address this risk when they update the program's schedule by the end of march 2020 . in summary , the arctic region has increased in strategic importance in recent years , and with the increase comes more responsibility for the coast guard . the coast guard has emphasized that as the arctic continues to open and strategic competition drives more actors to look to the arctic for economic and geopolitical advantages , the demand for coast guard leadership and presence will continue to grow . as the coast guard embarks on the acquisition of its new polar icebreakers , it faces a number of key acquisition risks .