gao - 05-787 . washington , d.c.: july 22 , 2005 . several factors are contributing to this shortage . the demographics of the district are changing and there are fewer qualified homes , according to cfsa and other officials we interviewed . they cited an influx of young professionals who are less likely to serve as foster parents or adopt children from the child welfare system . officials also reported that the average size of houses in the district has decreased over time , with new condominium developments that have fewer rooms , and these homes will not readily meet accommodation guidelines , particularly when trying to keep siblings together . they noted that older houses that are large enough to meet standards may require significant investment of resources to remove lead paint , which would be a danger for young children . in addition , there is a shortage of facilities within the district to care for children with special medical or mental health needs . the court monitor's recent progress report notes that in april 2006 , cfsa had placed 82 children in residential settings more than 100 miles away from the city for medical or mental health treatment . the court monitor reported that for 29 children in these facilities , cfsa had no plans to bring the children back to the district because of the lack of homes and limited availability of specialized services , including medical and mental health care services . the court monitor recommended that cfsa explore the possibility of developing additional resources in the district to serve children with special needs . many children in the district's child welfare system have family members living in neighboring states willing to take them in , but challenges exist with placing children across state lines . because of the district's proximity to maryland and virginia , many of the children in cfsa's care have relatives in these other states . however , even when children are placed with relatives , the homes must be licensed for foster care if the relatives are to be compensated by the district , and cfsa does not have agreements with maryland and virginia that would remove barriers to licensing homes and placing these children . for example , the state in which the child would be placed would be required to expend its resources to oversee the placement and manage the case , including conducting timely home visits and providing services . because the district lacks a border agreement with maryland and virginia that would speed placements for children with family members across state lines , these children may experience multiple placements while waiting for the necessary paperwork , including background checks , to be completed . cfsa reported that they have recently presented new proposals to facilitate interstate placements in maryland and virginia , and is awaiting a response . recent legislation , signed into law july 3 , 2006 , and intended to expedite the placement of children across state lines , may provide some needed assistance to the district .