we consider this action a partial implementation of the recommendation . you asked us to provide recommendations for improving the federal advisory committee act . regarding the key recommendations we made aimed at addressing the inappropriate use of representative appointments , while both oge and gsa were fully responsive to our recommendations to issue guidance to federal agencies clarifying such appointments , appointment data we reviewed raise questions about agency compliance . for example , in 2004 , we reported that three of the nine agencies we reviewed had historically used representative appointments for all or most of their advisory committees , even when the agencies called upon the members to provide independent advice on behalf of the government . overall , based on our review of the latest data on committee appointments , for these three agencies , this appointment practice continued through fiscal year 2007 . further , of these three agencies , which we identified as having questionable practices with respect to appointments for scientific and technical committees in 2004 , one is still appointing members to scientific and technical committees primarily as representatives , and one has reduced the number of representative appointments but still has a majority of representative appointments . the third shifted substantially away from representative appointments for its scientific and technical committees in 2006 following our report — but made appointments to two new committees in 2007 with representative members that might be more appropriately appointed as special government employees . regarding the agency that is still primarily using representative members on its scientific and technical committees , not only do the subject matters being considered by many of these committees suggest that the government would be seeking independent expert advice rather than stakeholder advice , but the agency's identification of the entities or persons some representatives are speaking for suggests this agency is not abiding by the oge and gsa guidance regarding representative appointments . for example , for some committees , this agency identifies the entity that all of the individual representative members are speaking for as the advisory committee itself . we believe these instances likely reflect an inappropriate use of representative rather than special government employee appointments . in addition , we note that some members appointed as representatives are described in the faca database as representing an expertise or “academia” generally . as discussed above , the oge guidance clarified that generally members may not be appointed as representatives to represent classes of expertise . the guidance further stated that such improper appointments should be corrected immediately . oge also suggested that for the committees required to renew their charters every 2 years , agencies use the rechartering process to ensure that the appointment designations are correct . in march 2008 , the director of gsa's committee management secretariat told us that while gsa has not issued formal guidance directing agencies to review appointment designations , it has addressed this recommendation by examining the types of appointments agencies are planning when it conducts desk audits of committee charters for both new and renewed committees and by providing information on appropriate appointments at quarterly meetings with committee management staff and at faca training classes .