location . we estimated that urban locations were associated with a per - unit cost about $13,000 higher than for suburban locations ( or about 6 percent of the median per - unit cost ) , and that per - unit costs in rural areas were not statistically different from suburban areas . consistent with this estimate , the data in our sample show that per - unit land and construction costs were greater in urban areas than in nonurban areas . in addition , urban projects were more likely to include parking structures , which we found were associated with a per - unit cost increase of about $56,000 in california and arizona ( or about 27 percent of the median per - unit cost ) , where parking structure data were available . in a july 2015 report on federal oversight of lihtc , we found that although irs is the only federal agency responsible for overseeing the lihtc program , it does not assess the performance of the program . irs officials said the agency's role is focused on ensuring taxpayer compliance and that the agency generally does not have the authority or funding to assess the performance of tax expenditures , including lihtc . unlike for the lihtc program , treasury collects and reports data on the new markets tax credit program , for which treasury has a more direct administrative role . the community development financial institutions fund within treasury uses its awards management information system and its community investment impact system to collect and report detailed information on new markets tax credit projects , including certain cost and project characteristics data . treasury produces annual research reports and periodic research briefs using these data . consistent with a recommendation in our july 2015 report , irs and treasury officials said hud may be better equipped to determine what data should be collected to assess lihtc performance . although hud is the government's lead housing agency , it currently plays a limited role in collecting and reporting data for the lihtc program . specifically , hud collects and periodically reports information on lihtc tenant characteristics as mandated by the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 . in addition , since 1996 , hud voluntarily has collected lihtc project - level data in its lihtc database . while hud may have the technological capacity to collect and maintain additional lihtc data , absent additional authority , the agency does not have access to irs taxpayer ( developers and allocating agencies ) data , including cost data . if hud or another agency were given authority to collect and report on these data , it likely would need additional budgetary resources to carry out this function . our tax expenditure evaluation guide outlines information congress could consider when determining which federal agencies should manage the evaluation of tax expenditures . the guide cites statutory requirements that set the expectation that agencies should consider tax expenditures in measuring and communicating progress in achieving their missions and goals . it also states that for tax expenditures without logical connections to program agencies , treasury may be the most appropriate agency to conduct an evaluation .