neither agency provided comments . the results of these interviews are not generalizable to all nmb stakeholders . further , we interviewed officials at omb and opm to determine how these agencies provide oversight and guidance to nmb . for additional details , see appendix i . under fisma , however , nmb is responsible for developing , documenting , and implementing a security program to protect its information systems and data , including those managed by another agency , contractor , or other source . we believe that developing procedures for reviewing audits conducted by third - party providers will be a positive step toward ensuring that nmb is conducting this required oversight . nmb agreed with our recommendation to develop and implement policies and processes to reflect the agency's current procurement environment and indicated it is taking steps to do so . nmb also commented that because it does not manage all of its own procurements , its policies and processes would be largely subordinate to those of the fiscal service . however , because nmb's interagency agreement with the fiscal service for performance of certain procurement functions does not absolve nmb of its responsibility to develop policies and processes as called for by internal control standards and best practice , nmb must develop its own set of complementary policies and processes to ensure the agency meets its needs through efficient , effective , and accountable procurement functions . in terms of its response to audits , nmb commented that all program audit findings have been addressed and that there are no outstanding issues related to any audits . while we recognized in the report that nmb resolved a long - standing , significant deficiency in its fiscal year 2015 financial statement audit , we disagree that all audit issues have been resolved . nmb needs to develop policies and procedures to address findings from all audits , not solely those reported in the financial statement audit report . nmb also commented that some of our concerns appeared to be related to the agency's failure to sufficiently document its processes and that this was not necessarily an indication of noncompliance with any particular requirement . we agree that nmb has made strides in certain areas , such as developing strategic and workforce plans , but its actions are not in accordance with federal guidance or federal internal control standards in some areas . for example , in the areas of strategic planning , information security and privacy , and procurement , officials were not able to provide the written policies and procedures that guide their actions . we continue to believe it is important for nmb to create this documentation to ensure future consistency and success in its management and program areas . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we interviewed nmb officials and current board members . we also interviewed key stakeholders who were interviewed for the december 2013 report , including representatives from rail and air management and labor groups . we conducted this performance audit from april 2015 to february 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .