( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report to usda for review and comment . sometimes multiple nutrition education programs operate in the same setting . for example , snap - ed may provide classes for students while team nutrition may distribute teacher training materials and nutrition education curricula to the same school . most of usda's nutrition education programs target interventions to low - income populations with varied characteristics , as shown in table 1 , and the programs also differ in how nutrition education fits into their structures . for example , snap - ed and efnep are primarily focused on providing nutrition education to participants , while team nutrition provides nutrition education to both child nutrition program implementers and participants . wic provides benefits for food and referrals to health and other social services , as well as nutrition education , including breastfeeding promotion and support , to participants . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or larink@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our report examines the extent to which the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) ( 1 ) has information on participation , expenditures , and effectiveness for its nutrition education programs ; and ( 2 ) coordinates its nutrition education efforts and leverages internal nutrition expertise for these efforts . the scope of our review includes five federal programs that provide nutrition education: supplemental nutrition assistance program education ( snap - ed ) , the expanded food and nutrition education program ( efnep ) , the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , team nutrition , and the food insecurity nutrition incentive ( fini ) grant program . among usda programs that provide nutrition education , four of these received the greatest amount of federal funding for nutrition education in fiscal year 2018 — wic , snap - ed , efnep , and team nutrition . in addition , we included fini because it is a grant program in which nutrition education can be a component , and the program's goal is to incentivize healthy eating . we also reviewed usda efforts that provide nutrition education through nutrition - related research and guidance directed at the general public . in addition to the methods discussed below , to address both of our research objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance , as well as our prior work on usda nutrition education efforts and leading practices for collaboration . we interviewed officials from relevant usda agencies , including the food and nutrition service ( fns ) and the national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) , which oversee the nutrition education programs described in this report . we also interviewed officials from other usda agencies overseeing nutrition - related research and guidance , including the agricultural research service , the center for nutrition policy and promotion , and the economic research service .