reg . experimental permits for reusable suborbital rockets ; notice of proposed rulemaking ( to amend 14 c.f.r . 53 fed . reg . what challenges does faa face in regulating and promoting the commercial space launch industry ? what are the key competitive issues affecting the u.s. commercial space launch industry , and to what extent are the industry and government responding to them ? to determine how well faa is overseeing the safety of commercial space launches , we reviewed the agency's safety oversight processes , including the documentation of its licensing and safety monitoring processes , internal guidance and policies , applicable regulations , and memoranda of agreement with other federal agencies . we also reviewed faa's use of system safety procedures and interviewed industry experts and faa officials . because faa relies on the air force to conduct safety oversight at the air force's two primary launch sites in florida and california , we reviewed air force launch safety requirements and interviewed faa and air force officials about their respective responsibilities and interaction . in addition , we examined faa's application of certain management controls in its licensing and monitoring processes using our guidelines for management controls at federal agencies , such as documentation and timeliness of the review process and communication and consultation with relevant federal agencies . to determine the extent to which faa is responding to key emerging issues in the commercial space launch industry , such as space tourism , we identified these issues through literature reviews and assessed the extent of faa's response through interviews with federal government officials and industry representatives . these industry representatives were from associations that represent the commercial space launch industry and from entities that had received launch or launch - site licenses from faa or were consulting with faa about receiving such licenses as of september 2005 . we also interviewed these officials and representatives to identify the challenges faa faces in regulating and promoting the commercial space launch industry . to determine the key competitive issues affecting the u.s commercial space launch industry and the extent to which the industry and the federal government are responding to them , we conducted a literature review that included applicable laws affecting industry competitiveness and interviewed agency officials , industry representatives , and industry experts to obtain their views . we conducted our review from august 2005 through october 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i contains additional information about our objective , scope , and methodology . there are three main types of space launches — national security , civil , and commercial . national security launches are by dod for defense purposes , and civil launches are by nasa for scientific and exploratory purposes . many commercial launches are internationally competed and carry payloads , such as satellites , that generate revenue . in 1984 , the commercial space launch act required the secretary of transportation to “encourage , facilitate , and promote commercial space launches by the private sector.” at that time , the u.s. government was the sole entity launching civil and commercial payloads into orbit from the united states .