he cannot be left unsupervised . as with the first hypothetical individual , we presented three scenarios to the case managers in which brian's conditions and needs for assistance remained the same , but the availability of unpaid informal care provided by his family varied: scenario 1: brian lives with his 65-year - old wife , who is his primary caregiver and is in fair health but has recently suffered health problems . she supervises brian with all adls and she performs many of his iadls herself , but is having increasing difficulty doing these tasks due to her declining health . during the day , she would like additional assistance reminding brian to toilet and bathe as well as with planning and preparing meals and transportation . each week , she would like additional assistance with laundry , housekeeping , and shopping . scenario 2: brian's 65-year - old wife is in poorer health than described in scenario 1 , and can offer supervisory help with adls but cannot perform most iadls . as a result , brian does not receive all of the reminders he needs for bathing and toileting nor all of the assistance he needs with planning and preparing meals , transportation , laundry , housekeeping , and shopping . scenario 3: brian lives alone because his wife recently died . he needs constant supervision with most adls and help with several iadls . he cannot be left unsupervised and does not receive reminders for bathing , dressing , grooming , toileting , eating , and taking his medications . he also does not receive assistance with planning and preparing meals , transportation , shopping , laundry , and housekeeping . we obtained care plans from 16 medicaid case managers in kansas , louisiana , new york , and oregon that detailed the long - term care services that they would offer to two hypothetical medicaid - eligible elderly individuals — abby , an 86-year - old woman with debilitating arthritis and who was chair - bound , and brian , a 70-year - old man with moderate alzheimer's disease . each case manager developed six care plans , representing three different levels of unpaid informal care provided to abby and brian by their family . the case managers we contacted were specifically responsible for medicaid home and community - based services . while most also were familiar with other local public services available , clients could receive different care options if they sought care through other approaches , such as physician referrals or contacting local councils on aging . the care plans were based on the information presented by telephone to the case managers we selected to interview in a small town ( a population of less than 15,000 people ) and a large city ( a population of more than 250,000 people ) in each of the four states and should not be generalized to indicate what care plans other case managers in these localities or other states would likely offer . we did not evaluate the adequacy or appropriateness of the care plans offered by the case managers for meeting the long - term care needs of our hypothetical individuals .