fppes . according to federal internal control standards for control activities , written documentation should exist for all significant events that occur within an agency ; this documentation should be readily available for examination , and it should be complete and accurate in order to facilitate tracing the event from initiation through processing to completion . in documenting fppes , building strong and complete evidence on each case is important to support the outcome of the evaluation , as well as to track the identified area of concern over time . vha's fppe policy provides a general definition of an fppe , that it can be used for cause ( when a question arises regarding a provider's ability to provide safe , quality patient care ) , that the criteria for the fppe should be defined by the vamc in advance , and that the results of the fppe must be documented in the provider's profile . however , there are gaps in vha's policy regarding how these evaluations should be documented and what information should be included , which limited our ability to assess vamcs' adherence to the fppe policy . officials from two of the vamcs we visited told us there are no standardized guidelines on how the fppe process should be structured . according to the director of credentialing and privileging , vha's policy on fppes was intended to allow vamcs flexibility in the design of the evaluation to accommodate the variety of ways that issues are identified and the types of issues that may be addressed ( see box for example of an fppe ) . example of an fppe at one vamc we visited there are multiple ways that an fppe may be prompted , including multiple patient complaints or exceeding a vamc's peer review trigger . at one vamc we visited , a provider exceeded a peer review trigger — receiving two or more level of care 3 peer review ratings within 6 months — which prompted a detailed assessment , including a retrospective evaluation of 25 percent of the provider's medical records over the previous 12 months . the medical records were evaluated specifically for patient evaluations , outcomes , and documentation . upon completion of the assessment , vamc officials determined that the provider's documentation , including patient discharge summaries , patient transfer , medication review , and disclosure notes , was inadequate . an fppe was initiated , for which the provider was instructed on how to properly document these types of summaries and notes . the evaluator also recommended that the provider write the notes for each patient seen before moving to see other patients , instead of writing the notes for all patients at the end of the day . vamc officials also initiated a performance improvement plan for the provider , which included monitoring his medical record documentation over a 6-month period . when officials determined that the provider had not improved after this period , the fppe was extended to continue monitoring aspects of his clinical care . the provider retired 6 months later .