gao - 15-350 . washington , d.c.: april 20 , 2015 . part shortages ( i.e. , backorders ) require workarounds – additional efforts to obtain a part ( eg , local manufacturing or obtaining parts from another end item ) – that can delay maintenance and negatively affect productivity and costs of depot maintenance . once the end item is rebuilt , then it is tested and validated for sale to and use by the customer ( eg , a military unit ) . navy f / a - 18 hornet maintenance one of the primary end items repaired at fleet readiness center ( frc ) southwest and frc southeast is the f / a - 18 hornet . the first aircraft was manufactured in the late 1970s and became operational in the early 1980s . as an aircraft ages , it incurs additional inspections and structural repairs . one of those additional inspections occurs when an aircraft reaches 8,000 flying hours . dod's aging weapon systems pose sustainment challenges that affect depot maintenance as well as supply support , especially for aircraft . depot maintenance on aging weapon systems becomes less predictable as structural fatigue occurs and parts that were not expected to need replacement begin to wear out . cracking , corrosion , or other unanticipated issues – identified through detailed inspections – must be remedied through the repair or the manufacture of new parts , often requiring engineering support and estimates that can take considerable time to develop . for example , the navy f / a - 18 hornet jet and air force b - 52 stratofortress bomber – both aging weapon systems – have recently experienced unanticipated structural and part replacement issues ( see sidebar for information on the f / a - 18 hornet ) . additionally , diminishing manufacturing sources and material shortages , and part obsolescence issues increase as weapon systems age , complicating supply support for the depot maintenance process and potentially resulting in a less efficient process if not properly mitigated or resolved . manufacturers discontinue production and support of needed items because it is no longer profitable to produce the part given low or sporadic demand . dod's diminishing manufacturing sources and material shortages guidebook provides guidance on mitigating and managing these issues as well as examples in which the department successfully managed and resolved these issues , such as parts obsolescence for the b - 1 lancer bomber and the virginia class submarine . of the aircraft to identify structural weaknesses , such as metal fatigue and cracks in the aircraft , and determine what needs to be repaired . engineering support to develop repair solutions for the damaged areas of the aircraft . structural repairs needed to fix the aircraft are non - standard repairs that must be designed and approved by frc engineers . according to frc engineers and engineering information documents we reviewed , it may take as long as a year or more for an engineer to determine and document the step - by - step instructions needed to repair the aircraft . the services have transferred the management of retail supply , storage , and distribution functions to dla in varying degrees across service industrial sites , as seen in figure 4 .