gao - 10-526 . washington , d.c.: may 14 , 2010 . both plans partially address strategies to achieve the goals . gao - 09-865 . washington , d.c.: september 17 , 2009 . the navair plan notes that industrial and maintenance coordinators work with weapon acquisition program offices to identify core requirements during the acquisition process , including program initiation . and ( 2 ) to what extent does the navy's depot maintenance strategic plan address ousd ( at&l ) 's direction that was designed to provide a framework for the services to meet future challenges ? the related gao products section at the end of the report lists additional publications on related topics . we used the same set of methodological procedures to answer both questions , and each type of procedure was performed simultaneously for the two questions . specifically , we reviewed the december 2007 u.s. navy depot maintenance strategic plan . because the navy does not have a single navy - wide plan , but rather a family of strategic planning documents , we focused our review on plans developed by the two commands whose maintenance depots collectively are responsible for 94 percent of the navy's depot maintenance workload . the two plans are navair's naval aviation industrial strategy and navsea's naval shipyard business plan . we reviewed the 2007 navair and navsea plans and their 2009 updates . we evaluated the navair and navsea plans using qualitative content analyses to compare information from them against criteria both from the seven elements of a results - oriented management framework and the 10 issues listed in the ousd ( at&l ) direction for depot maintenance strategic plans . to conduct these analyses , we first developed a data - collection instrument that incorporated these two types of criteria . one team member then analyzed the plans using this instrument . to verify the preliminary observations from this initial analysis , a second team member concurrently conducted an independent analysis of the plans . we compared the two sets of observations and discussed any differences . we reconciled the differences with the assistance of analysts from the team that was evaluating the air force depot maintenance strategic plan . we met with navy officials to confirm our understanding of the plans and sought additional information where our preliminary analyses revealed that one or both plans partially address or do not address the criteria . we also interviewed and obtained documentary evidence from relevant ousd ( at&l ) officials regarding its oversight of the services' plans . additionally , we interviewed depot leaders and strategic planning personnel at three of the seven navair and navsea depots to obtain first - hand information on issues the depots face . we also analyzed depot - level and servicewide depot maintenance data such as workload , personnel , and depot capacity utilization and determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our report . more detailed information on our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from august 2009 through june 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .