costs . senior usps officials told us that currently , it would be too costly for usps to create new representative performance measures for any major type of mail . they said that given current technology , usps would incur substantial costs to implement delivery performance measurement for all major types of mail if usps were to use bar codes to track every mail piece from when it enters the postal system to when it is delivered . a senior usps official told us that delivery performance measurement for all mail — which would have involved tracking more than 210 billion pieces of mail in fiscal year 2005 — would cost hundreds of millions of dollars and expressed doubt that mailers would want to pay those additional costs even in return for performance data . in this regard , sampling approaches could be used to obtain representative data on delivery performance that would likely be much less costly than seeking to measure delivery performance for every piece of mail . a related cost issue is how usps would recover the associated measurement costs from mailers and the impact of this decision on mailer participation that would be needed for usps to measure delivery performance . as the confirm program illustrates , a fee - based program creates a disincentive for mailers to participate . in contrast , usps chose to build its tracking costs into the rate base for parcel select , so that the costs would be shared by all parcel select mailers . usps officials told us they had rejected this approach for other types of mail for several reasons , including the uncertain benefits to usps and mailers' preference for lower rates , particularly for mailers who would not wish to pay the costs associated with collecting delivery performance data . however , some major mailer groups disagree with usps's perspectives of mailer willingness to cover costs as a key impediment to implementing representative measures of delivery performance for all major types of mail . the mailers council , a coalition of over 50 major mailing associations , corporations , and nonprofit organizations , told us that its members would be willing to pay additional usps costs , within reason , for delivery performance measurement , stating that such costs would be small compared to total postal costs . until usps commits to developing additional representative measures of delivery performance for all major types of mail and considers various approaches for measuring the delivery performance of its major types of mail , discusses their usefulness and feasibility with mailers , and estimates the associated costs , it will be difficult to get beyond usps's assertion that measurement is cost - prohibitive and mailers' assertions that the costs could be relatively low and that they would be willing to bear them . although usps plans to improve its service performance , it has no current plans to implement additional representative measures of delivery performance . usps states in its latest strategic transformation plan that it plans to improve the quality of postal services by continuing to focus on the end - to - end service performance of all mail . further , it states that “customers expect timely , reliable mail service , and the postal service has delivered .