( recommendation 5 ) . we provided a draft of this report to usda for review and comment . snap is jointly administered by fns and the states . fns pays the full cost of snap benefits and shares the costs of administering the program with the states . fns is responsible for promulgating snap program regulations , ensuring that state officials administer the program in compliance with program rules , and authorizing and monitoring stores from which recipients may purchase food . states are responsible for determining applicant eligibility , calculating the amount of their benefits , issuing the benefits on ebt cards — which can be used like debit cards to purchase food from authorized retailers — and investigating possible program violations by recipients . participation in snap has generally increased among recipients and retailers in recent years . specifically , participation in snap increased from about 26 million recipients in fiscal year 2007 to 42 million in fiscal year 2017 , leading to a corresponding increase in the amount of snap benefits redeemed . the number of stores fns authorized to participate in snap also increased , from about 162,000 nationwide in fiscal year 2007 to more than 250,000 in fiscal year 2017 . although there was particular growth in the number of small grocery and convenience stores , as well as “other” stores ( which include independent drug stores , general merchandise stores like dollar stores , and farmers' markets ) , the majority of snap benefits were redeemed at large grocery stores and supermarkets in each year ( see fig . according to fns , most snap benefits are used for the intended purpose ; however , as we have reported in prior work , fns has faced challenges addressing trafficking — one type of program fraud . in general , trafficking occurs when retailers exchange recipients' snap benefits for cash , often taking a fraudulent profit . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix i . kathy larin , ( 202 ) 512-7215 or larink@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , rachel frisk ( assistant director ) , rachael chamberlin ( analyst - in - charge ) , and swati deo made significant contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were james bennett , thomas cook , alex galuten , lara laufer , olivia lopez , jean mcsween , jessica orr , philip reiff , almeta spencer , jeff tessin , matthew valenta , and erin villas . this collaborative effort has led to improvements such as using store zip codes to compare transactions at stores suspected of trafficking with similar stores nearby . according to fns , its staff can use this information to substantiate charges against retailers by establishing what typical transaction patterns look like , compared to trafficking patterns , for similar stores . in addition , fns commissioned studies in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 to evaluate the effectiveness of its data analytics to monitor stores and identify areas for improvement .