agencies . around the same time the agreement was signed , va rolled out a around the same time the agreement was signed , va rolled out a redesigned employment program aimed at standardizing rehabilitation redesigned employment program aimed at standardizing rehabilitation services for veterans with service - connected disabilities , known as the services for veterans with service - connected disabilities , known as the five - track program . the program is intended to serve any disabled five - track program . the program is intended to serve any disabled veteran who meets the eligibility requirements . both labor and va provide services to five - track program participants , and these services are covered by the agreement . as part of the five - track program , va established the employment coordinator position to provide veterans with assistance preparing for and finding employment . the program also included provisions for each va location to install a job resource lab with computers , internet access , and other materials for veterans to use in their career exploration and job search . you have asked us to study the progress labor and va are making toward implementing these initiatives . in this agreement , the agencies agreed to share information , including wage data , and establish and maintain management information systems to enable accurate yearly reporting . the agreement also called for three joint work groups to develop performance measures to assess partnership program results , design a training curriculum , and establish joint data collection , analysis , and reports . in addition , the agreement outlined means to promote cooperation and eliminate duplication of efforts between the agencies . these include developing an approach to serving veterans that involves both va and state workforce agency staff from the early stages , advising all va clients about the employment services offered by the state workforce agency , and establishing an effective process for referring va clients who are seeking employment to the state workforce agency . while many of the specific elements of the agreement need to be implemented at a national level within labor and va , other activities , by their nature , would take place on the state or local level . the agreement provides for separate memorandums of agreement , containing common goals and measures , to be executed among labor , va , and the states . table 1 summarizes the key elements of the national agreement , the specific actions to which labor and va agreed , and the level at which implementation generally would occur . around the same time the national agreement was signed , va rolled out the five - track employment program aimed at standardizing rehabilitation services for veterans with service - connected disabilities and providing a greater focus on employment options early in the rehabilitation process . the five employment tracks from which veterans can select are reemployment with their previous employer , rapid access to employment through job readiness preparation and training opportunities , self - employment , employment through long - term services that include education programs and formal training leading to employment , and independent living services for those who are currently unable to work due to their disabilities .