kickbacks . this can include providers , provider associates , or beneficiaries knowingly and willfully offering , paying , soliciting , or receiving anything of value to induce or reward referrals or payments for services or goods under medicare . among other processes , to detect potential fraud , cms employs it systems — including its fraud prevention system — that analyze claims submitted over a period of time to detect patterns of suspicious billing.cms and its contractors investigate providers and beneficiaries with suspicious billing and utilization patterns and , in suspected cases of fraud , can take administrative actions , such as suspending payments or revoking a provider's billing privileges , or refer the investigation to the hhs office of inspector general for further examination and possible criminal or civil prosecution . as we have previously reported , there are three potential factors that can be used to authenticate an individual's identity: ( 1 ) “something they possess,” such as a card , ( 2 ) “something they know,” such as a password or personal identification number ( pin ) , and ( 3 ) “something they are,” such as biometric information , for example , a fingerprint , or a picture id.generally , the more factors that are used to authenticate an individual's identity , the higher the level of identity assurance . for example , a card used in conjunction with a pin provides a higher level of identity authentication than just a card , since the pin makes it more difficult for individuals who are not the cardholder to use a lost or stolen card . nist has issued standards for federal agencies for using electronically readable cards to achieve a high level of authentication , and those standards require robust enrollment and card issuance processes to ensure that the cards are issued to the correct individuals . these processes include procedures to verify an individual's identity prior to card issuance to ensure eligibility and to ensure that the cards are issued to the correct individual . for example , verifying an individual's address is an important practice for issuing cards by mail . if a significant number of cards are issued to ineligible or incorrect individuals , it undermines the utility of the cards for identity authentication . practices that provide higher levels of identity authentication generally are more expensive and difficult to implement and maintain and may cause greater inconvenience to users than practices that provide lower levels of assurance . the level of identity authentication that is appropriate for a given application or transaction depends on the risks associated with the application or transaction . the greater the determined risk , the greater the need for higher - level identity authentication practices . the office of management and budget and nist have issued guidance defining four levels of identity assurance ranging from level 1 — “little or no confidence in the asserted identity's validity” — to level four — “very high confidence in the asserted identity's validity” — and directed agencies to use risk - based methods to decide which level of authentication is appropriate for any given application or transaction . additionally , authentication practices should take into account issues related to cost and user acceptability .