is it fair ? in your company's view , are the program's enforcement mechanisms adequate to ensure labeled products comply with program requirements and meet performance criteria ? did your company consider , or is it considering , taking any of the following actions as a result of the changes to the energy star program being implemented under the mou ? in addition to the individual named above , jon ludwigson , assistant director ; mark braza ; heather dowey ; paige m. gilbreath ; michael meleady ; amanda miller ; alison d. o'neill ; barbara r. timmerman ; and james w. turkett made key contributions to this report . doe did not provid comments on the draft report . in its comments , epa stated its commitment to ensure the energy star label's credibility . in com on the report , epa stated that the energy star program has made not progress implementing changes to ensure the energy star label rem a credible designator of energy - efficient , environmentally friendly pro in the market . regarding our recommendation that the administrator of e pa assess the need to develop a process for independent review of adverse agency decisions for the energy star program as it relates to setting specifications and disqualifications to ensure decisions of the program are fair and transparent , epa neither agreed nor disagreed . ongoing pilot program . second , program partners we spoke with differed on their views of epa's new pilot program to promote the most efficient products . about half of the manufacturing partners stated that it may harm the energy star program , and over half of those partners told us they would consider dropping out of the program or reducing the number of products they have certified because of various reasons including the most efficient program and higher costs of certification . some of these partners raised concerns that creating two classes of energy star products could diminish the value of the energy star label for manufacturing partners whose products meet the standard energy star specification but may not rank among the most efficient products . for example , a few manufacturing partners said if the pilot program become a permanent part of the energy star program , then they would consider s the energy star label to be “second class” and would consider comple withdrawing from the program . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on f this report . gao staff who made major contributions to the last page o this report are listed in appendix iv . to determine the status of the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) and department of energy's ( doe ) implementation of changes to the energy star program under its 2009 memorandum of understanding ( mou ) , we reviewed the program's authorizing legislation . we also reviewed agency documentation related to the energy star program and the mou , including program policies , guidance , and draft and final versions of product performance eligibility criteria and specifications . we also interviewed key agency officials at epa , doe , and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) regarding the implementation of the mou and other associated issues .