specifically in 10 u.s.c . ยง 2330 , enacted in 2001 and amended in 2006 , congress required usd ( at&l ) and the military departments to establish a management structure for the acquisition of services . since 2003 , we have evaluated dod's implementation of 10 u.s.c . ยง 2330 and efforts to establish the management structure and service acquisition approval process twice . first , in september 2003 , we concluded that dod's approach to managing service acquisition did not provide a departmentwide assessment of how spending for services could be more effective . we therefore recommended that dod give greater attention to promoting a strategic orientation by setting performance goals for improvements and ensuring accountability for results . dod concurred in principle with our recommendation and agreed that additional actions could strengthen the management structure and acquisition approval process but also identified challenges for doing so based on its organizational size , complexity , and the acquisition environment . subsequently , in november 2006 , we found continued weaknesses associated with dod's management of service acquisitions at the strategic and transactional level . specifically , we found that dod's approach to managing service acquisition tended to be reactive and that the department had not developed a means for evaluating whether ongoing and planned efforts were achieving intended results . dod had not developed a strategic vision and lacked sustained commitment to managing service acquisition risks and fostering more efficient outcomes . dod also had not developed metrics to assess whether any changes to improve service acquisition actually achieved the expected outcomes . as a result , dod was not in a position to determine whether investments in services were achieving their desired outcomes . moreover , the results of individual acquisitions were generally not used to inform or adjust the strategic direction . we recommended that , among other actions , dod take steps to understand how and where service acquisition dollars are currently and will be spent , in part , to assist in adopting a proactive approach to managing service acquisition . we also recommended that dod take steps to provide a capability to determine whether service acquisitions are meeting cost , schedule , and performance objectives . at that time , dod concurred with our recommendations . usd ( at&l ) , however , acknowledged in 2010 that dod still needed a cohesive , integrated strategy for acquiring services . dod contract management has remained on our high risk list , in part , because dod has not developed such a strategy and continues to lack reliable services spending data to inform decision making . the military departments each subsequently developed their own service acquisition approval processes that had several elements in common . chief among these elements was the requirement that acquisition strategies be reviewed and approved by senior officials before contracts are awarded . acquisition strategies to be reviewed were to include , among other things , information on contract requirements , anticipated risks , and business arrangements . once acquisition strategies were approved , dod contracting offices may continue the acquisition process , including soliciting bids for proposed work and awarding contracts . in january 2006 , congress amended 10 u.s.c .