impacts on tourism . significant human - caused wildland fires can also affect tourism . according to a representative from the cochise college center for economic research , as well as local residents that we spoke with , fires can affect tourism because access to trails , campgrounds , and roads can be temporarily restricted and , more broadly , fires can diminish the appeal of the region for tourists . for example , local residents told us that hospitality businesses in portal , arizona , have been particularly vulnerable to the economic impacts of wildland fires because these businesses are dependent on visitors to the coronado national forest . if access to the forest is restricted , as it was in 2010 as a result of the horseshoe fire , these residents told us it can have a direct impact on local businesses . while the preceding examples provide some understanding of the nature of the economic impacts of significant human - caused wildland fires in the arizona border region , we could not quantify the overall effect of these fires on the region because comprehensive and consistent data are not available . for example , we found no data that would allow us to determine the extent to which the closures of national forests and other public lands have affected tourism in the region , and we likewise did not find data that would allow us to identify the cumulative impact of significant human - caused wildland fires on tourist - related businesses . moreover , the economic researcher from the cochise college center for economic research noted that it is difficult to assess the overall economic impact of such incidents because the arizona border region is rich in ecotourism resources . as a result , it is possible that visitors who could not visit a specific location may have still visited the region , simply choosing to visit other local areas . additionally , as noted in one study we reviewed , identifying the real cost of wildland fires on the economy is difficult because few data sources are consistent from fire to fire , and many lack any data at all . according to this study , the effects resulting from individual fires are unique to each fire and cannot be generally extrapolated to other fires . the representative we spoke to from the cochise college center for economic research also noted that the economic effects of wildland fire can be mixed and , therefore , difficult to delineate . for example , while wildland fires can provide a temporary boost to several industries in the region — such as construction and retail and restaurant sales — that boost could be offset by increases in home insurance premiums in the area and lost revenue and wages from other displaced businesses or workers . significant human - caused wildland fires have damaged the natural environment in the arizona border region , but the comprehensive effects are unknown , in part because — as with the economic effects of wildland fires — complete information is not available on the environmental effects of wildland fire .