ii ) . amtrak stated that it was in general agreement with the draft report and that the report fairly represented the costs and ramifications of an amtrak liquidation . however , amtrak believed that there would be material consequences of liquidation about which the draft report is silent . in amtrak's estimation , a liquidation could burden commuter and freight railroads ( especially on the northeast corridor ) with substantial operating and capital costs — about $600 million annually . we agree that the potential financial and operational impacts on commuter and freight railroads could be substantial if amtrak were to be liquidated . we acknowledged this impact both in the draft report supplied to amtrak for comment and in this final report . amtrak also believed that we did not provide sufficient information on the costs associated with administering an amtrak liquidation . amtrak estimated that these costs would range anywhere from $250 million to $360 million . we agree that there could be substantial costs associated with administering liquidation . however , this report is not intended to estimate the administrative costs of liquidating amtrak . finally , in our meeting , amtrak officials noted that the interest of the preferred stock holder ( the u.s. government ) would be about $6 billion more than the $10.9 billion we originally estimated in the draft report . this figure represents the cumulative dividends on this stock between 1981 and 1997 that amtrak never declared or paid . in amtrak's opinion , although the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 eliminated the statutory requirement for these dividends after 1997 , it did not abrogate the $6 billion in cumulative dividends during that period — an amount that amtrak believes would increase preferred stock holder interest in a liquidation . we noted that this $6 billion was not expressly disclosed in amtrak's financial statements , including its draft 2001 financial statements , and brought this to amtrak's , and its external auditor's , attention for possible future disclosure . we agree that upon liquidation the preferred stock holder interest would include the $6 billion in cumulative dividends . as a result , we have revised this final report to include the $6 billion both in the total amount of potential creditor claims and stockholder interests were amtrak to have been liquidated as of december 31 , 2001 , and in those sections of the report discussing preferred stock holder interests . amtrak offered additional clarifying , editorial , and technical comments that were incorporated as appropriate . the department of transportation , in oral comments made by federal railroad administration officials , including the associate administrator for railroad development , did not express an overall opinion about the report . instead , it offered comments designed to clarify specific points in the draft report . these included clarification that the lien securing the original equipment note required the federal government to subordinate its interest on the equipment acquired by amtrak after 1983 in individual transactions to the security interests of amtrak's equipment creditors in these transactions ; that is , the subordination was not discretionary .