dts testing . in january 2006 and september 2006 , we reported that the system testing performed did not provide reasonable assurance that dts was displaying the proper flights and airfares . we also reported that dod did not adequately document the testing performed to ensure dts was functioning properly . we recommended that the pmo - dts effectively implement the disciplined processes necessary to provide reasonable assurance that ( 1 ) requirements are properly documented and ( 2 ) requirements are adequately tested . throughout our review , we have found that while dod has stated that it has established processes , consistent with industry practices , to ensure that ( 1 ) dts requirements are valid , clearly stated , and properly documented and tested ; and ( 2 ) testing is properly documented , those processes have not been effectively implemented . for example , our january 2009 analysis of selected dts requirements related to flight displays and airfares found that the testing process did not fully address our previously reported problems . the problems we found generally related to missing documentation to support tests performed or the test performed focused on limited aspects of the requirement and did not provide sufficient evidence that the requirement was adequately tested . our analysis found that dod did not adequately test the dts requirement that travelers provide a justification for any deviation from dod travel policies . for example , dod policy requires the traveler to select the lowest cost compact rental car . however , if the traveler later changes this selection to the lowest cost car within another model category ( mid - size ) , the justification box will not appear for the approving official to review . testing of system interfaces . in our january 2006 report , we noted that while the department had developed and implemented interfaces with 36 systems , going forward , the testing of system interfaces would continue to be a challenge . we recommended that the pmo - dts test new or modified system interfaces to ensure that the intended functionality is operating properly . to address our recommendation , the pmo - dts engaged the dfas enterprise level test group as an independent verification and validation group in 2006 to provide an objective perspective of the reliability of the system interface testing being performed by the contractor . we reviewed the testing documentation , such as the test plan , test scripts , and test cases , related to the dts system interface with the navy enterprise resource planning system , and found that the documentation was sufficient for ensuring that interfaces between systems operated as intended . dod's use of an independent verification and validation group meets the intent of our recommendation . use of restricted airfares . in our january 2006 report , we recommended that the pmo - dts determine the feasibility of using restricted airfares where cost effective . we reported that the system requirement stipulated that dts is to display only unrestricted airfares . as noted in that report , other airfares generally referred to as restricted airfares may , in some cases , be less expensive than a given general services administration ( gsa ) city - pair fare and other unrestricted airfares .