bba requirements . the prescriptive nature of bba's nmep provisions may limit cms' flexibility to alter existing activities . the medicare handbook illustrates one of the major constraints facing cms . beneficiary advocacy groups and organizations representing health plans indicated that the current handbook is too long and raised doubts about whether it is the best vehicle to educate beneficiaries about their options . one beneficiary advocate questioned whether mailing the handbook annually to all medicare households was the best use of nmep resources . they suggested that cms could distribute the handbook to new enrollees and make it available to others upon request , but conduct mass mailings only when changes in medicare required an update . however , bba requires an annual mailing and specifies an extensive list of topics — in addition to a list of available m+c plans and a comparison of plan options — that must be covered . for example , the mailing must include information on the ffs program's covered benefits and cost sharing ; procedures for selecting an m+c plan or the ffs program ; beneficiary rights and the appeals process in both m+c plans and the ffs program ; and descriptions of benefits , enrollment rights , and other requirements of medicare supplemental policies ( medigap ) . significantly modifying the content of the handbook or changing how frequently it is mailed may require a statutory change . short time frames . compressed time frames each year hampers the agency's efforts to distribute more complete comparative information in printed form . a complaint voiced by beneficiary and health plan representatives is that the medicare handbook contains limited comparative information about m+c plans . according to hcfa officials , plan benefit package details have not been available until late september when plans' medicare contracts for the coming year were approved . that left the agency too little time to assemble extensive data in a handbook that must be mailed out by mid - october , as required by bba . hcfa therefore pre - approved selected aspects of each plan's contract . the agency focused on the basic information it believed would most help beneficiaries make some initial decisions: plan service area , monthly premium , whether prescription drugs are covered , and how to contact the plan for detailed information . hcfa included other information , such as rates of mammography screening exams and beneficiary satisfaction with plans' primary care physicians , that was not dependent on the contract approval package . complete benefit information for each plan was not available until more than a month after the medicare handbook was printed ( see fig . at that time , the information was posted on the medicare health plan compare pages of the medicare internet site . cms recently announced that it would fund a $30 million advertising campaign this fall to increase beneficiaries' awareness of the choices available to them and to encourage them to use the nmep information channels to learn more about those choices . in addition , the advertising campaign is intended to help beneficiaries learn about medicare's new features — such as the annual enrollment and lock - in provisions , and coverage for preventive services and medical screening examinations .