gao - 03-764t . washington , d.c.: may 8 , 2003 . fta has not implemented this recommendation . we believe that this recommendation is still valid because the funding requested for the many projects that are expected to compete for grant agreements over the next several years is likely to exceed the available federal dollars . a further concern about the ratings process stems from fta's decision during the fiscal year 2004 cycle to propose a project for a full funding grant agreement that had been assigned an overall project rating of “not rated,” even though fta's regulations require that projects have at least a “recommended” rating to receive a grant agreement . finally , we found that fta needs to provide clearer information and additional guidance about certain changes it made to the evaluation and ratings process for the fiscal year 2004 cycle . in work that addressed the challenge of overseeing ongoing projects once they are selected to receive a full funding grant agreement , we reported in march and september 2000 that fta had improved the quality of the transit grants management oversight program through strategies that included upgrading its guidance and training of staff and grantees , developing standardized oversight procedures , and employing contractor staff to strengthen its oversight of grantees . fta also expanded its oversight efforts to include a formal and rigorous assessment of a grantee's financial capacity to build and operate a new project and of the financial impact of that project on the existing transit system . these assessments , performed by independent accounting firms , are completed before fta commits funds for construction and are updated as needed until projects are completed . for projects that already have grant agreements , fta focuses on the grantee's ability to finish the project on time and within the budget established by the grant agreement . the administration's fiscal year 2004 budget proposal contains three new starts initiatives — reducing the maximum federal statutory share to 50 percent , allowing non - fixed - guideway projects to be funded through new starts , and replacing the “exempt” classification with a streamlined ratings process for projects requesting less than $75 million in new starts funding . these proposed initiatives have advantages and disadvantages , with implications for the cost - effectiveness and performance of proposed projects . first , the reduced federal funding would require local communities to increase their funding share , creating more incentive for them to propose the most cost - effective projects ; however , localities might have difficulties generating the increased funding share , and this initiative could result in funding inequities for transit projects when compared with highway projects . second , allowing non - fixed guideway projects to be funded under new starts would give local communities more flexibility in choosing among transit modes and might promote the use of bus rapid transit , whose costs compare favorably with those of light rail systems ; however , this initiative would change the original fixed guideway emphasis of new starts , which some project sponsors we interviewed believe might disadvantage traditional new starts projects .