( see fig . states also reported that they were dissatisfied with the level of services provided to at - risk families in the child welfare system . these services are needed to help prevent the removal of children from their homes or to help facilitate the reunification of children with their parents after removal . specifically , more than half of states responded that they were dissatisfied with mental health services , substance abuse services , transportation services , and housing for parents in at - risk families . ( see fig . states we visited reported that funding constraints were among the reasons maintaining an adequate level of services was difficult . for example , while maintenance payments to foster families for children under state care are provided as an open - ended entitlement for federal funding under title iv - e , federal funding for family support services is capped at a much lower level under title iv - b . in addition , many states experienced budget deficits that adversely affected overall funding for social services . in prioritizing funding needs , child welfare officials in 40 states responding to our survey reported that family support services , such as those that could prevent removal of a child or help with reunification of a family , were the services most in need of greater federal , state , or local resources . officials from 29 states responded that child protective services such as investigation , assessment of the need for services , and monitoring were next in need of additional resources . another reason providing services may be challenging in some states or areas is that some caseworkers and families may be unaware of the array of existing services offered by numerous public and private providers . in north carolina , for example , state officials reported that about 70 percent of children and families in the child welfare system received services from multiple public agencies , and the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) — a repository of information on all federal assistance programs that is periodically updated — lists over 300 federal programs that provide youth and family services . however , caseworkers and families are not always aware of the range of services that are available to support children and families , and child welfare officials cited the need for additional information to help link children and families with needed services . in october 2003 , the white house task force for disadvantaged youth recommended that the cfda be modified to provide a search feature that can be used to identify locations where federally funded programs were operating . state child welfare officials most frequently reported dissatisfaction with the current status of three underlying factors that affect the state's ability to recruit and retain caseworkers to serve children and families in the child welfare system . specifically , more than half of the states reported dissatisfaction with the average number of cases per worker , administrative responsibilities of caseworkers , and effectiveness of caseworker supervision . ( see fig . child welfare officials in each of the states we visited reported having trouble recruiting and retaining caseworkers because many caseworkers are overwhelmed by large caseloads .