gao - 08-467sp . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2008 . best practices: increased focus on requirements and oversight needed to improve dod's acquisition environment and weapon system quality . gao - 08-294 . washington , d.c.: feb. 1 , 2008 . washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2004 . cost assessment guide: best practices for estimating and managing program costs . gao - 07-1134sp , washington , d.c.: july 2007 . this acquisition environment has been characterized in many different ways . cost estimates have proven to be off by billions of dollars in some of the programs we reviewed . for example , the initial cost analysis improvement group estimate for the expeditionary fighting vehicle program was about $1.4 billion compared to a service estimate of about $1.1 billion , but development costs for the system are now expected to be close to $3.6 billion . estimates this far off the mark do not provide the necessary foundation for sufficient funding commitments and realistic long - term planning . constraining development cycles would make it easier to more accurately estimate costs , and as a result , predict the future funding needs and effectively allocate resources . we have consistently emphasized the need for dod's weapon programs to establish shorter development cycles . dod's conventional acquisition process often requires as many as 10 or 15 years to get from program start to production . such lengthy cycle times promote program funding instability — especially when considering dod's tendency to change requirements and funding as well as frequent changes in leadership . constraining cycle times to 5 or 6 years would force programs to conduct more detailed systems engineering analyses , lend itself to fully funding programs to completion , and thereby increase the likelihood that their requirements can be met within established time frames and available resources . an assessment of dod's acquisition system commissioned by the deputy secretary of defense in 2006 similarly found that programs should be time - constrained to reduce pressure on investment accounts and increase funding stability for all programs . when dod consistently allows unsound , unexecutable programs to pass through the requirements , funding , and acquisition processes , accountability suffers . program managers cannot be held accountable when the programs they are handed already have a low probability of success . in addition , program managers are not empowered to make go or no - go decisions , have little control over funding , cannot veto new requirements , and have little authority over staffing . defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs . gao - 07-406sp . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2007 . best practices: an integrated portfolio management approach to weapon system investments could improve dod's acquisition outcomes . gao - 07-388 , washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2007 . best practices: stronger practices needed to improve dod technology transition processes . gao - 06-883 . washington , d.c.: september 14 , 2006 . best practices: better support of weapon system program managers needed to improve outcomes . gao - 06-110 . washington , d.c.: november 1 , 2005 . defense acquisitions: major weapon systems continue to experience cost and schedule problems under dod's revised policy . gao - 06-368 .