we support these efforts . in its comments , va also stated that while some variance exists to the tpss schedule produced in fiscal year 1998 , vba has given assurance that it will meet the original final delivery date in fiscal year 2004 . however , in its fiscal year 2001 budget submission , vba showed that the tpss program would be completed in calendar year 2002 . accordingly , we are reporting that the tpss program is behind schedule . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce it contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the honorable christopher h. smith , chairman of the house committee on veterans' affairs ; the honorable arlen specter , chairman of the senate committee on veterans' affairs ; the honorable john d. rockefeller iv , ranking minority member of the senate committee on veterans' affairs ; other appropriate congressional committees ; the honorable anthony j. principi , secretary of the department of veterans affairs ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you have questions about this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-7101 or irene chu on ( 202 ) 512-7102 . other key contributors were ira spears , steve morris , paul wright , and patrick di battista . ii ) . in its comments , va concurred with both of our recommendations . with regard to our first recommendation , va stated that vba will continue exploring alternative means for providing standardized training and will evaluate whether training on certain topics is better suited to tpss or alternative means such as the vba satellite network . with regard to our second recommendation , va stated that when the sipa program is implemented in late 2001 and 2002 , vba intends to develop formal plans to use it as a tool in evaluating the impact of tpss on accuracy and consistency . doing so delayed releasing those modules to the regional offices . at the time of our survey in october 2000 , the extent to which regional offices had used the six tpss modules that were available varied widely . of the 57 regional offices , 8 had not used any of the available tpss modules to train employees . of the 49 that had used tpss , their use varied greatly . for example , 41 regional offices had used the original compensation module , but only 11 had used the routine future examinations module ( see table 2 ) . only 5 regional offices had used all of the available modules to train employees , and 10 regional offices had used only one module . vba had strongly encouraged , but not required , regional offices to use tpss in their training programs . vba expects to complete these efforts in march and april 2001 , respectively . additionally , it is considering using the vba satellite network and video teleconferencing facilities to provide training for both rating specialists and veterans service representatives .