prevention activities should be integrated . prevention activities should be coordinated with the hiv / aids strategies of host governments . prevention interventions should be driven by best practices . ogac's guidance to the field states that “the optimal balance of abc activities will vary across countries according to the patterns of disease transmission , the identification of core transmitters ( i.e. , those at highest risk of transmitting hiv ) , cultural and social norms , and other contextual factors.” the abc guidance also specifies the components of the abc model that should be targeted to certain populations and sets parameters on the prevention messages that may be delivered to youths . for example , although pepfar funds may be used to deliver age - appropriate ab information to in - school youths aged 10 to 14 years , the funds may not be used to provide information on condoms to these youths . when students are identified as being at risk , they may be referred to out - of - school programs that provide integrated abc information and that provide condoms . under these rules , pepfar funds may be used to give integrated abc information to youths older than 14 . other rules include the following: pepfar funds may not be used in schools for marketing efforts to promote condoms to youths . pepfar funds may not be used in any setting for marketing campaigns that target youths and encourage condom use as the primary intervention for hiv prevention . pepfar funds may be used to target at - risk populations with specific outreach , services , comprehensive prevention messages , and condom information and provision . at - risk groups include , among others , sexually active discordant couples and those who have sex with one whose hiv status is unknown . to meet the 33 percent abstinence - until - marriage spending requirement , ogac issued policies in late august 2005 instructing each of the 15 focus country teams and 5 additional teams to spend at least 50 percent of their prevention funding on sexual transmission prevention and at least 66 percent of that amount on ab activities . to show compliance with the spending requirement , country teams' operational plans must isolate the amount of funding dedicated to ab activities . ogac allows country teams to request exemption from its 50 percent and 66 percent policies . however , the guidance cautions that , in a generalized epidemic , a very strong justification is required for not meeting the 66 percent policy and adds that ogac expects all focus country teams , particularly those with total pepfar funding exceeding $75 million , to adhere to the policies . finally , ogac directed country teams to apply the spending requirement to all pepfar prevention funding ( about $357 million in fiscal year 2006 ) , although it determined that , as a matter of law , the requirement applies only to funds appropriated to the ghai account ( about $322 million in fiscal year 2006 ) . as our april 2006 report discusses , country teams face challenges related to both the abc guidance and the leadership act's abstinence - until - marriage spending requirement .