( see table 2. ) pcori issued its research priorities and agenda in may 2012 , following a process that began in july 2011 . in the fall of 2011 , pcori formed two workgroups within its board of governors — the national priorities for research workgroup and the research agenda workgroup . along with pcori staff and members of the methodology committee , these workgroups examined the processes and products of other recent priority - and agenda - setting efforts , including those from ahrq and iom . they also engaged with and received input from stakeholder groups through a number of public presentations and other modes of communication , such as press releases , focus groups , and feedback through social media . pcori posted on its website its draft research priorities and agenda for public comment from january 23 , 2012 to march 15 , 2012 . in response , pcori received and analyzed a total of 474 formal comments , and made changes to the draft priorities and agenda based on these comments . a final version of pcori's research priorities and agenda were adopted by the board of governors and made publicly available in may 2012 . pcori established its research priorities and agenda consistent with ppaca requirements . specifically , ppaca directed pcori to establish priorities for research that take into account factors that include disease incidence , prevalence , and burden ; gaps in evidence with regard to clinical outcomes ; patient needs , outcomes , and preferences ; and practice variations and health disparities in terms of delivery and outcomes of care , among other things . the act also directed pcori to develop a research agenda for addressing these priorities . the act did not specify the content or form of the priorities or agenda . according to documentation on the process pcori used to develop its research priorities and agenda , the workgroups reviewed and considered these requirements . in the process of developing the research agenda , the workgroups identified where , for example , certain agenda items addressed criteria such as gaps in knowledge , variation in care , and inclusiveness of different populations . according to pcori officials , pcori intended its research priorities to be broad in scope so that they could encompass a broad range of topics in need of study , including different disease areas , conditions , or health care system issues , thus making pcori's research agenda more flexible than if it identified specific topics . pcori noted in its research priorities and agenda document that pcori did not want to exclude any disease from being studied . some stakeholders we interviewed expressed concern that pcori's research priorities are too broad and lack specificity . while pcori officials acknowledged that many of the institute's initial funding announcements were broad in that they did not identify specific topics , they noted that they are in the process of increasing the proportion of funding that goes to specific research topics . for example , pcori will soon begin funding awards for large pragmatic clinical studies to evaluate patient - centered outcomes . the funding announcement for this effort indicates a number of specific research topics of interest to pcori .