iv. ) food stamp officials in 22 states reported that their agencies had increased their commitment to reducing payment errors in recent years ; officials in 14 states stated that financial sanctions , or the threat of sanctions , was the primary reason for their increased commitment . for example , when the texas department of human services requested money to cover sanctions prior to 1995 , the texas legislature required the department to report quarterly on its progress in reducing its payment error rate . officials in texas , which has received enhanced funding for the past 2 fiscal years , cited the department's commitment and accountability to the texas legislature as primary reasons for reducing the error rate over the years and for maintaining their focus on payment accuracy . some states took other actions to reduce their payment errors . for example , even though fns regulations only require that food stamp households be recertified annually , 16 states increased the frequency with which certain types of food stamp households must provide pertinent documentation for recertifying their eligibility for food stamp benefits . in particular , 12 of the 16 states now require households with earned income to be recertified quarterly because their incomes tend to fluctuate , increasing the likelihood of payment errors . more frequent certification enables caseworkers to verify the accuracy of household income and other information , allowing caseworkers to make appropriate adjustments to the household's benefits and possibly avoid a payment error . however , more frequent certification can also inhibit program participation because it creates additional reporting burdens for food stamp recipients . in addition to more frequent certification , five states reported that they access credit reports and public records to determine eligibility and benefits . seven states have formed change reporting units in food stamp offices serving certain metropolitan areas , so that participants notify these centralized units , instead of caseworkers , about starting a new job or other reportable changes . food stamp officials in 20 of the 28 states told us that they have primarily relied on case file reviews by supervisors and others to verify payment accuracy and reduce payment errors . for example , georgia officials noted one county's percentage of payment errors dropped by more than half as a result of the state's requirement that management staff in 10 urban counties re - examine files after a supervisor's review . in each of the past 3 years , ohio food stamp administrators have reviewed up to 100 cases per county per year and have awarded additional state funding to counties with low error rates . in fiscal year 1999 , the counties used $2.5 million in state funds primarily for payment accuracy initiatives . there was less consensus about the relative usefulness of other initiatives in reducing payment errors . specifically , food stamp officials in 13 states told us that special training for caseworkers was one of their primary initiatives ; officials in 8 states cited recertifying households more frequently ; officials in 6 states identified the use of computer software to determine eligibility and / or benefits ; officials in 5 states identified computer database matches ; and officials in 4 states cited analyses of quality control data .