costs . for example , emmie does not collect information on all of the preaward activities that are part of the pa grant application process . as a result , pa program officials said they , and applicants , must use ad hoc reports and personal tracking documents to manage and monitor the progress of grant applications . pa officials added that emmie is not user - friendly and applicants often struggle to access the system . in response to these ongoing challenges , pa program officials developed fac - trax — a separate information system from emmie — with new capabilities designed to improve transparency , efficiency , and management of the pa program . specifically , fac - trax allows fema staff ( pa grants manager ) and applicants ( pa grants portal ) , to review , manage , and track current pa project status and documentation . for example , applicants can use fac - trax to submit requests for public assistance , upload required project documentation , approve grant application items , and send and receive notifications on grant progress and activities . in addition , the fac - trax system includes standardized forms , as well as required fields and tasks that pa program staff and applicants must complete before moving on to the next steps in the pa preaward process . according to pa officials , these capabilities increase transparency , encourage greater applicant involvement , and enhance collaboration and communication between fema and grant applicants , to improve efficiency in processing and awarding grant applications and enhance the quality of project development . further , pa officials said that fac - trax could reduce challenges associated with staff turnover during the project development process because the system stores and maintains applicant information and project documentation , making it easier for transitioning staff to assist an applicant . they also said they use fac - trax to gather and analyze data that supports management of the pa process , including measuring the timeliness of the grant application process . for example , during the test implementation of the new delivery model in georgia following hurricane matthew , officials were able to document that , on average , program delivery managers took 5 days to conduct the exploratory call and 14 days to hold the recovery scoping meeting with applicants , and crc officials took 33 days to develop and review grant proposals . managers use this data to assess staffing needs and identify bottlenecks in the pa process , according to pa officials . fac - trax is critical to the new pa delivery model and will be a primary means of sharing grant application documents , tracking ongoing pa projects , and ensuring that fema staff and applicants follow pa grant policies and procedures . given the importance of developing and testing this new information sharing system , we evaluated its development against four key it management controls — ( 1 ) project planning ; ( 2 ) risk management ; ( 3 ) requirements development ; and ( 4 ) systems testing and integration . when implemented effectively , these controls provide assurance that it systems will be delivered within cost and schedule and meet the capabilities needed by its users .