broadband competition . in 2017 , we found that infrastructure costs and other factors can affect competition among broadband providers . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at https: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or vonaha@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . another estimate of capital expenditures by ustelecom — a broadband industry association — uses a different scope and methodology than the u.s. census bureau's annual capital expenditures survey . the association reports total capital expenditures for u.s. broadband providers , as shown in table 2 . ustelecom's data include expenditures from fixed ( wireline ) , mobile ( wireless ) , and cable companies . its primary source of data are publicly traded companies' financial statements filed with the securities and exchange commission . ustelecom also makes estimates for companies that do not report financial information publicly . its data exclude some companies , such as satellite providers , telecommunication resellers , and electric utilities . ustelecom publishes estimates annually for advocacy or research purposes . its capital expenditures data differ from the census bureau's annual capital expenditures survey estimates for telecommunications industry in scope , methodology , and timing , among other things . for instance , the census bureau's survey is broader in scope . specifically , in addition to the types of companies ustelecom includes in its data , the census bureau's survey data include satellite providers , resellers , and other telecommunications providers . in addition , the census bureau collects data through a survey instrument from both publicly traded and privately held companies across the united states . it makes statistical inferences about the capital expenditures for the entire telecommunications industry , whereas ustelecom collects data mainly from financial reports for a defined set of providers and makes estimates for companies that do not report financial information publicly . moreover , ustelecom typically releases its capital expenditure data within a year after companies release their financial data while preliminary survey results from the census bureau are made public about 2 years after companies report and data reliability assessments occur and the final revised results are made public about 3 years after companies report . in addition to the ustelecom and census bureau estimates , investment firms , such as goldman sachs and ubs , also estimate or may report industry capital expenditures for selected publicly traded companies providing broadband service . in addition to the contact named above , andrew huddleston ( assistant director ) ; steve martinez ( analyst in charge ) ; oluwaseun ajayi ; michelle bacon ; carl barden ; melissa bodeau ; hannah laufe ; dan luo ; malika rice ; sandra sokol ; and betsey ward - jenks made key contributions to this report . rus grant and loan programs . in 2017 , we assessed whether rus's procedures and activities related to its broadband grant and loan programs are consistent with leading management practices .