table 1 compares niplecc and stop . stop and niplecc share similar goals , including coordination of ip protection and enforcement , and involve nearly the same agencies . niplecc's membership is designated by statute and includes specific positions by agencies , whereas agencies that participate in stop overlap with niplecc members , but do not designate any specific positions . ( see figure 1. ) the u.s. government has a coordinating structure for ip enforcement , but the structure's effectiveness is hampered by a lack of clear leadership and permanence , and despite some progress , it has not been developed in a manner that makes it effective and viable for the long term . niplecc and stop form the central coordinating structure for ip enforcement across federal agencies . however , niplecc continues to have problems in providing leadership despite enhancements made by congress , and stop's authority and influence , which result from its status as a presidential initiative , could disappear after the current administration leaves office . while the current ip enforcement coordinating structure has contributed to some progress – particularly in increasing attention to ip enforcement domestically and abroad through stop – niplecc's commitment to implementing stop as a strategy remains unclear , creating a challenge for effective accountability and the long - term viability of ip enforcement . in 1999 , congress created niplecc to coordinate domestic and international intellectual property law enforcement among u.s. federal and foreign entities . the council's membership is designated by statute and includes six federal agencies . the commissioner of patents and trademarks ( uspto ) and assistant attorney general , criminal division from the department of justice serve as niplecc's co - chairs . from 1999 through the end of 2004 , niplecc produced three annual reports that did little more than provide a compilation of individual agency activities . we also concluded in our 2004 report that if congress wished to maintain niplecc and take action to increase its effectiveness , it should consider reviewing the council's authority , operating structure , membership , and mission . congress addressed niplecc's lack of activity and unclear mission in the 2005 consolidated appropriations act in december 2004 . the act called for niplecc to ( 1 ) establish policies , objectives , and priorities concerning international ip protection and enforcement ; ( 2 ) promulgate a strategy for protecting american ip overseas ; and ( 3 ) coordinate and oversee implementation of the policies , objectives , and priorities and overall strategy for protecting american ip overseas by agencies with ip responsibilities . it also created the position of the coordinator for international intellectual property enforcement , also known as the “ip coordinator,” to head niplecc . the ip coordinator is appointed by the president and may not serve in any other position in the federal government . the co - chairs for niplecc are required to report to the ip coordinator . unlike niplecc , stop from its beginning has been characterized by a high level of active coordination and visibility .