allocation analysis and development . after the act is passed , usaid and state review their allocation estimates against the requirements and directives in the act and adjust their spreadsheet containing allocation estimates as necessary , taking into consideration policy direction from state and usaid leadership . according to state and usaid officials , detailed congressional instructions for particular accounts can limit the agencies' ability to allocate funds according to the administration's priorities and to consider country - specific foreign assistance needs . for example , congress appropriated $876 million in fiscal year 2018 for the nonproliferation , anti - terrorism , demining , and related programs account and included 40 associated requirements and directives . state and usaid officials added that in order to satisfy all the requirements and directives they sometimes have to allocate appropriated amounts to address more than one requirement or directive . for instance , in the fiscal year 2018 section 653 ( a ) report , some of the funds allocated to meet an appropriation requirement for conventional weapons destruction were also designated as an allocation to satisfy a different requirement for humanitarian demining . further , some amount of those funds satisfied a more specific requirement for humanitarian demining in laos . state officials noted that by allocating appropriated amounts to more than one requirement or directive , they have greater flexibility to address administration priorities , while also meeting congressional instructions . allocation negotiation , review , and agreement . state and usaid ensure that input from all the various parties is taken into consideration when further developing allocations . these instructions come in two broad categories . requirements: congress's instructions to agencies as contained in the annual appropriations act , including mandatory and non - mandatory spending , and tables within the joint explanatory statement that are required by statute . directives: congress's instructions to agencies presented as additional language in the joint explanatory statement that are not required by statute .