agree on roles and responsibilities . establish compatible policies , procedures , and other means to operate across agency boundaries . develop mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report on results . reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts through agency plans and reports . reinforce individual accountability for collaborative efforts through performance management systems . these best practices would support a collaborative working relationship between the irs and sec and cftc . while we generally believe that the application of as many of these practices as possible increases the likelihood of effective collaboration , we also recognize that there is a wide range of situations and circumstances in which agencies work together . following even a few of these practices may be sufficient for effective collaboration . although financial derivatives enable companies and others to manage risks , some taxpayers have used financial derivatives to take advantage of the current tax system , sometimes in ways that courts have later deemed improper or congress has disallowed . the tax code establishes broad categories for financial instruments , such as debt , equity , forwards , and options , each with its own tax rules governing how and when gains and losses are taxed . however , as new financial derivative products and uses are developed , they could be similar to multiple tax categories , and therefore irs and taxpayers must choose different tax treatments . in certain instances , this has allowed economically equivalent outcomes to be taxed inconsistently . without changes to the approach to how financial derivatives are taxed , the potential for abuse continues . experts have suggested alternative approaches that they believe would provide more comprehensive and consistent treatment . however , each alternative would present tradeoffs to irs and taxpayers , including tradeoffs to simplicity , administrability , and economic efficiency . this report does not address or evaluate alternatives for taxing financial derivatives . because of their unique role in defining policy and administering the tax code , treasury and irs are best positioned to study and recommend an alternative approach to the taxation of financial derivatives . outside of any comprehensive changes to the current approach to the taxation of financial derivatives , one way that treasury and irs address potential abuses and provide clarity to tax issues is through its taxpayer guidance . the lack of finalized guidance has negative consequences for both irs and taxpayers , including uncertainty that inhibits irs staff during audits and litigation and leaves taxpayers uncertain about whether they have appropriately determined their tax liabilities . however , challenges that irs and treasury face in developing guidance for financial derivatives , including the risk of adverse economic effects of guidance changes and the complexity of financial derivative products , have resulted in some pgp projects taking longer than the 12-month period established in the plan . as such , uncertainty is heightened because taxpayers may not be aware when projects are going to take longer than the 12-month period and irs does not provide public updates to the pgp as changes occur to project status , priorities , and target dates . the growth in the complexity and use of financial derivatives presents another challenge for irs .