however , aoc had not invoked the clause for any of these contracts . further , congress recently enacted legislation prohibiting the aoc from using funds made available by the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , to make incentive or award payments to contractors for work on contracts that are behind schedule or over budget , unless certain determinations are made . termination for default: when poor contractor performance cannot be corrected through other means , aoc may take additional steps and ultimately terminate the contract for default . we compared aoc's efforts to assess its competition levels against acquisition best practices and standards for internal control in the federal government , which call for continually tracking spending to gain insight about how resources are being used and using the information to assess how agency's objectives are being achieved . to determine how the aoc oversees contractor performance , we reviewed the same sample of 21 contracts and orders , reviewed aoc project management guidance , and interviewed relevant officials . our process identifies new roles and responsibilities for existing offices and officials within the agency . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from april 2015 to april 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the aoc's authority to contract for goods and services is vested by statute in the agency head who has delegated this responsibility to the chief administrative officer ( cao ) . the cao has responsibility to , among other things , administer the procurement function on behalf of aoc . ammd , which falls under the cao , is authorized to enter into contracts on behalf of the agency . ammd is the primary office responsible for developing contracting policies and procedures , appointing contracting officers , and awarding and overseeing contracts . requirements for goods and services are identified by aoc's operational units , which consist of various jurisdictions and offices that handle the day - to - day operations including the support , maintenance , and operations of buildings as well as construction and renovation projects . while ammd has the primary responsibility of awarding and administering contracts , ammd often works with the aoc's jurisdictions and offices to assist in monitoring the progress of contracts awarded to support aoc's various projects , such as the restoration of the capitol dome . from fiscal years 2011 through 2015 , aoc obligated , on average , $326 million annually to procure goods and services . during the 5-year period , as figure 1 shows , the level of contracting actions has generally declined while obligations on contracts and orders varied . there was a substantial increase in obligations between fiscal years 2014 and 2015 when aoc awarded a contract to begin construction for the cannon building renewal project .