( see app . i for information on the challenges of hiv / aids program integration experienced by care act grantees. ) to determine the effect on grantees and service providers of the new competitive process for awarding part a and b mai funds , we conducted a web - based survey of care act fiscal year 2007 part a and b grantees to learn how the grantees applied for funds , distributed funds to service providers , and provided oversight , and what services they provided prior to and after the enactment of rwtma . the survey response rates were about 77 percent ( 43 of 56 ) for part a and about 81 percent ( 48 of 59 ) for part b . also , we created estimated funding amounts for part a and b grantees based on the old formula - based process and analyzed the difference between these amounts and the actual funding for fiscal year 2007 . to create these estimated funding amounts , we reviewed care act mai funding data for fiscal years 2006 and 2007 , case counts of minorities living with aids for fiscal year 2006 , and case counts of minorities living with hiv / aids for fiscal year 2007 , all of which were provided by hrsa . we used this information to assess the effect of the new competitive process on mai funding . ( see app . ii for more information on the survey and how estimated funding amounts were determined. ) to assess the validity of the funding amounts , we compared data we received from hrsa to previously published funding amounts . we provided hrsa officials with a copy of our tables , and they agreed with our methodology . we determined that the funding data and case count data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . grantees under parts a , b , and c must spend at least 75 percent of their grants for core medical services , while no more than 25 percent of these funds can be spent for support services . table 1 lists core medical service and support service categories . in administering the care act , hrsa issues guidance for applying for and spending mai grants . hrsa requires mai grantees to submit reports as a condition of their grant awards . the reports mai grantees submit to hrsa summarize grantees' mai activities and include data on individuals served , services offered , budget allocations , and expenditures . for all parts of the care act , hrsa provides oversight of grantees but expects grantees to provide oversight of service providers . ( see fig . 1 for hrsa's role in the administration and oversight of mai funds. ) focused on women , children , nd yoth multiple care act parts . sometimes mai grantees also function as service providers . ryan white comprehensive aids resources emergency act of 1990 , as amended . emas are eligible metropolitan areas , tgas are transitional grant areas . service providers are organizations with which grantees contract or award subgrants to provide services or arrange to have another organization to provide services .