victims . a federal crime victim is a person directly and proximately harmed as the result of a federal offense . federal crime victims are entitled to full and timely restitution as provided in law . victims may provide information to prosecutors , probation officers , and to the court about their losses and have a right to be heard at sentencing , but are not required to participate in any phase of the restitution proceedings . defendants and their counsel . defendants who commit federal crimes where an identifiable victim suffered a physical injury or monetary loss are generally required to pay restitution . defendants are required to submit information about their financial resources and the financial needs and earning ability of their dependents to the court and have the burden of demonstrating these resources and needs in any restitution proceedings . defendants are generally represented by counsel in criminal proceedings and according to the judiciary approximately 90 percent qualify for court - appointed counsel under the criminal justice act because they are financially unable to retain counsel in federal criminal proceedings . court - appointed counsel is provided by federal defender organizations and panel attorneys . a defendant may be convicted pursuant to plea agreement with the government or after a trial ; more than 90 percent of defendants plead guilty rather than go to trial . a defendant is referred to as an offender following conviction of an offense . restitution is only available to victims and for harms as statutorily authorized . congress passed the mvra in 1996 , which substantially revised the restitution process . the legislative history reflects the balancing of competing interests — including ensuring that the loss to crime victims is recognized , that they receive the restitution that they are due , and also that the offender realizes the damages caused by the offense and pays the debt owed to the victim as well to society . as provided in the legislative history , one of the ways that the law sought to balance the application of mandatory restitution was by limiting it to the instances where a named identifiable victim suffered a physical injury or monetary loss as a direct and proximate result of the defendant's offense of conviction . this means that the victim would not have been harmed “but for” the conduct underlying the offense of conviction and also that the harm was proximately caused by the conduct . proximately caused means that the causal nexus between the conduct and the loss is not too attenuated either factually or temporally . as such , a defendant is not held liable for downstream effects of an act where there were additional , intervening causes not sufficiently related to the offense . for example , a rapist would not be held responsible for the death of a hospitalized rape victim who died in a hospital fire . for example , losses such as the cost of necessary physical and occupational therapy and rehabilitation , and necessary funeral and related services , among others .