gao - 09-832t . washington , d.c.: july 9 , 2009 . it is administered by the u.s. department of education . the funds are intended to help ( 1 ) stabilize state and local government budgets in order to minimize and avoid reductions in education and other essential public services ; ( 2 ) ensure that local educational agencies and public institutions of higher education have the resources to avert cuts and retain teachers and professors ; and ( 3 ) support the modernization , renovation , and repair of school and college facilities . according to the department of education , states participating in the program must provide a commitment to advance essential education reforms to benefit students from early learning through post - secondary education . federal transit formula grants programs: administered by the department of transportation's federal transit administration , these grant programs provide capital and operating assistance for public transit systems . three of the major formula federal assistance programs include the following: ( 1 ) the urbanized area formula program , which makes federal resources available to areas with populations of 50,000 or more and to governors for transit capital and operating assistance and for transportation related planning ; ( 2 ) the nonurbanized area formula program , which provides formula funding to states for the purpose of supporting public transportation in areas with populations of less than 50,000 ; and ( 3 ) capital investment — fixed guideway modernization program , which may be used for capital projects to maintain , modernize , or improve fixed guideway systems . head start: head start is administered by the department of health and human services's administration for children and families ( acf ) and provides grants directly to over 1,600 local agencies . head start provides funds for early childhood development services to low - income children and their families . these services include education , health , nutrition , and social services to prepare children to enter kindergarten and to improve the conditions necessary for their success later in school and life . highway planning and construction: the department of transportation's federal highway administration ( fhwa ) administers the highway planning and construction program , also known as the federal - aid highway program . according to fhwa , the federal - aid highway program provides federal financial resources and technical assistance to state and local governments for planning , constructing , preserving , and improving federal - aid eligible highways . the federal - aid eligible highway system includes the national highway system ( nhs ) , a network of about 163,000 miles of roads that comprises only 4 percent of the nation's total public road mileage , but carries approximately 45 percent of the nation's highway traffic as well as an additional 1.1 million miles of roads that are not on the nhs , but that are eligible for federal - aid . individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) part b: the department of education has responsibility for oversight of idea and for ensuring that states are complying with the law . idea part b grants provide funding for special education and related services for children and youth ages 3 to 21 .