, stage ) reviews . the purpose of the phase is to ensure that blm chooses the it projects that best support its mission and align with the bureau's architecture . during this phase , the project proponent and portfolio manager are expected to collaborate to develop an investment proposal . a key practice was rated as ”not executed” when we found insufficient evidence of a practice during the review , or when we determined that there were significant weaknesses in blm's execution of the key practice . to address our second objective , we interviewed officials from the system coordination office , whose main responsibility it is to oversee and ensure that blm's it investment management process is implemented and followed ; the chief information officer ; and other national itib members to determine efforts undertaken to improve it investment management processes . we also reviewed an improvement plan developed about 3 years ago based on strengths and weaknesses of blm's it investment management process at that time , and the results of the comprehensive it management assessment blm officials stated they plan to use as a basis for an integrated plan for improving it investment management and other it management areas . we conducted our work at blm headquarters in washington , d.c. , from march through july 2003 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . these individuals and groups and their roles are described below . national information technology investment board ( itib ) — chaired by blm's deputy director of operations , this board is responsible for selecting , controlling , and evaluating all national it investments . members include the cio , chief financial officer , assistant directors from the business units , two state directors , an associate state director , the cio council chair , the bureau architecture chair , a fire and aviation portfolio representative , and several ex officio members including interior's cio , the bureau architect , and managers from the system coordination office and the investment management group .