the results of our analysis are summarized below . fusion centers: directors and other senior officials in 8 of 10 fusion centers we spoke with generally found i&a information to be useful . for example , officials at 1 fusion center reported that i&a products keep officials up to date on national and global terrorism trends that may have an impact on their region . in addition , officials at another fusion center stated that reports , such as the joint intelligence briefing from dhs and the fbi on the 10th anniversary of 9 / 11 , and special assessments of security at sporting events , have helped the fusion center provide guidance to state and local law enforcement . further , in response to an i&a report on radicalization of prison inmates , 1 fusion center's detectives met with corrections department staff to enhance their awareness of prison radicalization and held trainings on suspicious activities and radicalization indicators . moreover , officials at this center noted that the timely dissemination of reports has improved , that reports are more specific to regional needs than in the past , and that i&a has responded to fusion center feedback . however , officials at 2 other fusion centers we met with stated that i&a information was not always timely . components are following suit . component surveys include a common question that asks customers to rate satisfaction on a five - point scale — very satisfied , somewhat satisfied , neither satisfied nor dissatisfied , somewhat dissatisfied , or very dissatisfied — and dhs customer satisfaction performance measures report the percentage of intelligence products rated somewhat satisfied or very satisfied . dhs plans to aggregate survey results on this question from across the dhs intelligence enterprise components , use the data as a gauge on how the information provided contributed to success in achieving goals for missions areas — such as preventing terrorist attacks — and publish the results in the department's annual performance report as performance measures , beginning in 2013 . for example , tsa disseminated about 11,000 incident reports that pertain to preventing terrorist attacks during the first two quarters of 2012 and received about 5,800 responses . over the same time period , i&a distributed 41 reports pertaining to preventing terrorist attacks and received over 700 responses.that customers who responded to the surveys said that they were generally satisfied with the reports they reviewed during that time frame . i&a data for fiscal year 2011 also show that customers said they were generally satisfied with products disseminated that year . these customer feedback mechanisms should help to provide customers' perspectives of how well dhs is meeting its 2015 vision . however , i&a recognizes that the survey results may not be representative of the entire population of customers that received those products because customers voluntarily choose whether or not to provide feedback . outcomes of executing these agreements . specifically , dhs plans to assess customer satisfaction of the recipients of multiple data sets received through these agreements beginning in october 2012 . dhs's key initiatives and capabilities should help to increase the department's ability to make components' information available to important customers , and to disseminate components' products and reports created for these customers .