( see app . ii for more information on key characteristics of these ex - situ technologies. ) similarly , we identified nine in - situ technologies that can be used to remediate contaminated groundwater . in contrast to ex - situ technologies , in - situ technologies treat contaminants within the subsurface . some in - situ technologies — such as bioremediation and chemical treatment — destroy the contaminant within the subsurface by altering the contaminant's chemical structure and converting the toxic chemical to a nontoxic form ( eg , benzene to carbon dioxide ) . other in - situ technologies — such as multiphase extraction and enhanced recovery using surfactant flushing — facilitate the removal of the contaminant from the subsurface for treatment above ground . still other technologies — such as air sparging — combine in - situ treatments with extraction techniques . air sparging introduces air or other gases into the subsurface to remove the contamination from the groundwater through volatilization ( converting a solid or liquid into a gas or vapor that may be treated at the surface ) , and in some configurations may also introduce oxygen into the contaminated area to stimulate in - situ biological breakdown ( i.e. , bioremediation ) or ozone to achieve chemical oxidation of the contaminant . bioremediation relies on microorganisms living in the subsurface to biologically degrade groundwater contaminants through a process called biodegradation . bioremediation may be engineered and accomplished in two general ways: ( 1 ) stimulating native microorganisms by adding nutrients , oxygen , or other electron acceptors ( a process a called biostimulation ) or ( 2 ) providing supplementary pregrown microorganisms to the contaminated site to augment naturally occurring microorganisms ( a process called bioaugmentation ) . enhanced recovery using surfactant flushing involves the injection of active agents known as surfactants into contaminated aquifers to flush the contaminated groundwater toward a pump , which removes the contaminated water and surfactant solution to the surface for treatment and disposal of the contaminants . chemical treatments inject various substances into the groundwater that can chemically oxidize or reduce contaminants into less - toxic or nonhazardous materials . monitored natural attenuation involves using wells and monitoring equipment in and around a contaminated site to track the natural physical , chemical , and biological degradation of the contaminants . although not necessarily considered a treatment technology , this approach is often used to monitor contaminant concentrations to ensure that human health and the environment are not threatened . multiphase extraction uses a series of pumps and vacuums to simultaneously remove from the subsurface combinations of contaminated groundwater , free product ( i.e. , liquid contaminants floating on top of groundwater ) , and hazardous vapors . this technology can be used to remove contaminants from above and below the groundwater table , thereby exposing more of the subsurface for treatment . permeable reactive barriers are vertical walls or trenches built into the subsurface that contain a reactive material to intercept and remediate a contaminant plume as the groundwater passes through the barrier . phytoremediation relies on the natural hydraulic and metabolic processes of selected vegetation to remove , contain , or reduce the toxicity of environmental contaminants in the groundwater .