gao - 05-207 . washington , d.c.: january 2005 . in region a , these activities were conducted by a psc . as of march 1 , 2006 , the psc in region a also became responsible for conducting the medical review and benefit integrity activities for region b . washington , d.c.: november 17 , 2004 . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date . we will then send a copy of this report to the secretary of hhs , the administrator of cms , and the attorney general , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . this report also will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 312 ) 220-7600 or aronovitzl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . u.s. reion a - dme mac: ntionl heritge insunce compny ; psc: tricentrion , llc reion b - dme mac: adminasr federl , inc. ; psc: tricentrion , llc reion c - dme mac: to nnonced ; psc: trussoltion , llc reion d - dme mac: noridin adminitrtive service , llc ; psc: electronic d stem corp . to discuss the program integrity activities of the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) and its contractors to prevent and minimize improper payments made for durable medical equipment , prosthetics , orthotics , and supplies ( dmepos ) , we reviewed aspects of the contractors' medical review and benefit integrity responsibilities . we reviewed the automated prepayment controls — called edits — that contractors introduce into their payment systems to deny claims or flag them for medical review , and contractors' benefit integrity activities . we included edits because they are generally the contractors' first line of defense for avoiding payment of improper claims . we did not evaluate other aspects of medical review , which can include analysis or examination of claims after payment , but we discuss these functions in relation to automated prepayment controls and benefit integrity activities . we also included benefit integrity efforts — such as referring potential cases to law enforcement — because these efforts allow contractors to enlist federal law enforcement agencies to act against suppliers who have defrauded medicare . as part of our work , we reviewed related gao reports and cms's medicare program integrity manual ( pim ) , which establishes cms's guidelines for contractors' program integrity activities .