we closed each of these recommendations as implemented . this report is a public version of a sensitive report that we issued on november 20 , 2018 , which examined the efforts that u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) has taken since our 2012 report to address fraud risks , including the extent to which ice has ( 1 ) taken steps to strengthen its management of fraud risks in the student and exchange visitor program ( sevp ) , ( 2 ) implemented controls to address fraud risks in the school certification and recertification processes , and ( 3 ) implemented fraud risk controls related to the eligibility , suitability , and training of designated school officials ( dso ) .the sensitive report included information related to sevp internal controls used to help prevent and identify noncompliance or fraud in the program . the sensitive report also discussed some planned actions to improve these internal controls , some of which the department of homeland security ( dhs ) deemed to be sensitive and must be protected from public disclosure . this public report omits the information that dhs deemed to be sensitive including details associated with ( 1 ) the oversight of schools during the certification and recertification process , ( 2 ) our covert testing of sevp certification internal controls , and ( 3 ) current and planned actions to oversee dsos . although the information provided in this report is more limited , it addresses the same objectives and uses the same methodology as the sensitive report . for our first objective , to evaluate the extent to which ice has taken steps to strengthen its management of fraud risks in sevp , we assessed actions ice , particularly sevp and the counterterrorism and criminal exploitation unit ( ctceu ) , have taken since 2012 to design and implement controls to address fraud in the postsecondary , vocational , and english language school certification and recertification process . we reviewed documents including regulations , processes and procedures , and guidance related to fraud risk management , school certification , and recertification processes , and the role of dsos . we evaluated the extent to which ice's practices were consistent with standards for internal control in the federal government and gao's a framework for managing fraud risks in federal programs . in particular , we analyzed ice documentation , such as standard operating procedures , policy statements , and guidance for adjudicators to determine how ice's processes and systems identify and assess risk in sevp , including the sevp risk assessment model and framework , risk assessment tool , risk register , and other internal guidance . in addition , we reviewed information from ice's current sevp administrative , watch , and criminal investigative cases and analyzed information on past cases of sevp fraud , including indictments . also , we interviewed ice officials within sevp to evaluate the extent to which the program has taken steps to strengthen its management of fraud risks since 2012 .