medicare uc payments . ppaca directed cms to base these payments on hospital uncompensated care costs , including the costs of treating uninsured patients . however , cms has discretion to choose the methods and data sources it uses to calculate these costs , and cms has to date used data related to medicaid and medicare workload as a proxy for uncompensated care costs . for fiscal years 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 , medicare uc payments made to individual hospitals are based on a hospital's days spent treating medicaid patients and low - income medicare beneficiaries rather than on a hospital's actual uncompensated care costs . specifically , an individual hospital's medicare uc payment is based on the hospital's relative proportion of days spent treating medicaid patients and low - income medicare patients across all hospitals receiving uc payments nationally . our analysis indicates that , under this formula , medicaid patient days accounted for about 85 percent of medicare uc payments , and low - income medicare patient days accounted for the remaining 15 percent in fiscal year 2014 . in other words , we found that the amount of a hospital's medicare uc payment is largely based on the hospital's medicaid patient workload . medicare bad debt payments . cms pays hospitals a certain percentage of the actual unpaid copayments and deductibles that hospitals expected to receive , but were unable to collect , from medicare beneficiaries . bad debt . this includes cost - sharing for which patients are responsible for paying but have not paid — - for example , deductible and coinsurance amounts . public payer payment shortfalls . these include the differences between payments from public payers such as medicaid , and hospitals' costs for the services provided to these payers' beneficiaries . in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , the federal government made multiple types of payments to hospitals to help offset uncompensated care costs mainly through two programs — medicare and medicaid — totaling nearly $50 billion each year . medicaid payments accounted for almost three - quarters of these payments in each year . federal tax laws provided other benefits to qualifying non - profit hospitals through tax exemptions . in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , state medicaid programs spent over $35 billion in each year for payments that helped hospitals offset their uncompensated care costs . medicaid spending comprised three types of payments: disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments , upper payment limit ( upl ) payments , and uncompensated care payments made under section 1115 demonstrations . all three payment types are , for purposes of this report , considered to be supplemental payments , which are payments generally made separately from , and in addition to , states' regular , claims - based payments to hospitals for medicaid services provided to medicaid beneficiaries . supplemental payments are generally made as lump sum payments on a monthly , quarterly , or annual basis . specifically medicaid dsh payments . these are medicaid payments that congress established for hospitals serving large numbers of medicaid and low - income individuals to help offset their uncompensated costs .