contracting support organizations . we also found that army contracting offices had difficulty in readily providing complete and accurate data to us on arlington contracts . for example , the national capital region contracting center could not provide a complete list of active contracts supporting arlington during fiscal years 2010 and 2011 and in some cases did not provide accurate dollar amounts associated with the contracts it identified . usace also had difficulty providing a complete list of active arlington contracts for this time frame . the micc - fort belvoir contracting office was able to provide a complete list of the recently awarded contracts supporting arlington with accurate dollar amounts for this time frame , and those data were supported by similar information from arlington . the army has also taken a number of steps to better align ancp contract support with the expertise of its partners . however , some of the agreements governing these relationships do not yet fully define roles and responsibilities for contracting support . we have previously reported that a key factor in improving dod's service acquisition outcomes — that is , obtaining the right service , at the right price , in the right manner — is having defined responsibilities and associated support structures . going forward , sustained attention on the part of ancp and its partners will be important to ensure that contracts of all types and risk levels are managed effectively . the following summarizes ongoing efforts in this area: ancp established a new contracting support agreement with the army contracting command in august 2010 . the agreement states that the command will assign appropriate contracting offices to provide support , in coordination with ancp , and will conduct joint periodic reviews of new and ongoing contract requirements . in april 2011 , ancp also signed a separate agreement with the micc , part of the army contracting command , which outlines additional responsibilities for providing contracting support to ancp . while this agreement states that the micc , through the fort belvoir contracting office , will provide the full range of contracting support , it does not specify the types of requirements that will be supported , nor does it specify that other offices within the command may also do so . ancp signed an updated support agreement with usace in december 2010 , which states that these organizations will coordinate to assign appropriate offices to provide contracting support and that usace will provide periodic joint reviews of ongoing and upcoming requirements . at the time of our review , usace officials noted that they were in the process of finalizing an overarching program management plan with ancp , which , if implemented , provides additional detail about the structure of and roles and responsibilities for support . usace and ancp have also established a senior executive review group , which updates the senior leadership at both organizations on the status of ongoing efforts . ancp has also put agreements in place with the army information technology agency ( ita ) and the army analytics group , which provide program support for managing information technology infrastructure and enhance operational capabilities .