usda agreed to act on most of our recommendations . however , usda stated that its current regulations are sufficient for determining active engagement in farming and assessing whether operations are schemes or devices to evade payment limitations . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . we would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact lawrence j. dyckman , director , natural resources and environment , ( 202 ) 512-3841 , or by email at dyckmanl@gao.gov . ron maxon , thomas cook , cleofas zapata , carol herrnstadt shulman , and amy webbink made key contributions to this statement . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . each officer provided the active personal management for three corporations . on the other hand , fsa regulations only provide this as one example of what fsa considers to be a scheme or device . the regulations do not specify that all covered schemes or devices must involve fraudulent intent . as previously stated , covered schemes or devices under fsa regulations include those that have “the effect of evading” payment limitation rules . the regulations need to better define what constitutes a significant contribution of active personal management and clarify whether fraudulent intent is necessary to find that someone has adopted a scheme or device . without specifying measurable standards for what constitutes a significant contribution of active personal management , fsa allows individuals who may have had limited involvement in the farming operation to qualify for payments . moreover , fsa is not providing adequate oversight of farm program payments under its current regulations and policies . in our report to you , we made eight recommendations to the secretary of agriculture for improving fsa's oversight of compliance with the 1987 act , including: developing measurable requirements defining a significant contribution of active personal management ; clarifying regulations and guidance as to what constitutes a scheme or device ; improving its sampling method for selecting farming operations for review ; and developing controls to ensure all available tools are used to assess compliance with the act . finally , guidance contained in fsa handbook payment limitations , 1-pl ( revision 1 ) , amendment 40 , does not clarify the matter because it does not provide any additional examples for fsa officials of the types of arrangements that might be considered schemes or devices . this lack of clarity over whether fraudulent intent must be shown in order for fsa to deny payments under the scheme or device provision of the law may be inhibiting fsa from finding that some questionable operations are schemes or devices . in addition to the weaknesses described above , fsa does not effectively oversee farm program payments in five key areas , according to our analysis of fsa compliance reviews and our survey of fsa field offices .