b . income: most households must meet gross - and net - income tests , but a household with an elderly person or a person who is receiving certain types of disability payments has to meet only the net - income test . a household's gross income cannot exceed 130 percent of the federal poverty guidelines to receive snap benefits . gross income means a household's total , non - excluded income , before any deductions have been made . a household's net income cannot exceed 100 percent of the federal poverty guidelines . according to the usda , net income is gross income minus allowable deductions . deductions allowed are: 20 percent of earned income ; a standard deduction of $155 for household sizes of 1 to 3 people , and $168 for a household size of 4 ( higher for some larger households ) ; dependent - care expenses when needed for work , training , or medical expenses for elderly or disabled members that are more than $35 for the month if they are not paid by insurance or someone else ; legally owed child - support payments , if a state agency chooses not to exclude child - support payments from income ; and excess shelter costs that are more than half of the household's income after the other deductions . allowable shelter costs include the cost of fuel to heat and cook with , cooling , electricity , water , service fees for one telephone , rent or mortgage payments and property taxes . the amount of the shelter deduction cannot be more than $504 unless one person in the household is elderly or disabled . the limit is higher in alaska , hawaii and guam . some states allow homeless households to deduct a set amount ( $143 ) for shelter costs . c. employment requirement: in general , people must meet work requirements to be eligible for snap . an applicant is ineligible for snap if the individual refuses to register for work , accept an offer of employment , or participate in an employment and training program required by a state agency , or the individual voluntarily , and without good cause , quits a job or reduces hours . in addition , able - bodied adults without dependents are required to work or participate in a work program for at least 20 hours per week to receive snap benefits for more than 3 months in a 36-month period . some special groups — including children , seniors , pregnant women , and people who are exempt for physical or mental health reasons — may not be subject to these requirements . the federal law regarding snap provides an additional pathway for financial eligibility to snap . this federal law makes households in which all members are either eligible for or receive cash benefits from tanf , ssi , or state - financed general assistance ( ga ) programs automatically eligible for snap . these households , which have already gone through eligibility determination for those programs , bypass the income and resource tests described above and are deemed financially eligible .