we disagree . we did not measure dcps's progress against “ultimate goals.” as is now reflected in the paragraph describing our approach to this study , we measured the progress of ongoing reform efforts by comparing dcps's progress to its own time frames for implementing various initiatives . in conducting our review , we spoke with numerous dcps officials and repeatedly asked for documents and time frames in order to objectively gauge the district's progress . in some cases , dcps officials did not provide us with such documentation ; however , we made a concerted effort to accurately identify current initiatives and related time frames . in addition , we measured completed initiatives against recognized standards . ( 2 ) what actions has the district taken to strengthen the quality of teachers and principals ? ( 3 ) to what extent have the district's education offices developed and implemented long - term plans and how has dcps used stakeholder input in key initiatives ? ( 4 ) what steps have dcps and the state superintendent's office taken to improve their accountability and performance ? to answer these questions , we reviewed and analyzed relevant documents and research and interviewed officials from the district's education offices , such as dcps and the office of the state superintendent of education . for example , we interviewed high - ranking officials such as the state superintendent of education ; the chancellor of dcps ; and departmental leaders at dcps , including the interim chief academic officer , the deputy chancellor for human resources and external relations , the chief of data and accountability , and the head of the transformation management office . we also interviewed representatives of education and research associations , and various organizations based in the washington , d.c. community . across all our objectives , we measured the progress of ongoing reform efforts against any implementation time frames established by dcps or the state superintendent's office . we based our evaluation of completed initiatives on relevant recognized standards , such as those established by gao in past reports . to understand the steps that have been taken to address student achievement , we gathered information about the various academic initiatives dcps has planned or implemented , and reviewed and analyzed documentation of how schools were restructured . we assessed the reliability of the restructuring data for the 2008-2009 school year by reviewing documentation and interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also interviewed eight principals from schools that had been consolidated as a result of the closure of 23 schools prior to the 2008-2009 school year primarily due to declining enrollments . we reviewed and analyzed documentation — including state - level contracts and project plans — regarding efforts to improve data collection , quality , and usage . we did not independently verify reported improvements to dcps and state superintendent's office data systems . to understand how the district was strengthening teacher and principal quality , we reviewed documents regarding teacher and principal recruitment , development , and evaluation , as well as licensure requirements .