material costs were uncertain . cvn 78 was already beginning to experience slips in the delivery of material in august 2007 . according to the shipbuilder , none of the delays to date were expected to disrupt the construction schedule . however , late material delivery led to labor hour increases on both cvn 76 and cvn 77 . cvn 78's costs grew , as the budget did not appropriately reflect the actual effort required to construct the ship . as a result , the secretary of the navy increased the cost cap in 2010 , and congress approved an additional increase to the cap in 2013 . the navy attributed the cost increases to construction cost overruns and economic inflation . figure 3 depicts cvn 78's procurement cost growth and cost cap increases . recent issues discovered during shipboard testing of the systems installed on the ship further delayed cvn 78's delivery date , creating added uncertainty regarding the program's ability to maintain costs under the current $12.9 billion cost cap . since we last reported on the status of cvn 78 in november 2014 , emals has completed deadload testing — a key aspect of the system's test program — and the shipbuilder has positioned the ship to begin testing the ship's propulsion system in preparation for sea trials . however , other systems have experienced the following problems , which have resulted in cost and schedule uncertainty: dbr — in august 2016 , program officials told us that testing for dbr had been further delayed due to problems with ship integration , specifically related to its interface with the power system . the navy is working to resolve technical deficiencies with the volume search radar . program officials stated that they plan to continue dbr testing during sea trials following ship delivery . however , issues with dbr may still affect cvn 78's schedule . for example , warfare and aircraft operations events scheduled for 6 weeks after ship delivery may be pushed back if dbr issues are not resolved . aag — in may 2017 , the navy reported that shipboard testing of aag is 85 percent complete , and the remaining testing has been deferred to post - delivery . the navy is still resolving issues with emergent faults with the aag system discovered during shipboard testing , while land - based testing with live and simulated aircraft continues . the navy needs to resolve these issues in order to support aircraft operations during an exercise scheduled to take place 10 weeks after ship delivery . propulsion plant — according to the navy , in june 2016 , a transformer in one of the main turbine generators in cvn 78's propulsion plant experienced a catastrophic failure . a shipbuilder and vendor review of this incident found that the failure was likely due to a manufacturing defect in the transformer . however , a follow - on review uncovered additional problems , including issues with the voltage regulator on the main turbine generator ; design and performance problems with the protection system ; and excessive noise in the plant . detailed assessments of these issues show that the voltage regulator and protection systems require design modifications .