the paper does not identify the registrant . an oca official responded that the registrants and their auditors might be concerned that the facts presented to the standard - setting bodies may be biased by the staff members . however , oca representatives emphasized that it is the responsibility of the chief accountant and a deputy chief accountant to ensure that the issues and facts are fairly presented and that oca does not advocate a certain position . the sec's internal procedures require that the chief accountant be notified if a registrant will be required to restate its financial statements . in such situations , the sec staff must first obtain the approval of a deputy chief accountant and then must discuss the case with the chief accountant before notifying the registrant of its decision . the chief accountant may overturn the decision of the sec staff if he becomes convinced that it is the best course of action . in reviewing registrants' filings , dcf sometimes requests assistance or consultation services from oca to resolve difficult accounting issues . some of dcf's inquiries of oca are oral and , if the questions are easily resolved , do not involve further interaction with the registrant . according to sec officials , in cases in which additional information is needed from the registrant , both the dcf staff member reviewing the filing and an oca staff member are present when the registrant is called for additional information . this internal procedure helps to ensure continuity and prevents or minimizes any duplication of information requests between dcf and oca . depending on the issues , oca staff may also have further follow - up questions on previously submitted information from the registrant if it was unclear . after oca staff members complete their review , oca provides an oral response to the registrant along with an explanation of the basis for oca's position and then documents its decision in a memorandum for its files . the sec asks the registrant to provide a letter documenting the registrant's understanding of oca's position . this procedure is set forth in the sec's protocols and is intended to ensure that the registrant clearly understands oca's position and the basis for its decisions . however , registrants do not always respond to oca's request , especially when they disagree with sec decisions . although the sec does not provide written responses to registrants' issues , it issues its staff accounting bulletins as a way to communicate broad issues to the registrant community . representatives of the registrants and the accounting profession expressed concerns that the sec is using a variety of sources in addition to the authoritative standards and interpretations issued by the private sector standard - setting bodies as criteria for making decisions on accounting issues . representatives expressed concern about the variety of sec interpretive guidance , which they believe is being used by the sec in its decisions on accounting issues . many of the representatives we spoke with stated that it is becoming increasingly difficult to keep track of the variety of guidance being issued and used by the sec , especially for the smaller accounting firms with limited resources . eitf proceedings are documented in eitf abstracts .