an offset ) . air force . most of the provisions also apply to retirement systems for members of the coast guard ( administered by the department of homeland security ) , officers of the public health service ( administered by the department of health and human services ) , and officers of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( administered by the department of commerce ) . 98-94 provided for accrual funding of the military retirement system and for the establishment of a department of defense military retirement fund in 1985. payments to those receiving both military retired pay and disability compensation paid by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) . the government's legal commitment to pay benefits to those retirees who reach 20 years of active service makes military pension benefits an explicit exposure . from a government - wide perspective , the magnitude of the exposure can be estimated by the accrued liability for military pensions , which at the end of fiscal year 2012 was estimated to be $1.5 trillion , up from $708 billion in 2001 ( see figure 9 ) . 36concurrent receipt refers to the simultaneous receipt of military retired pay and va disability compensation . prior to 2004 , the law required that military retired pay be reduced dollar - for - dollar by the amount of any va disability compensation received ( e.g . the 2004 national defense authorization act ( pub . 108-136 ) authorized concurrent receipt of both amounts without a required offset for certain military retirees . figure 9 also shows the military retirement fund's outlays and receipts as reported in primary budget data . outlays reflect benefit payments to current retirees , which totaled $49 billion in 2012 , up from $34 billion in 2001 . receipts to the trust fund capture the intragovernmental contributions from the services to fund future benefits earned today , treasury general fund payments , and investment income on the treasury securities the fund holds . the military retirement fund had assets of $376 billion as of september 30 , 2012 . beginning in 1985 , military pension costs have been partially visible to dod since it makes contributions to cover the costs as they accrue , but the normal cost is not reflected in the unified budget because the payments are intragovernmental — that is , they are recorded as outlays by one agency and receipts by the trust fund . since no cash leaves the government , there is no effect on the government - wide deficit . dod's military compensation system , including pension benefits , is an important tool to attract and retain the number and quality of active duty servicemembers it needs to fulfill its mission . comprehensive information about the total cost of compensation , including benefits earned today that will be paid in the future , is important for future decisions about military compensation in a constrained fiscal environment . tricare is dod's managed health care system for active duty and retired uniformed service members and their families . tricare consists of multiple plan options , a number of which cover active duty personnel , their dependents , and retirees under age 65 .