we disagree . we believe the title accurately reflects the concerns detailed throughout the body of the report . the july 25 , 2002 , fsis notice 28-02 — action to be taken in establishments subject to salmonella testing — does not establish specific time frames for actions to be taken at plants that fail a second set of salmonella tests as we recommend . while the september 5 , 2001 , notice 36-01 — rules of practice — identifies fsis's various enforcement tools and general circumstances in which each type would be appropriate , it does not establish clear , consistent criteria for inspectors to use when considering whether to recommend a suspension as an enforcement action in response to repetitive violations . we are recommending that fsis do so . fsis's august 9 , 2002 , notice 29-02 — haccp verification procedures and the 30-day reassessment letter — addresses our recommendation for the need for additional training for inspectors on their roles and responsibilities . however , fsis's efforts to provide training for inspectors on their roles and responsibilities , in response to our previous report recommendation , were not fully effective . we are keeping this recommendation because it is too early to tell whether this effort will be effective . our draft report acknowledged that fsis had established a new office to ensure that its programs and policies are implemented and monitored correctly . while the review of the salmonella testing program does not directly address any of our recommendations , it may help fsis to provide inspector training and procedures for field supervisors and district managers to oversee inspector activities — which we do recommend — with respect to salmonella requirements . fsis directive 5000.1 — enforcement of regulatory requirements in establishments subject to haccp system regulations ( including regulations on sanitation standard operating procedures , e. coli testing and criteria , and salmonella performance standards ) — should help fsis address several of our recommendations , including those related to ensuring that all haccp plans fully meet regulatory requirements and ensuring that plants take prompt actions to correct violations . fsis directive 4430.3 — in - plant performance system ( ipps ) reviews — should respond to our recommendation regarding procedures to monitor inspector activities . fsis is planning to implement the new directive and begin training supervisors in october 2002 . we are keeping this recommendation to ensure the directive is implemented as planned . this new interactive computer tool that inspectors , supervisors , and managers can use to strengthen haccp problem solving using fictional scenarios . it should help fsis address our recommendations regarding inspector training and supervisor oversight of inspector activities . the draft report acknowledged the budget constraints regarding the hiring of consumer safety officers . fsis is still testing the pbis 5.0 and district early warning systems , which should provide useful data for fsis managers to carry out their haccp responsibilities . fsis does not believe that plants are given too much time to comply with regulatory requirements . we disagree . our review of enforcement case files found that , on average , these cases were closed in 10 months rather than the 3 months ( 90 days ) recommended by fsis .