gao - 15-268t . washington , d.c.: december 3 , 2014 . ( see fig . several factors can affect a state's ability to report the child core set measures . officials from the states we reviewed provided the following examples of challenges they face reporting the child core set measures . mississippi and pennsylvania officials cited difficulty reporting certain measures , such as the extent of follow - up care for children prescribed medication for attention - deficit / hyperactivity disorder , due , in part , to their not having access to the data required to report the measure . arizona , new hampshire , nevada , and wisconsin officials cited the difficulty and cost of reporting certain measures , in particular those measures that require medical record reviews as opposed to the reporting of measures that use only encounter data . for example , hhs suggests that medical record reviews be used to calculate a perinatal measure related to the performance of caesarean sections and none of these states reported this measure in fiscal year 2013 . rhode island officials noted that it can be difficult to collect data for measures that are not nationally endorsed — and as a result , they may not report them . for example , in fiscal year 2013 , rhode island did not report the child core set measure of a developmental screening in the first 3 years of a child's life , which had not been endorsed by the national committee for quality assurance , but developed by a university in oregon . noting that the state does not have a department dedicated to measuring quality , alaska cited a lack of internal expertise needed to collect and report reliable data for the measures . as such , an official cited the need to leverage resources and work with other agencies within the state that have the expertise to analyze measures and set targets for quality improvement . in light of difficulties cited by states in reporting on the child core set measures , hhs reported ongoing efforts to assist states with reporting the measures . for example , to streamline state reporting , hhs began calculating three child core set measures on behalf of states in fiscal year 2012 . specifically , hhs began calculating the preventive dental and dental treatment measures from the form cms - 416 . at this time , hhs also began using data available from the centers for disease control and prevention to calculate the neonatal central - line associated blood stream infection measure . in addition , hhs assists states by allowing states to report child core set measures for the medicaid population , chip population , or combined medicaid and chip populations . additionally , hhs reported efforts to assist states in improving their reporting of the child core set measures through the quality demonstration grant program . through this program , hhs awarded 10 grants providing funding to 18 states to implement various projects to improve the information available on the quality of care provided to children enrolled in chip , including undertaking efforts to improve their reporting of the child core set measures .