, megacenter facility . ( see fig . assessed the quality and completeness of these data . collectively , this multifaceted approach enabled us to make conclusions about whether fps's collaboration approach is reasonable . appendix i contains more information on our objective , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from february 2011 to march 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . fps — located within the national protection and programs directorate of dhs — protects the over 9,000 federal facilities that are under the control and custody of gsa , as well as the persons on those properties . fps headquarters is located in washington , d.c. ; regional offices are located in new york , boston , philadelphia , atlanta , denver , chicago , san francisco , seattle , fort worth , kansas city , and the district of columbia . fps is authorized to enforce federal laws and regulations aimed at protecting gsa buildings and persons on the property and to investigate offenses against these buildings and persons.include buildings of exclusive , concurrent , and proprietary jurisdictions . exclusive: under exclusive federal jurisdiction , the federal government — and federal law enforcement entities — have all of the legislative authority within the land area in question , while the state — and its state and local law enforcement entities — have no residual police powers . concurrent: in concurrent jurisdiction facilities , both federal and state governments — and law enforcement entities — have jurisdiction over the property . proprietary: under proprietary jurisdiction , the federal government has rights — similar to a private landowner — but also maintains its authorities and responsibilities as the federal government . under proprietary jurisdiction , the local government is the principal municipal police authority . to enable fps to track changes in the inventory of federal buildings that it protects , gsa , through its public buildings service , provides building data in electronic files to fps weekly from gsa's building property system . these data include each building number with address ; type of jurisdiction ; and square footage and number of personnel to assist fps to bill for its services , among other things . fps personnel then input this information into its systems electronically . megacenters — the four regional dispatch centers within fps that are the primary focal points for incident notification ( see figure 1 ) — use the data to direct calls concerning building incidents and emergencies to fps personnel as well as state and local law enforcement agencies . as a general practice , megacenters make direct radio calls for incident response to fps personnel and telephone calls to state and local law enforcement agencies . fps instructs tenants to contact the megacenter by calling 1-877-4fps - 411 and , in areas where fps responders cannot provide an immediate response ; tenants are often directed to also dial 911 .