we provided hud with these and other examples for their review . according to a hud official , before 2008 its contractor followed up with hfas on these types of data anomalies but now places less emphasis on this function because of resource limitations and the hera requirement for tenant data . instead , the contractor now focuses on assisting hfas with meeting the tenant data requirement and follows up only with hfas that do not report any project data at all . investors receive tax benefits . investment partnerships are a primary source of equity financing for lihtc projects . syndicators recruit investors willing to become partners in lihtc partnerships . the money investors pay for the partnership interest is paid into the lihtc project as equity financing . developers apply to the states for tax credits . to apply for tax credits , a developer must submit a detailed proposal to an hfa . to qualify for consideration , a project must meet certain requirements , such as reserving specified percentages of available units for lower income households and restricting rents for these households to 30 percent of a calculated income limit . hfas award tax credits to selected housing projects . regarding the applicable percentage , there are two credit rates ( referred to as the 9 percent and 4 percent rates ) for the lihtc program that determine how much of a project's costs the allocated credits can cover . the credit rate takes into account whether the project is newly constructed or acquired and rehabilitated and the extent to which it uses other federal subsidies . most new construction and substantial rehabilitation projects are eligible for the 9 percent rate , which allows investors to claim credits for about 9 percent of the eligible basis annually over a 10-year period.the 9 percent credit floated based on a statutory formula and often fell below 9 percent . because the lihtc program is jointly administered by federal and state governments , agencies at both levels played roles in implementing hera's changes to the program . at the federal level , irs and treasury's office of tax policy provided new guidance for program stakeholders . at the state level , hfas modified their qaps for allocating tax credits . hera made changes to the lihtc program that affected various parties , including taxpayers , hfas , and project owners , and irs and treasury provided guidance and took other actions into 2012 to implement these changes . to better ensure that information on the hera changes was widely accessible , irs issued revenue procedures and notices , made changes to forms and form instructions , and circulated newsletters to program stakeholders .