i will now expand on the problems facing bmmp . the purpose of bmmp is to provide world - class mission support to the war fighter through transformation of dod's business processes and systems . a key element of bmmp is the development and implementation of a well - defined bea . properly developed and implemented , a bea can provide assurance that the department invests in integrated enterprisewide business solutions and , along with effective project management and resource controls , it can be instrumental in developing corporatewide solutions and moving resources away from nonintegrated business system development efforts . as we reported in july 2003 , dod had developed an initial version of bea and had expended tremendous effort and resources in doing so . however , we also reported that substantial work remains before the architecture would be sufficiently defined to have a tangible impact on improving dod's overall business operations . in may 2004 , we reported that after about 3 years of effort and over $203 million in reported obligations for bmmp operations , bea's content and dod's approach to investing billions of dollars annually in existing and new systems had not changed significantly . under a provision in the recently enacted ronald w. reagan national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 , dod must develop an enterprise architecture to cover all defense business systems and related business functions and activities that is sufficiently defined to effectively guide , constrain , and permit implementation of a corporatewide solution and is consistent with the policies and procedures established by the office of management and budget . further , the act requires the development of a transition plan that includes not only an acquisition strategy for new systems , but also a listing of the termination dates of current legacy systems that will not be part of the corporatewide solution , as well as a listing of legacy systems that will be modified to become part of the corporatewide solution for addressing dod's business management deficiencies . transforming dod's business operations and making them more efficient through the elimination of nonintegrated and noncompliant legacy systems would free up resources that could be used to support the department's core mission , enhance readiness , and improve the quality of life for our troops and their families . i cannot overemphasize the degree of difficulty dod faces in developing and implementing a well - defined architecture to provide the foundation that will guide its overall business transformation . the department's business transformation depends on its ability to develop and implement business systems that provide corporate solutions . successful implementation of corporate solutions through adherence to a well - defined enterprise architecture and effective project management and fund control would go a long way toward precluding the continued proliferation of duplicative , stovepiped systems and reduce spending on multiple systems that are supposed to perform the same function . without these things , we have continued to see that dod is still developing systems that are not designed to solve corporatewide problems .