the ussc did not provide comments . in an e - mail we received may 27 , 2016 , doj's audit liaison stated that doj concurred with all of our recommendations and provided comments , which we incorporated as appropriate and have further addressed below . in particular , in our draft report , we recommended that eousa identify , obtain , and track data on the outcomes and costs of pretrial diversion programs , and develop performance measures to help assess program outcomes . what is a court - involved pretrial diversion practice ? in addition to title 9 pretrial diversion , federal criminal justice stakeholders within some judicial districts have voluntarily established court - involved pretrial diversion practices or specialty courts that handle specific offender populations such as veterans , or those with specific problems such as substance abuse or mental health issues that appear to be the root cause of their criminal activity . unlike traditional diversion , court - involved pretrial diversion practices vary in structure and do not uniformly result in the avoidance of a federal conviction upon successful completion . while some provide for a full dismissal of charges , others may provide for a sentence of probation or little to no incarceration . also , unlike title 9 pretrial diversion , courts are primary actors in these practices and must participate in their creation . court - involved pretrial diversion practices: as described earlier , to obtain perspectives on court - involved pretrial diversion practices , we spoke with stakeholders in 6 districts that use such practices , and 5 districts that do not . within the 6 selected districts that use court - involved pretrial diversion practices , the 13 judges , 6 prosecutors , 6 defense counsel , and officials in 9 ppsos with whom we spoke identified a number of factors that led their districts to adopt such practices . most frequently , they reported that three particular factors influenced their decision to adopt such alternatives . first , they reported that an awareness of effective state - level pretrial alternative programs influenced their decision . for example , 5 judicial branch officials ( 3 judges , 1 federal defender , and 1 ppso officer ) with whom we spoke in 3 of the 6 districts explained that their awareness of state - level pretrial diversion programs helped them understand how to replicate a similar program at the federal level . further , 4 of the stakeholders with whom we spoke in 2 districts indicated that some federal judges who were former state judges involved in state pretrial diversion programs brought their past experience to the federal judicial system . second , 11 stakeholders representing a mix of judges , federal defenders , ppso , and usao staff with whom we spoke in 5 of the 6 districts indicated there is a perception that offenders may commit crimes as a result of addiction to drugs , and that if the addiction were addressed , they would be unlikely to continue to commit crimes .