the officer was arrested in 2005 . consular affairs emphasized that although some of its officers have engaged in visa malfeasance , other u.s. government employees and foreign service nationals have as well . a further weakness to investigations is the lack of data on allegations and investigations to identify vulnerable points in the visa process . ( see fig . consular officers are assisted by locally hired staff who are generally not u.s. citizens . these staff perform support tasks but do not adjudicate visas . the bureau of consular affairs considers the visa process to be a major element of national security . in addition to guidance on visa processing , state provides visa adjudicators , who are typically entry - level officers , with specific guidance and training on examining applicants' documentation , interviewing , and screening out applicants who may pose security concerns . this guidance is provided in the foreign affairs manual and the consular management handbook , as well as through periodic policy updates of standard operating procedures transmitted to overseas posts and placed on an intranet site . while the office of the inspector general and diplomatic security share authority for investigating visa malfeasance , diplomatic security conducts most of the investigations . in particular , diplomatic security's visa fraud branch investigates visa malfeasance cases and carries out related enforcement functions for state . these cases are typically pursued by a regional security officer and consular management and involve observation of the suspected employee and collection of evidence to document the malfeasance . in cases where justice determines sufficient evidence exits , it will prosecute employees who are accused of malfeasance . the bureau of consular affairs has established a number of key internal controls designed to mitigate the risk of employee malfeasance , some of which are new or have been reinforced since september 11 , 2001 . among the controls state has emphasized are: limiting employee access to visa issuing systems and applicants , periodic reconciliations of visa stocks , specific criteria for post employees to follow when referring foreign individuals seeking visas for favorable treatment by consular officials , and mechanisms to provide oversight of key consular activities by post and consular affairs headquarters management . while consular affairs' controls are consistent with accepted control standards , we found that some of the controls were not always being followed at the posts we visited . to prevent the issuances of nonimmigrant visas to unqualified applicants , consular affairs has strengthened its efforts to limit employee access to automated systems that issue visas and has taken steps to ensure that visa applicants cannot predict which officers will interview them . additionally , consular affairs has a series of controls over accountable items . it has also strengthened its criteria for applicants referred by post employees for favorable consideration in obtaining a visa and expedited processing by consular officers . further , consular affairs has increased its emphasis on both headquarters and post supervisory oversight . it also requires posts to certify in writing annually their compliance with key internal controls . consular affairs has issued guidelines on reporting suspicious behavior that may involve malfeasance . it has also enhanced its malfeasance prevention efforts .