documenting processes . rita has also acted to document its process for systematically evaluating the results of its own multimodal research programs , such as the hydrogen safety program and various grant programs . rita evaluates the results of its rd&t activities by ensuring they align with dot goals , meet the research and development investment criteria , and are subject to an annual peer review process . rita has documented this process in its strategic plan . establishing performance goals . in 2006 , we found that rita lacked performance goals and an implementing strategy and evaluation plan to delineate how the activities and results of its coordination , facilitation , and review practices will further dot's mission and ensure the effectiveness of the department's rd&t investment . rita has partially implemented our recommendation that it develop these elements . setting meaningful goals for performance , and using performance information to measure performance against those goals , is consistent with requirements in gpra . developing an evaluation plan and analyzing performance information against set goals for its own coordination , facilitation , and review practices could assist rita in identifying any problem areas and taking corrective actions . linking performance goals with the planning and budget process , such as dot's annual budget process , can also help rita determine where to target its resources to improve performance . guidance provided by the committee on science , engineering , and public policy notes that evaluating the performance of research in the context of the strategic planning process ensures the research is relevant to the agency's mission . without such goals and an evaluation plan , it is difficult for rita to determine its success in overseeing the effectiveness of dot's rd&t activities . according to rita officials , while an overall implementing strategy and evaluation plan has not yet been established , rita has created performance goals . a rita official told us that the rpic process — a relatively new process that integrates the budget and strategic planning processes — will help in creating an implementing strategy . the rpic process is meant to provide information to the planning council and planning team , which is responsible for defining the department's overall rd&t strategic objectives . the rpic process assesses the department's rd&t activities in terms of the following performance goals: ( 1 ) balanced portfolio ( eg , mix of basic , applied , developmental , and high risk rd&t ) , ( 2 ) alignment of rd&t programs with dot goals and each operating administration's mission , and ( 3 ) return on investment . the rpic process has been in place only for fiscal year 2009 , and as a result , the planning council does not yet have the information needed to make decisions about a strategy . in addition , rita does not yet have an evaluation plan to monitor and evaluate whether it is achieving its goals . a rita official told us that the rpic process needs to be in place for 2 or 3 fiscal years before it can provide enough information for rita to establish a strategy or evaluation plan . developing performance measures .