the director of the u.s . fish and wildlife service should direct wsfr to develop a template or other standardized method to facilitate collection of all required information for grant performance reports . wsfr provided copies of grant applications to the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , u.s. coast guard , and national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) for them to review and score the applications . wsfr also provided its scores on the applications to these agencies . epa informed wsfr in an email that it agreed with the proposed funding decisions for the program . ( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the department of the interior for review and comment . the maximum grant award is $1.5 million per project , and recipients generally must provide matching funds worth at least 25 percent of the total cost of projects . funds not obligated within three fiscal years shall be transferred to the coast guard and expended for state recreational boating safety programs . highlights from the award process used in fiscal year 2016: the notice of funding opportunity for fiscal year 2016 was posted on www.grants.gov on june 22 , 2015 , and applications were due by september 18 , 2015 . thirteen states submitted a total of 22 applications for projects . regional staff for the wildlife and sport fish restoration program and members from the sport fishing and boating partnership council scored the applications and recommended that 10 projects be fully funded and one be partially funded . the deputy director of the u.s . fish and wildlife service approved the list of recommended projects on march 11 , 2016 . fish and wildlife service announced the selected projects on march 17 , 2016 . information on past applications and selected projects: table 5 shows the number of applications received and selected projects under the boating infrastructure tier 2 grant program in fiscal years 2012 through 2016 . below is summary information on the clean vessel act grant program that we compiled from reviewing relevant laws and regulations , reviewing agency documents , and interviewing agency officials . establishment and goals of the program: the program was established by the clean vessel act of 1992 , which amended the dingell - johnson sport fish restoration act . this program funds grants to coastal states for certain activities , such as constructing and renovating pumpout stations and waste reception facilities and conducting a program to educate recreational boaters about the problem of human body waste discharges from vessels and inform them of the locations of pumpout stations and waste reception facilities . the program also funds grants to inland states meeting certain criteria . under program regulations , facilities need to be open to the public in order to be eligible for a grant . since the program was established , over 6,000 dump or pumpout facilities have been built and over 3,700 of these facilities have been operated or maintained using grant funds . governor - designated agencies in a state of the united states , the district of columbia , american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , puerto rico , or the u.s. virgin islands are eligible for this grant program .