we did not evaluate this feedback . additionally , the fbi's office of intelligence has been tasked to develop all policies , including education requirements , with regard to analysts working in the intelligence area . the office of intelligence intends to work with the college of analytical studies to ensure that appropriate analytical training has been provided , according to fbi officials . the fbi is also pursuing accreditation for its college of analytical studies . the fbi continues to work with other federal agencies to improve their analytical capabilities . for example , the fbi is currently working with the joint military intelligence college to allow a select number of fbi personnel with intelligence backgrounds to earn a master of science in strategic intelligence . fbi officials anticipate that the program will begin accepting applications from interested fbi personnel by the end of fiscal year 2003 , for consideration by fbi executives and final acceptance by the joint military intelligence college for classes in fiscal year 2004 . to better address the longer - term training needs of its entire workforce , the fbi is implementing a plan to restructure its training programs . in march 2003 , director mueller approved a series of proposals contained in a reengineering project addressing fbi training activities , which included a goal of establishing an office of training and development . this office , among other duties , would assess the career - long training needs of all employees , standardize training , and centralize the tracking of staff progress through the curriculum . the training reengineering plan calls for the assistant director of training to function as the chief learning officer and to oversee both the office of training and development and the fbi academy . the fbi academy will continue its primary mission of training new agents , as well as operating the college of analytical studies . while the fbi , in announcing its training reengineering plan , acknowledges the long - term benefits of enhancing training as an investment in human capital , it is too soon to tell how effective the plan will be in improving performance . and , as the overall human capital plan for the agency develops there will be a need to revise and enhance training plans . appendix iv also provides additional details on the fbi's training reengineering plan . the revised attorney general's guidelines on general crimes , racketeering enterprise and terrorism enterprise investigations ( the “guidelines” ) are intended to provide the fbi greater investigative flexibility to enhance its ability to detect and prevent terrorist acts and other federal crimes . as traditional investigative constraints are eased , however , appropriate internal controls are needed to prevent investigative abuses and ensure the protection of civil liberties . the guidelines themselves contain internal controls regarding specific investigative procedures and prohibited activities , and the fbi and doj have other internal control mechanisms in place to help ensure agents do not go beyond their stated authorities . although private sector groups we interviewed have expressed concern regarding issuance of the new guidelines , neither we nor they have identified any reported allegations or investigations of abuses under the new guidelines authorities .