medicare . under medicare's prescription drug benefit , medicare part d plans may choose to cover obesity drugs — in these cases , obesity drugs are considered supplemental drugs under an enhanced alternative coverage plan . medicare beneficiaries who select a part d plan that offers supplemental benefits , which may include coverage of excluded drugs such as obesity drugs , must pay the full premium cost for those additional benefits ( i.e. , medicare does not subsidize them ) . medicare part d plans can choose whether or not to offer enhanced alternative coverage , and not all medicare part d plans that provide enhanced alternative coverage cover obesity drugs as supplemental drugs . one of these studies found that about 1 percent of the 153,939 veterans who enrolled in the move ! weight management program from 2013 through 2016 were prescribed an obesity drug ( orlistat , phentermine , phentermine / topiramate , liraglutide , or bupropion / naltrexone ) within 1 year of move ! initiation . according to officials from groups representing physicians and advocacy groups we interviewed , and seven studies we reviewed , some physicians and other health care providers may not be open to or comfortable with prescribing obesity drugs . for example , providers may not perceive obesity drugs to be safe or effective . according to officials from one advocacy and research group , concerns about the safety of obesity drugs may be related to the adverse consequences associated with past obesity drugs . in addition , one medical association we contacted indicated physicians consider clinical preventive service recommendations from the u.s. preventive services task force on the use of obesity drugs . the task force recommends that clinicians offer or refer adults with a bmi of 30 or higher to intensive , multicomponent behavioral interventions . further , a systematic review of evidence of the benefits and harms of behavioral therapy and use of obesity drugs conducted for the task force found that obesity drugs , but not behavior - based interventions , were associated with higher rates of harm . the potential for harm ( i.e. , adverse events ) may discourage physicians and other health care providers from prescribing these drugs . in addition , officials we interviewed and the studies we reviewed noted that a lack of insurance coverage , high out - of - pocket costs , and the patient's means to afford obesity drugs may also discourage physicians from prescribing obesity drugs . the officials and studies also noted that physicians might have gaps in knowledge about obesity drugs . for example , officials from one medical association noted that lack of education is a barrier to physicians in prescribing obesity drugs for patients who would be candidates for them , and officials from another medical association said that many clinicians are not aware that there are fda - approved drugs for obesity , and therefore they do not think about prescribing them . one study we reviewed found that , of the 111 primary care providers responding to a survey , most reported limited experience with obesity drugs as a barrier to prescribing them .