dod does have a definition of space systems . specifically , according to a dod directive , space systems include all systems related to making a space capability operational — that is programs acquiring satellites , satellite ground systems ( including satellite control and data processing ) , receivers / user segments ( including terminals and radios ) , and launch systems — but specifies that terminals that are embedded as part of a platform ( i.e . aircraft , ship , or tank ) are excluded . however , dod officials had difficulty identifying some programs , particularly those in the user segment . for example , the air force's space fence program , which is developing ground radar as a part of the space surveillance network that detects and tracks space objects , is included as a space program in dod's budget documents . officials from the program executive office that staffs personnel to the program initially told us they did not consider it a space program since it is a series of ground - based radars . air force officials at the space and missile systems center said that hiring challenges are further exacerbated for space acquisition organizations that are located in areas with higher costs of living . they said , for example , that prospective employees often visit the center in los angeles , california , and , after assessing the local cost of living , decide not to accept a job offer . dod is taking steps to address its hiring challenges . to address difficulties in obtaining personnel with sufficient technical experience , some officials told us that they typically hire the best candidate available — who may lack some of the desired technical skills — and provide them with on - the - job and formal training to increase their technical knowledge and skills . to better compete with higher salaries offered by other potential employers , several officials told us they offer tuition reimbursement as a recruiting incentive . air force officials told us that in areas with higher costs of living they focus their recruiting efforts on the local area because local candidates already understand the higher costs of living challenges for the area and are more likely to have support systems in place to manage such costs . beyond the concerns expressed about hiring personnel , air force space and missile systems center officials expressed concerns that some functional areas within the space acquisition workforce face challenges assigning experienced personnel — personnel with the appropriate knowledge and skill set to perform the work — that are already hired to space acquisition programs . for example , contracting career field officials at the center noted that the space acquisition workforce does not have enough mid - level personnel who understand the detailed steps and documentation required in the acquisition process . in particular , the air force space and missile systems center reported that at the end of january 2018 , the number of mid - level civilian and military personnel working in the contracting functional career field was 50 less than the number authorized .