leverage partnerships . the bureau partnered with state , local , and tribal governments as well as religious , media , educational , and other community organizations to improve participation in the 2000 census and to mobilize support for other operations . the partnership program stemmed from the bureau's recognition that local people know the characteristics of their communities better than the census bureau . the city of los angeles ( l.a. ) , for example , directed department of water and power employees , sanitation , and many other city workers to identify dwellings that the bureau may have missed as part of its address - list development operations . the city selected these employees because they went door - to - door as part of their work , and could thus help find nonstandard dwellings . l.a.'s information technology agency developed a 10-minute video that described the importance of the effort and how to find unconventional housing . according to city representatives , the employees found over 38,000 nonstandard dwellings . the partnership program was also important for the be counted campaign as partnership staff worked with local governments , community organizations , and other groups to help identify the best places to put be counted forms , including undercounted and non - english - speaking neighborhoods . however , the full complement of partnership program staff did not come on board until after october 1 , 1999 , when the bureau filled the remaining 202 ( 34 percent ) of the 594 positions authorized for the initiative . as shown in figure 3 , this was several months after the bureau completed the bulk of its address list - building activities . had the full complement of partnership specialists been available to support the listing operations in 1998 and 1999 , they could have encouraged greater participation on the part of local governments and community groups in building a better address list for the 2000 census , much like they did later on in the census to increase local awareness of the census and boost response rates . for example , partnership specialists could reach out to local governments and encourage greater participation in the local update of census addresses ( luca ) program . during the 2000 census , of the 17,424 eligible city - style jurisdictions the bureau invited to participate in what was known as “luca 1998” , 9,263 ( about 53 percent ) volunteered to participate . ultimately , about 36 percent of eligible jurisdictions reviewed the material and returned something to the bureau . partnership specialists could have followed up with the nonresponding localities to determine why they did not return material to the bureau and , if necessary , encourage their participation in luca . make use of address information from local organizations . as part of its partnership efforts , the bureau frequently obtained information about special places and group quarters from local advocacy and community groups . in one instance , the bureau's los angeles regional office partnered with the california rural legal assistance ( crla ) corporation , a nongovernmental migrant farm worker advocacy group , to improve coverage of housing units in areas populated by many migrant farm workers .