sba has long understood the need for collaboration . in the late 1980s , sba shifted its core functions of direct loan making and entrepreneurial assistance to reliance on resource partners to deliver sba programs directly . this shift allowed sba to greatly increase its loan volume and the number of clients served . however , sba has lost much of its direct connection with its small business owner clients . the importance of senior leadership and commitment to change is essential . additionally , high performing organizations have recognized that a key element of an effective performance management system is to create a “line of sight” that shows how individual responsibilities and day - to - day activities are intended to contribute to organizational goals . in addition to creating “lines of sight,” a performance management system should encourage staff to focus on performing their duties in a manner that helps the organization achieve its objectives . the sba administrator has demonstrated his commitment to transforming sba by tasking his deputy administrator and chief operating officer with coordinating the implementation of sba's 5-year workforce transformation plan . he also said that the transformation plan will complement the agency's 5-year strategic plan and that sba's successes will be measured by the successes of its clients . these are important steps in aligning expectations within the agency toward agency goals . as sba begins to implement its transformation plan , it will also be important to be certain that agency goals are reflected in the performance objectives and ratings of sba's senior executives and the performance appraisal systems for lower - level employees . sustained senior management attention to implementation of the plan and support from key internal and external stakeholders will be important ingredients in the ultimate success or failure of sba's transformation . an organization's activities , core processes , and resources must be aligned to support its mission and help it achieve its goals . leading organizations start by assessing the extent to which their programs and activities contribute to fulfilling their mission and intended results . they often find , as our work suggested , that their organizational structures are obsolete and that levels of hierarchy or field - to - headquarter ratios must be changed . organizational alignment is crucial if an agency is to maximize its performance and ensure its accountability . communication flows up and down the organization to ensure that line staffs have the ability to provide leadership with the perspective and information that the leaders need to make decisions . likewise , senior leaders keep the line staff informed of key developments and issues so that the staff can best contribute to achieving organizational goals . as sba moves forward to execute its workforce transformation plan , it should consider employing strategies common to successful transformation efforts both here and abroad . successful efforts begin with instilling senior - level leadership , responsibility , and accountability for organizational results and transformation efforts . for example , iowa has two district offices located less than 130 miles apart , and neither manages a very large share of sba's lending program or other workload .