some of these schools have health clinics . additionally , there were approximately 2,600 school - based health centers as of 2017 , some of which served children in underserved communities , according to the school - based health alliance . some state medicaid programs allow for services to be delivered via telehealth , including in schools . this report describes 1 . medicaid coverage of oud services for pregnant and postpartum women in selected states ; 2 . medicaid coverage of oud services for children in selected states ; 3 . medicaid coverage of oud services delivered to children via telehealth in schools across all states , and what is known about utilization of these services . to describe medicaid coverage of oud services for pregnant and postpartum women in selected states , we reviewed federal and state documentation , and interviewed federal and state medicaid officials . specifically , we reviewed cms policies and guidance , and interviewed cms officials to understand the federal parameters for medicaid coverage of services for pregnant and postpartum women with oud . we also reviewed documentation and conducted interviews with officials from six selected states — alabama , arkansas , colorado , massachusetts , south dakota , and texas . we selected these states to provide variation in oud rates , medicaid expansion status , and geographic location . we also included states with different levels of medicaid coverage for pregnant women as of 2019 , such as states that offer pregnancy - related coverage ; states that offer coverage beyond 60 days postpartum ; and states with specific programs for pregnant and postpartum women with oud . we reviewed documentation — including state plans , health care provider manuals , and waivers — of the six selected states' medicaid coverage of oud services for pregnant and postpartum women . in discussing oud services covered for pregnant and postpartum women with state medicaid and behavioral health officials , we refer to a set of services to treat oud . based on background research and interviews with cms and other expert stakeholders , we were unable to identify an existing list of a standard set of services used to treat oud . we therefore developed our own list of oud services to discuss with states . we did this using documentation from cms ; the american society of addiction medicine ; and states , including information on state substance use disorder treatment programs . we interviewed state medicaid and behavioral health officials about whether these services were covered for pregnant and postpartum women . however , we did not review state information to determine how frequently these services are actually provided to pregnant and postpartum women . we also requested the six selected states provide estimates of the number of women who maintained medicaid coverage after 60 days postpartum . we asked state officials to describe the steps they took to compile and ensure the accuracy of these estimates , and determined that the estimates were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of our report . we also reviewed federal and selected states' documentation on samhsa grants that can be used to fund services for target populations — such as pregnant and postpartum women — and interviewed samhsa and state officials about these grants .