( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report for comment to state , usaid , hhs , and usda . usda officials did not explain why they did not have full documentation . without full documentation of the required monitoring activities , usda may not have the information it needs to make appropriate budgetary and programmatic decisions . usaid did not have full documentation of 2 of the 11 total monitoring activities ( 18 percent ) we identified across the three agreements we reviewed ( see table 12 ) . usaid had partial documentation of those 2 monitoring activities . see appendix i for details on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from july 2016 to december 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the u.s. government engages with the governments of other countries in the western hemisphere through various inter - american organizations including the oas , paho , iica , and paigh . according to state , the oas is the primary inter - american political forum through which the united states engages with other countries in the western hemisphere to promote democracy , human rights , security , and development . paho serves as the regional office for the americas of the world health organization , the united nations agency on health . iica supports agricultural development and rural well - being through technical cooperation and the execution of agricultural projects throughout the hemisphere . paigh specializes in regional cartography , geography , history , and geophysics and has facilitated the settlement of regional border disputes . according to u.s. agency officials , the organizations' regional knowledge and technical expertise make them effective implementing partners for projects serving u.s. national interests and priorities throughout the hemisphere . member states collectively finance these organizations by providing assessed and voluntary contributions ( see table 1 ) . for each organization , its member states' assessed contributions are intended to finance the organization's regular budgets , which generally cover the organization's day - to - day operating expenses , such as facilities and salaries . member states also finance certain oas , paho , and iica activities and projects through voluntary contributions . according to u.s. officials , the united states provides voluntary contributions to the oas , paho , and iica primarily through assistance agreements for specific projects from state , usaid , hhs , and usda . the institute of internal auditors ( iia ) provides the framework for international organizations to oversee funds such as the assessed contributions provided by member states to oas , paho , iica , and paigh . the institute's authoritative guidance , international standards for the professional practice of internal auditing , includes mandatory performance standards that describe the nature of internal audit activities and provide criteria for evaluating these activities .