( see app . faa should establish support for efforts faa should improve data collection and analysis related to efforts do not believe efforts are ineffective do not know / no basis to judge this response option was not available to the panelists . what action will have the most positive impact on improving the certification and approval processes ? expand use of designees / organization designation authorizations ( oda ) expand use of designees / organization designation authorizations ( oda ) . gerald l. dillingham , ph.d. , ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , teresa spisak ( assistant director ) , sharon dyer , bess eisenstadt , amy frazier , brandon haller , dave hooper , michael silver , and pamela vines made key contributions to this report . what leading factor has contributed to problems with the certification and approval processes ? leading factor in process problems faa's prioritization system for managing certifications and approvals faa's rulemaking process and development of guidance ( eg , amount of time required to develop or change regulations , etc. ) however , even with this framework in place , industry stakeholders noted that the time it takes to obtain certifications and approvals can differ from one faa field office to another because of differences in office resources and expertise . in some cases , delays may be avoided when faa directs the applicant to apply at a different field office . nevertheless , applicants who must apply to offices with fewer resources can experience costly delays in obtaining certifications or approvals . delays also occur when faa wait - lists certification submissions because it does not have the resources to begin work on them . aircraft certification meets weekly to review certification project submissions . if it determines that a submission is to be wait - listed , the applicant is sent a 90-day delay letter and if , after the initial 90 days , the submission is still wait - listed , the applicant is sent another letter . faa has addressed staff resource issues by increasing the number of inspectors and engineers . over the past 3 years , faa has steadily increased its hiring of aircraft certification engineers and flight standards inspectors , thereby reducing the risk of certification delays . according to agency data , faa's hiring efforts since fiscal year 2007 have resulted in an 8.8 percent increase in the number of aircraft certification engineers and a 9.4 percent increase in the number of flight standards inspectors on board . faa hired 106 engineers in aircraft certification and 696 inspectors in flight standards from the beginning of fiscal year 2007 to march 15 , 2010 . faa also hired 89 inspectors in aircraft certification from fiscal year 2007 through august 2010 . in addition , flight standards headquarters staff are available to assist field staff with the certification of part 121 air carriers — an average of 35 of these staff were available for this assistance annually from 2005 through 2009 , and they helped with 16 certification projects . furthermore , faa delegates many certification activities to individuals and organizations ( called designees ) to better leverage its resources .