none . l&e and cas analyzed stakeholder assessments of training to identify needed changes . for example , management councils and focus groups were used to determine if changes were needed to improve course material , training environment , timing , and objectives of training . however , because l&e and cas had not agreed to do a level 4 evaluation , there were no efforts to collect and analyze assessments from internal and external stakeholders to assess training in terms of its impact on accuracy . evaluations were for individual courses , not for the program as a whole . l&e and cas reported using evaluation results in planning to make improvements to training courses or to identify training needs for the upcoming year . l&e and cas used the available level 1 through 3 evaluations to make planned improvements on individual courses . however , because l&e and cas had not agreed to do a level 4 evaluation or cost - benefit comparisons , l&e and cas's ability to make informed decisions on improving training to improve accuracy was limited . l&e had adopted a four - level model for evaluating training ( ems - items ) that was based on the widely accepted kirkpatrick model . in 2004 , l&e and tec planned a pilot test of a level 4 evaluation . l&e and tec officials stated in an official document that they intend to conduct a level 4 evaluation in 2005 . l&e had not analyzed the feasibility and cost effectiveness of alternative methodologies . l&e had a plan to conduct a level 4 evaluation in 2004 . l&e planned to conduct a level 4 evaluation in 2005 similar to that done in 2004 . officials said they would use the 2004 plan as the basis for the 2005 evaluation effort . l&e had controls to ensure data were collected systematically and in a timely manner . data collection practices for all four levels of evaluation in the level 4 pilot test evaluation included specific steps to be accomplished , status updates , and due dates . in addition , for the 2005 pilot , data on tec accuracy in five technical categories and staff proficiency in those technical categories were available before the end of 2004 . in 2004 , tec was concerned that the accuracy data in the five technical categories , based on test calls , did not reflect the types of calls taxpayers actually made . tec and irs's quality review staff subsequently worked together in an effort to fix the problem . ems - items had level 1 and some level 3 data , and the system had controls in place to ensure that data were accurate , valid , and complete . however , the database used to collect level 2 data no longer existed , and there was no replacement system planned . tec did not have such goals . tec involved stakeholders in its annual training planning . for example , tec surveyed employees to obtain input on training needs for the upcoming year . however , tec did not have a long - term training planning process for involving key stakeholders in such strategic issues as establishing training program goals and long - term employee developmental needs .