gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 22 , 2009 . nearly all of these projects are managed by nnsa or em . these reports detail a litany of contract and management problems that have led to , in many cases , massive cost increases and significant schedule delays . my testimony today discusses ( 1 ) our work over the past 3 years on nnsa and em contract and project management of large projects , ( 2 ) the preliminary results of our ongoing review of the cost and schedule performance and the status of licensing on a major nnsa construction project — the nearly $5 billion mixed oxide fuel fabrication facility ( mfff ) at the savannah river site in south carolina , and ( 3 ) actions needed by nnsa and em to improve contract and project management . today's statement is based on published gao products and ongoing work for this subcommittee . in conducting our work on the mfff project , we met with nnsa and contractor officials , visited the mfff construction site in south carolina , reviewed relevant project documents such as project execution plans and performance reports , examined the reliability of the project's earned value management data , and examined the reliability of the project's schedule . we conducted the performance audit work that supports this statement in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to produce a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our statements today . over the past 3 years , we have reported on significant problems with nnsa's and em's ability to manage major projects within cost and schedule targets . two of these reports examined the performance of doe's largest construction projects — nearly all of these projects are managed by nnsa or em — and em's largest nuclear waste cleanup projects . the estimated cost of completing these construction projects is about $27 billion , and the estimated cost of completing these cleanup projects is about $100 billion . in summary , these reports documented that the cost increases and schedule delays that have occurred for most of these projects have been the result of inconsistent application of project management tools and techniques on the part of both doe and its contractors . these reports identified issues , including inadequate systems for measuring contractor performance , approval of construction activities before final designs were sufficiently complete , ineffective project reviews , and ineffective development and integration of the technologies used in these projects . regarding doe's largest construction projects , we reported in march 2007 that 8 of the 10 major nnsa or em construction projects we reviewed had exceeded the initial cost estimates for completing these projects — in total , doe added nearly $14 billion to these initial estimates . we also reported that 9 of the 10 projects were behind schedule — in total , doe added more than 45 years to the initial schedule estimates .