because of that , certain risks are involved . for instance , some design development will not be fully completed before production must be initiated to keep the refurbishment on schedule . the b - 61 program manager indicated that the commencement date for phase 6.3 has already changed from august 2002 to december 2002 because of the air force's lack of timely action in reviewing certain documentation . the reasons why these activities were late varied . for instance , the decision to reuse or remanufacture certain components did not occur on schedule , according to the w - 76 program manager , primarily because the nnsa person assigned to do the necessary calculations neglected to perform that task . conversely , the reactor test at the los alamos national laboratory did not occur on schedule because the laboratory unilaterally transferred funds from the w - 76 refurbishment to the b - 61 . as to cost growth , the w - 76 will need about $10.75 million in additional funding in fiscal year 2004 . the funding is necessary to purchase certain commercial off - the - shelf parts that were previously not authorized or budgeted for . according to nnsa field and sandia national laboratory officials , it is unlikely that the w - 80 will meet its scheduled first production unit delivery date . echoing those sentiments , according to the nnsa program manager , the w - 80 was scheduled to enter phase 6.4 ( production engineering ) on october 1 , 2002 . now , however , it is hoped that phase 6.4 will commence in 2003 . the nnsa program manager indicated that the w - 80 has been impacted by a lack of funding for the refurbishment from the air force . this lack of funding , the nnsa program manager said , has occurred because of a disconnect in planning between the 6.x process and the department of defense budget cycle . the air force had made no plans to allocate money for the w - 80 in either its fiscal year 2001 or 2002 budgets . therefore , several important joint nnsa and air force documents have not been completed . certain ground and flight tests also lack funding and have been delayed . in addition , the w - 80 will need an additional $8 million to $9 million in fiscal year 2003 to buy certain commercial off - the - shelf parts that had been planned but not budgeted for . according to the air force's lead program officer on the w - 80 , the air force , because of an oversight , had no money for the w - 80 in its fiscal years 2001 and 2002 budgets . as a result , he anticipated that the first production unit delivery date will need to be slipped . he also indicated that he was working on a lessons learned report due in early 2003 to document the situation with the w - 80 and help ensure that a similar funding problem does not occur with future refurbishments . this air force official added that in december 2002 the air force finally received the funding necessary to support the w - 80 refurbishment .