gao - 17-690r . washington , d.c.: august 8 , 2017 . ( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dod concurred with our recommendations and identified actions that it would take in response . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ; the f - 35 program executive officer ; the secretaries of the air force and navy ; and the commandant of the marine corps . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5431 or russellc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . staff members making key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . for each of our objectives , we reviewed relevant sustainment plans , guidance , and program documentation , and collected information by interviewing officials from the office of the assistant secretary of defense ( logistics and materiel readiness ) , the f - 35 joint program office , the u.s. air force , the u.s. navy , the u.s. marine corps , and the prime contractor , lockheed martin . to interview officials and observe f - 35 operations , maintenance , and training , we conducted visits to two f - 35 operational locations — hill air force base , utah , and marine corps air station iwakuni , japan ; two f - 35 training locations — eglin air force base , florida , which also includes a navy f - 35 training squadron , and marine corps air station beaufort , south carolina ; and two f - 35 maintenance depots — ogden air logistics complex , utah , and fleet readiness center southeast , florida . a full listing of organizations with whom we met is provided later in this appendix . we also gathered various data related to f - 35 sustainment , such as supply chain and repair data and aircraft performance data . to determine the reliability of these data , we collected information on how the data were collected , managed , and used through a questionnaire and interviews with cognizant department of defense ( dod ) officials and the prime contractor . in our assessment , we identified some limitations in the way that certain data are collected and reported , such as data related to aircraft performance ( air vehicle availability , full mission capable , and mission effectiveness metrics ) , data related to aircraft that are not mission capable due to supply issues , and parts cannibalization rates that could potentially result in inaccuracies . however , these data come from the program's data systems of record , and are the same data used by the program office and prime contractor to monitor the health of the supply chain and assess aircraft performance against contract requirements and program objectives .