table 5 presents our results . reductions in benefits have a positive effect on di trust fund solvency . the increase in the retirement age results in the expected negative effect on solvency of the di trust fund . two reform proposals we studied either maintain current - law benefits — the president's proposal — or guarantee that the beneficiary would receive at least the amount of current - law benefits — the archer - shaw proposal . the remaining three reform proposals — kasich , kolbe - stenholm , and gregg - kerrey - breaux - grassley — would affect the levels of insurance benefits di and oasi beneficiaries receive by changing the pia formula for calculating initial benefits , reducing the cola , raising the retirement age , or increasing the number of years of earnings used in computing benefits . how a beneficiary's total benefit income ( reduced insurance benefits plus ia income ) under these three proposals compares with the benefits received under a maintain - benefits scenario or a maintain - tax - rates scenario depends both on the extent of the decrease in the insurance benefits and on the amount of income received from the ia . our maintain - benefits scenario achieves solvency through increased payroll taxes while current - law benefits are maintained . our maintain - tax - rates scenario achieves solvency through benefit reductions while holding current payroll tax rates at today's levels . these two scenarios represent a range of benefit levels , with the maintenance of current - law benefits being at the upper end and the reduced benefits necessary for the maintenance of current payroll taxes being at the lower end . we compared the benefit income received under each of the three proposals with that received under the maintain - benefits scenario and the maintain - tax - rates scenario for each of three beneficiary groups with the selected characteristics that we simulated: disabled workers , dependents of disabled workers ( including spouses , children younger than 18 , and adult disabled children ) , and adult disabled children who are dependents of retired workers . we made the comparisons under each of several different assumptions about the year in which the worker was born , the worker's earnings level , and the worker's age when the worker first received di benefits . we chose the ages of initial benefit receipt to reflect ssa data indicating that individuals are receiving di benefits at younger ages . they will also have smaller balances in their ias because of fewer working years in which to make ia contributions and accrue compounded interest . in addition , under several proposals , disabled beneficiaries cannot gain access to income from individual accounts until they reach retirement age . these differences between disabled and retired workers suggest that social security reform proposals should be viewed not only in light of their effects on retired workers but also explicitly for their effect on disabled beneficiaries and their families . we provided a draft of this report to ssa . for the ias in our analysis , we assumed that individuals would have portfolios with a smaller percentage invested in equities as they got older .