( apr . - june ) ( july - sept. ) bdget ye exhiit 00 / 5ll nd initisubmission to treasury ( apr . - jne ) preliminry elect review for budget yer plnning ( mr. ) hold finelect review for budget yer ( jly ) hold control review q1 ( mrch ) hold control review q2 ( jne ) hold control review q ( jly ) evuation review on tedy te invetment for budget yer ; et pend pl ( decemer ) . to provide a method for evaluating and assessing how well an agency is selecting and managing its it resources , gao developed the information technology investment management framework ( itim ) . the itim is a maturity model composed of five progressive stages of maturity that an agency can achieve in its investment management capabilities . it was developed on the basis of our research into the it investment management practices of leading private - and public - sector organizations . in each of the five stages , the framework identifies critical processes for making successful it investments . the maturity stages are cumulative ; that is , in order to attain a higher stage , the agency must have institutionalized all of the critical processes at the lower stages in addition to the higher stage critical processes . the framework can be used to assess the maturity of an agency's investment management processes and as a tool for organizational improvement . the overriding purpose of the framework is to encourage investment processes that increase business value and mission performance , reduce risk , and increase accountability and transparency in the decision process . we have used the framework in several of our evaluations , and a number of agencies have adopted it . these agencies have used itim for purposes ranging from self - assessment to redesign of their it investment management processes . itim's five maturity stages represent the steps toward achieving stable and mature processes for managing it investments . each stage builds on the lower stages , and the successful attainment of each stage leads to improvement in the organization's ability to manage its investments . with the exception of stage 1 , each maturity stage is composed of critical processes that must be implemented and institutionalized in order for the organization to achieve that stage . these critical processes are further broken down into key practices that describe the types of activities an organization should be performing to successfully implement each critical process . it is not unusual for an organization to be performing key practices from more than one maturity stage at the same time , but efforts to improve investment management capabilities should focus on implementing all lower stage practices before addressing higher stage practices . in the itim , stage 2 critical processes lay the foundation for sound it investment processes by helping the agency to attain successful , predictable , and repeatable investment control processes at the project level . specifically , stage 2 encompasses building a sound investment management foundation by establishing basic capabilities for selecting new it projects .