gao - 10-627 . according to our analysis of doe data , as of march 10 , 2011 , doe's lgp had obligated only about 17 percent of the remaining $2.5 billion in recovery act funds . doe stands to lose about $2 billion of the recovery act funds for lgp projects if it does not make final loan guarantees using those funds soon ; the recovery act requires that borrowers begin construction of their projects by september 30 , 2011 . one of the purposes of the recovery act is to create jobs , and doe established job creation as an agency goal when making loan guarantees . however , it is not clear to what extent the lgp projects for which doe has used recovery act funds are supporting that goal . in our july 2010 report , we stated that doe had not established measures for evaluating agency progress in achieving that goal , as called for by principles of good governance . for the fourth quarter of 2010 , recipients reported funding 784 ftes from lgp projects . doe officials estimate that 8 projects were under way by the end of 2010 . as of march 2 , 2011 , according to agency estimates derived from loan guarantee applications , 10,531 construction and operations positions are expected to result from the 10 projects that have received loan guarantees , and an additional 2,331 positions are expected to result from the 4 additional projects to which doe has conditionally committed . the $3.1 billion that the recovery act appropriated to the state energy program ( sep ) was made available to 56 recipients , including all 50 states , the district of columbia , and u.s. territories . the sep provides funds through formula grants to achieve national energy goals such as increasing energy efficiency and decreasing energy costs . created in 1996 , the sep has typically received less than $50 million per year . thus , the recovery act provided a substantial increase in funding for this program . as of january 31 , 2011 , recipients reported obligating over $2.7 billion and spending over $900 million of their available funds . as we reported in september 2010 , recipients obligated their sep funds for such items as buildings , including school and government improvements and revolving loan programs ; electric power and renewable energy , including wind turbine deployment ; and industry , including energy audits and water conservation . we also noted that a lack of guidance and other obstacles , such as the lack of state energy management staff , hampered states from obligating and spending funds . as of september 2010 , doe was beginning to monitor recipient spending , and recipient monitoring practices varied in scope and depth . doe and recipients reported challenges in meeting recovery act outcome reporting requirements for a variety of reasons , including the need to coordinate among numerous state agencies to fulfill reporting requirements and difficulties with reporting information into doe's primary reporting system . the recovery act provided $5 billion for the weatherization assistance program , which doe is distributing to each of the states , the district of columbia , five territories , and two indian tribes .