age . the incidence of ira withdrawals was higher among individuals ages 45 to 54 ( 8 percent ) than individuals ages 25 to 34 and 35 to 44 . education . individuals with a high school education or less had higher incidence of cashouts ( 97 percent ) and hardship withdrawals ( 7 percent ) than individuals with some college or some graduate school education . family size . individuals in families of seven or more ( 8 percent ) or in families of five to six ( 7 percent ) had higher incidence of hardship withdrawals than individuals in smaller family groups we analyzed . individuals living alone had higher incidence of ira withdrawals than individuals living in the larger family groups . marital status . widowed , divorced , or separated individuals had higher incidence of ira withdrawals ( 11 percent ) and hardship withdrawals ( 7 percent ) than married or never married individuals . race . the incidence of hardship withdrawals among african american ( 10 percent ) and hispanic individuals ( 6 percent ) was higher than among individuals who were white , asian , or other . residence . the incidence of ira withdrawals and hardship withdrawals was higher among individuals living in nonmetropolitan areas ( 7 percent and 6 percent , respectively ) than among individuals living in metropolitan areas . similarly , individuals with certain economic characteristics that we analyzed had higher incidence of early withdrawals of retirement savings , according to our analysis of sipp data . the characteristics described below reflect statistically significant differences between comparison groups ( a full listing of all demographic groups can be found in appendix iii ) . employer size . individuals working for employers with fewer than 25 employees had higher incidence of ira withdrawals ( 9 percent ) than individuals working for employers with higher number of employees . employment . individuals working fewer than 35 hours per week had higher incidence of ira withdrawals ( 7 percent ) than employees working 35 hours or more . household debt . individuals with household debt of $5,000 up to $20,000 had higher incidence of ira withdrawals ( 14 percent ) than individuals with other debt amounts . household income . individuals with household income of less than $25,000 or $25,000 up to $50,000 had higher incidence of ira withdrawals ( 12 percent and 9 percent , respectively ) and hardship withdrawals ( 9 percent and 7 percent , respectively ) than individuals with higher income amounts . personal cash reserves . individuals with personal cash reserves of less than $1,000 had higher incidence of ira withdrawals ( 10 percent ) and hardship withdrawals ( 6 percent ) than individuals with larger reserves . retirement assets . individuals with combined ira and 401 ( k ) plan assets valued at less than $5,000 had higher incidence of hardship withdrawals ( 7 percent ) than individuals with higher valued assets . tenure in retirement plan . individuals with fewer than 3 years in their retirement plan had higher incidence of hardship withdrawals ( 6 percent ) than individuals with longer tenures .