lack of training . cbp senior management acknowledged that , in some cases , periodic and on - the - job training is not being delivered . cbp has taken action to address weaknesses in its inspection procedures by renewing its emphasis on the need to improve inspections at ports of entry and by revising traveler inspection policies and procedures . in july 2006 , cbp headquarters showed field office directors the 15-minute videotape that documented the type of noncompliant inspections that were taking place at land ports of entry . cbp management emphasized the importance of thorough inspection procedures at all ports of entry , including airports and seaports , by requesting field office directors to review current procedures and identify best practices for more thorough inspections . what progress and problems has cbp encountered in setting goals and performance measures for its traveler inspection program ? as our october 2007 report contained information that dhs considered law enforcement sensitive , this version of the report omits sensitive information about cbp's traveler inspection efforts , including information on the techniques used to carry out inspections , data on the number of inadmissible aliens and other violators that enter the country each year , and data on staffing at ports of entry . in addition , at dhs's request , we have redacted the specific locations that we visited . the overall methodology used for our initial report is relevant to this version of the report since the information in this product is derived from our first report . to address the questions above , we analyzed information and data on cbp's traveler inspections , staffing , and training at ports of entry . we reviewed cbp policies and procedures for the traveler inspection program as well as other documents related to traveler inspection efforts . we interviewed cbp officials on the status of cbp efforts to develop a staffing model , train staff , carry out traveler inspections , and develop performance measures . for information that would provide an overall picture of cbp's efforts , we reviewed and analyzed several nationwide databases , including data on staffing , training , attrition , resource requests from cbp's 20 field offices and one pre - clearance headquarters office , and apprehension of inadmissible aliens and other violators at major airp and land ports of entry . we assessed the reliability of cbp's data from cbp's random selection program of travelers and staffing and training data by , among other things , meeting with knowledgeable officials about these data , reviewing relevant documentation , and performing electronic testing . we concluded that data from cbp databases , with the exception of the data on training as we discuss later in our report , were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . although we discussed the staffing model and its results with cbp officials responsible for the model , validating the model and its results was outside the scope of our review . to supplement our analyses of cbp's nationwide data , we visited eight ports of entry . while we cannot generalize our work from our visits to all ports of entry , we chose these ports of entry to provide examples of operations at air and land ports of entry .