( fig . 5 compares state rankings by pci and by people in poverty , adjusted for cost differences related to age and geographic location. ) because of the 50 percent floor , 11 states received higher federal matching rates in fiscal year 2002 than they would have if their rates had been based only on their pci . two others — alaska and the district of columbia — received special federal matching rates set in statutes that gave them higher matching rates than they would have received solely on the basis of pci . ( see table 1. ) eleven of these 13 states ( all except the district of columbia and new york ) had above - average funding ability in fiscal year 2002 . their receipt of a higher federal matching rate than they would have received without statutory minimums increases the overall differences in funding ability among the states . ttr is reported annually by the department of the treasury . to determine the number of low - income people in each state ( “people in poverty” ) , we obtained the bureau of the census's counts of people with incomes at or below the federal poverty level ( fpl ) . we adjusted the counts of people in poverty to reflect ( 1 ) the higher cost of serving the elderly , who utilize health care services at higher rates than other age groups , and ( 2 ) geographic differences in the cost of medical personnel , facilities , and supplies used to deliver health care services . to adjust for age differences in people in poverty , we used data on medicaid spending by age group from the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . we used 5-year averages of people in poverty for each age group for 1995 through 1999 to increase the reliability of the state - level population counts because they are subject to statistical error , especially in smaller states . ( 2 ) what factors prevent the formula from further narrowing differences in states' funding ability ? to evaluate the extent to which the formula narrows differences in states' ability to fund program services , we defined a state's ability to fund its medicaid programs as the financial resources potentially subject to state taxation relative to its number of low - income residents , adjusted for the cost of providing health care to them . for state resources , we used total taxable resources ( ttr ) , a measure of all income potentially subject to taxation that is either produced within a state or received by state residents from out - of - state sources . to measure geographic differences in the cost of medical personnel , facilities , and supplies , we used data from the department of labor's bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) and from the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) . we compared states' funding ability from their own resources with their funding ability after their resources have been augmented to include the value of the federal medicaid matching aid they receive .