inspections . an external quality review , or peer review , of the state ig's inspections is not required under the inspection standards . during our review , the state ig implemented a plan for conducting an internal quality review of inspections as called for by the pcie and ecie inspection standards . the first such review was currently being conducted at the time of our audit , but the report on inspection quality had not yet been completed . this review includes a sample of completed inspections to determine whether they meet the pcie and ecie quality inspection standards . currently , the state ig's quality review does not include inspections by the office of information technology , and at the time of our review there was no internal quality review process for it inspections . because the inspection work of the ig's it office is used , at least in part , by the department to ensure its compliance with the requirements of the federal information security management act of 2002 ( fisma ) for effective information security controls , the quality of the it inspections is critical to the department for providing overall assurance of fisma compliance . inspection quality is critical also because of the state ig's almost exclusive reliance on inspections to cover the information security area , which has been identified by gao as high - risk and by the state ig as a management challenge for the department . independence . investigations . the state ig obtained the results of the first external quality review of its investigations from the tennessee valley authority ( tva ) ig on november 16 , 2005 . the tva ig used the pcie quality standards for investigations , the quality assessment review guidelines established by the pcie , and the attorney general guidelines for offices of inspector general with statutory law enforcement authority to review the quality of the state ig's investigations . the tva ig concluded that the state ig's system of internal safeguards and management procedures for the investigative function was in full compliance with quality standards established by the pcie and the attorney general's guidelines , and provides reasonable assurance of conforming with professional standards . the reviewers also suggested improvements for the state ig and these are currently being addressed by the assistant ig for investigations . independence is an overarching element that is critical to quality and credibility across all of the work of the state ig and is fundamental to government auditing standards and the ig act . quality standards for federal offices of inspector general , updated by the pcie and ecie in october 2003 , also addresses independence in its quality standards for the management , operations , and conduct of federal ig offices . both sets of standards recognize that ig independence is a critical element of the ig's obligation to be objective , impartial , intellectually honest , and free of conflicts of interest . also , consistent with government auditing standards , the ig quality standards for ig offices state that without independence both in fact and in appearance , objectivity is impaired .