overstay for short periods . as indicated above , many short - term overstays are not included in the 2000 census , which is the starting point of dhs's 2.3 million estimate of the resident overstay population . these groups are illustrated in figure 2 . in part because of coverage issues , the extent of overstaying has not been definitively measured . in addition , the accuracy of dhs's estimate of the resident overstay population is not known with precision . other limited data points may help illustrate the possible magnitude . for this testimony , we obtained two small - sample sources of data . first , we identified a government - sponsored survey , reported in 2002 , that had ( 1 ) sampled more than 1,000 adult green - card holders , ( 2 ) asked them about their prior immigration status , and ( 3 ) found that more than 300 respondents self - reported prior illegal status . from the computer run we requested , we found that of the roughly 300 former illegals , about 1 / 3 said they were former overstays , with most of the remaining 2 / 3 reporting prior illegal border crossing . second , we obtained data from operation tarmac , the 2001 – 03 sweep of airport employees who had access to sensitive areas . although operation tarmac investigators had collected information on overstaying , they did not systematically record data for overstays versus illegal border crossers . we requested that dhs manually review a sample of case files and identify overstays . dhs reported to us that of 286 sampled cases in which illegal immigrant airport workers ( that is , overstays and illegal border crossers ) were arrested or scheduled for deportation , 124 workers , or about 40 percent , were overstays . while both the survey data and the airport data represent rough small - sample checks , they provide some additional support for concluding that overstays are not rare . one weakness in dhs's system for tracking the paper form i - 94 — its limited coverage of mexican and canadian visitors — was discussed in the section above . in our previous work , we have pointed to at least three other weaknesses in this tracking system: failure to update the visitor's authorized period of admission or immigration status . we reported earlier this year that dhs does not “consistently enter change of status data . integrate these data with those for entry and departure.” dhs told us that linkage to obtain updated information may occur for an individual , as when a consular official updates information on an earlier period of admission for someone seeking a new visa , but dhs acknowledged that linkage cannot be achieved broadly to yield an accurate list of visitors who overstayed . interior enforcement.” despite large numbers of overstays , current efforts to deport them are generally limited to ( 1 ) criminals and smugglers , ( 2 ) employees identified as illegal at critical infrastructure locations , and ( 3 ) persons included in special control efforts such as the domestic registration ( or “call in” component ) of the nseers program ( the national security entry and exit registration system ) .