that concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . for further information on this testimony , please contact barry t. hill at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included paul aussendorf , robert crystal , jonathan dent , doreen feldman , and bill swick . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we continue to believe that our recommendation is warranted . in light of the department's opposition , we suggested that the congress consider expanding the fws's authority to enable it to consistently regulate the surface activities of private mineral owners on refuges . thank you mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee . we identified two primary reasons for this variation . first , the fish and wildlife service's legal authority to require operators to obtain permits with conditions to protect refuge resources varies considerably , depending upon the nature of the mineral rights . second , refuge managers lack sufficient guidance , resources , and training to properly manage and oversee oil and gas activities . over the years , we and others have examined the effects on the refuge system of secondary activities , such as recreation , military activities , and oil and gas activities — which include oil and gas exploration , drilling and production , and transport . exploring for oil and gas involves seismic mapping of the subsurface topography . seismic mapping requires surface disturbance , often involving small dynamite charges placed in a series of holes , typically in patterned grids . oil and gas drilling and production often requires constructing , operating , and maintaining industrial infrastructure , including a network of access roads and canals , local pipelines to connect well sites to production facilities and to dispose of drilling wastes , and gravel pads to house the drilling and other equipment . in addition , production may require storage tanks , separating facilities , and gas compressors . finally , transporting oil and gas to production facilities or to users generally requires transit pipelines . department of the interior regulations generally prohibit the leasing of federal minerals underlying refuges . in addition , under the national wildlife refuge system administration act of 1966 , as amended , the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) is responsible for regulating all activities on refuges . the act requires fws to determine the compatibility of activities with the purposes of the particular refuge and the mission of the refuge system and not allow those activities deemed incompatible . fws does not apply the compatibility requirement to the exercise of private mineral rights on refuges . however , the activities of private mineral owners on refuges are subject to a variety of other legal restrictions under federal law .