( app . unrwa has several policies and procedures to h and unrwa's conformance with conditions on receiving u.s. funds . this appendix provides additional information on specific policies and procedures that unrwa uses to implement its cash assistance activities and promote the neutrality of agency staff , facilities , and contractors . unrwa has policies to oversee the relief and social services assistance it provides to refugees , including special instructions for special hardship , selective , and emergency cash assistance . unrwa policy is to provide special hardship cash subsidies for food only to registered palestinian refugees . in addition , unrwa staff are to screen applicants' eligibility for cash assistance . the screening process includes a home visit by a social worker and follow - up checks to ensure assistance has been used for the designated purpose . under written unrwa instructions for assistance , if a family has other sources of income , such as palestinian authority ministries or charitable organizations , it may be disqualified from receiving unrwa cash assistance . agency officials also reported that unrwa uses a computerized distribution list for special hardship cash subsidies for food , which has been reviewed by finance and social services staff in the field . similarly , agency policy states that senior field staff are responsible for overseeing cash distributions , a social worker is required to be present at each distribution point , and refugees must provide certain documentation to receive cash assistance . in addition , senior officials in the department of relief and social services are required to conduct random visits and review case files to ensure proper handling of special hardship cases by social workers and staff . social workers are also to rotate among areas to alleviate social pressures they may face from refugees . unrwa also recently introduced the use of a needs - based formula , the proxy means test formula , as criteria for receipt of certain social services , such as special hardship assistance , in order to target benefits to those in most need . unrwa has additional measures to oversee its cash assistance activities . for example , for both selective and emergency unrwa cash assistance , unrwa policy is that social workers are to make field inquiries to examine an applicant's emergency circumstances prior to making a recommendation for assistance . depending on the amount of assistance recommended , senior relief and social services officials at varying levels of hierarchy must then review the recommendation . social workers are to conduct follow - up visits with beneficiaries , and senior field officials are to perform random checks to determine whether funds are spent for approved uses . in addition , relief and social services officials in the field must report monthly to the head of the department on any selective or emergency cash assistance approved and issued . unrwa reported that it has implemented various policies and procedure to promote staff neutrality , including both pre - and post - hire policies on staff behavior . in cases where unrwa investigates and finds staff behavior inconsistent with unrwa policies , unrwa policy is to discipline or terminate the staff . unrwa reported that it has implemented various policies and procedures to promote staff neutrality .