exercises . many exercises focus primarily on crisis management , which often ends in a successful tactical resolution of the incident and do not include more likely scenarios where terrorist attacks are successful , requiring a consequence management exercise component . mass casualties . overall planning and integration among agencies are needed for mass casualty management , including conventional terrorist incidents . also , medical surge capacity for any type of weapon of mass destruction event may be limited . disposition of bodies would also be an issue . the second category of problems and their solutions are applicable to chemical or biological incidents . they would not be relevant in a conventional , radiological , or nuclear terrorist incident ; however , they would be relevant in other chemical or biological events not related to terrorism , such as an accidental release of chemicals or a natural outbreak of a disease . they vary in their level of applicability , with some only being applicable to specific chemical or biological agents . public health surveillance . basic capacity for public health surveillance is lacking . improved public health - coordinated surveillance for biological terrorism and emerging infectious diseases is an urgent preparedness requirement at the local level . detection and risk assessment . the capability of first responders and specialized response teams to rapidly and accurately detect , recognize , and identify chemical or biological agents and assess the associated health risks can be slow . also , following the release of a chemical or biological agent , emergency hazardous material teams do not always conduct a downwind analysis of the toxic cloud , which could delay a decision to evacuate potentially affected populations . protective equipment and training . first responders often lack special personal protective equipment ( level - a protective clothing and masks ) to safeguard them from chemical or biological agents and could become contaminated themselves . training curricula deal with the technical level of response , such as treatment protocols , but do not describe operational guidelines and strategies for responding to large - scale public health emergencies . physicians sometimes lack adequate training to recognize chemical and biological agents . chemical and biological - specific planning . emergency operations plans and “all - hazard” plans do not adequately address the response to a large - scale chemical or biological terrorism event . plans often do not address chemical or biological incidents . efforts to better prepare for chemical and biological attacks include solutions that have broad applicability across a variety of contingencies and solutions that are applicable to only a specific type of attack . for example , efforts to improve public health surveillance would be useful in any disease outbreak , whereas efforts to provide vaccines for smallpox would be useful only if terrorists used smallpox in a biological attack . given the uncertainty of the chemical and biological terrorist threat and continued fiscal concerns , the congress may want to initially invest resources in efforts with broad applicability rather than those that are only applicable under a specific type of chemical or biological attack . as threat information becomes more certain , it may be more appropriate to invest in efforts only applicable to specific chemical or biological agents .