we provided a draft of this product to dhs for review and comment . dhs provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we also provided draft excerpts of this product to the selected sector coordinating council representatives we interviewed , who provided technical comments that we also incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and the secretary of homeland security . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . what are dhs's risk assessment practices in selected ci sectors and what are private sector representatives' views on the utility of this risk information ? how , if at all , does ci risk information influence dhs's strategic planning and private sector outreach ? to address our first objective , we reviewed agency documents and interviewed relevant officials to identify dhs's physical and cyber risk assessment practices for 3 of the 16 ci sectors: critical manufacturing ; nuclear reactors , materials , and waste ; and transportation systems . we selected these three sectors because they were sectors for which dhs serves as the ssa or the co - ssa . dhs's office of infrastructure protection is the lead component within dhs for the critical manufacturing and nuclear sectors , and dhs shares ssa responsibilities with the department of transportation for the transportation systems sector . these three sectors also have varying levels of federal regulation . specifically , we chose the critical manufacturing sector because according to dhs , the majority of the assets in this sector are privately owned and operated by companies that have minimal interaction with the federal government and other regulatory entities and includes the manufacturing industries that are the most crucial for the continuity of other critical sectors and has significant national economic implications . additionally , we selected the nuclear sector because all of the facilities in the sector are subject to federal security requirements , which allowed us to observe how a regulatory environment may affect dhs's provision of risk information to ci owners and operators . we also included the transportation systems sector because portions of it are regulated and dhs regularly conducts sector - wide complete risk assessments for this sector . the information gathered from these three selected sectors is not generalizable to all 16 sectors but does provide insight into how dhs's risk assessment information is used for a variety of ci . we reviewed laws and guidance regarding dhs's roles and responsibilities relating to physical and cyber ci risk assessment practices including the homeland security act of 2002 , as amended , and presidential policy directive / ppd - 21 ( ppd - 21 ) . we also examined dhs's national infrastructure protection plan , dhs's risk management fundamentals , and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) cybersecurity framework to identify common practices for generating risk - related information . to characterize the risk information dhs distributed to ci owners and operators in the three selected sectors , we identified the products and activities associated with each risk element — threat , vulnerability , and consequence .