increased enrollment . enrollment is expected to increase significantly , even in states that do not implement the expansion , as streamlined processes and publicity about the expansion encourage enrollment among previously eligible but unenrolled adults and children . the sheer number of additional enrollees — about 10 million by 2020 , according to congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates — may stretch health care resources and exacerbate challenges to ensuring access to care . the potential for new technologies to contribute significantly to long - term health care spending growth poses particular challenges for the medicaid program . state medicaid directors have highlighted as a critical concern the emergence of high - cost , cutting - edge pharmaceuticals , in light of the requirement that state medicaid programs that cover outpatient drugs must cover nearly all food and drug administration - approved prescription drugs of manufacturers that participate in the medicaid drug rebate program . these changes underscore the importance of addressing problems we have identified in ensuring fiscal accountability , program integrity , and access . while expenditures grew at an average annual rate of 5.3 percent between 2005 and 2015 , the cms office of the actuary has projected that the rate of increase will rise to 5.8 percent between 2015 and 2020 . see cms , 2014 actuarial report on the financial outlook for medicaid . spending , including supplemental payments that states often make to institutional providers , would help to ensure the fiscal accountability and integrity of the program , facilitate efforts to manage program costs , and provide information needed for policy making . lastly , improved federal program integrity efforts will be critical to ensuring the appropriate use of program funds . continued increases in states' demonstration spending , changes in states' delivery systems and payment approaches , as well as the aging of the population and the introduction of new technologies also will continue to pose challenges to federal oversight . increased demonstration spending . medicaid spending governed by the terms and conditions of medicaid demonstrations , rather than traditional medicaid state plan requirements , accounted for close to one - third of federal medicaid spending in 2014 — up from one - fourth of federal medicaid spending in 2013 and one - fifth in 2011 . the trend among states to seek flexibilities under the demonstration authority has implications for enrollees' access and program spending . for example , enrollees may lose protections — such as those to limit cost - sharing or to provide certain mandatory benefits — under the traditional medicaid program . the federal government will need to oversee increasingly diverse medicaid programs not subject to traditional medicaid requirements . as of february 2015 , hhs had approved demonstration proposals from two states — arkansas and iowa — allowing them to provide coverage to some or all of their expansion populations through premium assistance to purchase private health insurance on exchanges established under ppaca . changes in states' delivery systems . growth of managed care and states' exploration of new models of health care delivery systems , particularly for long - term services and supports , will further heighten the need for program oversight .