, hardware ) for the vehicle systems . for example , its vrtc conducts nhtsa's sensitive and quick turn - around cybersecurity research projects , according to officials . other research is conducted through contracts with dot's volpe center and other research institutions . nhtsa officials informed us that the agency has used the results of its completed research to inform industry about its efforts and to form the basis for additional research currently under way or planned . the officials expect more reports to be issued in 2016 as additional research projects are completed . notably , each of the above hacking demonstrations illustrate that some overarching characteristics of the can bus make it more likely that a vehicle cyberattack launched through any interface — including non - safety - critical systems , such as the telematics unit — could impact safety . specifically , these hacking demonstrations highlight a major security weakness of can: it assumes that any message on the bus is sent from a trusted sender , so messages are not secured or restricted in any way . in other words , these demonstrations help illustrate that because of the can's design , there is no way to know whether a given message on the can bus originates from a legitimate source or from a cyber attacker . as previously noted , the can was designed in 1985 , which was long before vehicles were connected to external networks and vehicle cybersecurity was an issue facing the auto industry . despite its inherent security weaknesses , can is the most commonly used bus system in the auto industry today . while the possibility that remote cyberattacks could occur outside the research environment is concerning , some of the selected industry stakeholders we spoke to ( 8 out of 32 ) have also pointed out that attacks comparable to the hacking demonstrations described above would be complex to execute . specifically , most of these stakeholders noted that such attacks would likely require a high level of hacking sophistication , including specialized knowledge . for example , as previously mentioned , the researchers involved in the gm and jeep hacking demonstrations had prolonged access to test vehicles , which they used to closely study the vehicles' systems and key components . in another example , representatives from a cybersecurity firm noted that one very difficult step in such demonstrations is figuring out how to create authentic - looking messages that will be accepted and acted upon by the vehicle's ecus . in addition , one leading researcher predicted that those who would execute remote cyberattacks would be those with previous experience hacking into other computer systems ; for someone with no such experience , hacking into a vehicle remotely would be very difficult . to date , there have been no remote cyberattacks with safety impacts reported outside of the research environment . in addition , determining the risk that such a remote cyberattack will occur in the near future is challenging , especially because of the difficulty of predicting the actions of cyber attackers and since modern vehicles' designs vary widely ( with some vehicle makes and models more vulnerable than others to such an attack ) .