these states do not require compliance with federal taxes . in addition , states that currently require compliance with federal employment taxes may be amenable to extending the requirement to include federal income taxes . for example , california's dlse requires applicants for the three industries requiring licensing to be compliant with federal employment taxes only . california's garment manufacturing , farm labor contracting , and car washing and polishing license applicants have no requirement to be in compliance with federal income taxes to qualify for business licenses . the irs ogden spreadsheet used to track the number of federal tax returns filed by noncompliant california business license applicants and the amount irs collected from these businesses attributable to the data - sharing arrangement did not contain data for the months of july , august , november , and december 2007 . we acknowledge that data for the entire calendar year of 2007 would affect the number of tax returns filed and the amount irs collected from applicants during those months . our estimate of the cost of irs and california's data - sharing arrangement may be somewhat overstated because , for instance , we used approximate purchase costs for equipment and did not spread those costs over the useful life of the equipment or other uses of the equipment and used calendar year 2009 costs . additionally , our analysis did not address some other potential factors that could reduce , or increase , the roi we calculated . we did not verify the responses from the states about tax compliance to qualify for state business licenses . we recognize that the state revenue officials may not be knowledgeable about all of their states' requirements for tax compliance to qualify for business licenses , but they are a credible source of information about state tax compliance to qualify for state business licenses . we conducted this performance audit from june 2007 through june 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , signora j . may , assistant director ; amy r. bowser ; jennifer k. echard ; amy c. friedlander ; arthur l. james , jr. ; stuart m. kaufman ; edward j. nannenhorn ; lou v. b. smith ; jessica thomsen ; and james j. ungvarsky made key contributions to this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . our objectives were to analyze ( 1 ) the extent to which requiring a demonstration of federal tax compliance to qualify for a state business license has the potential to improve federal tax compliance and ( 2 ) what opportunities exist for increasing arrangements that require federal tax compliance to qualify for state business licensing . this report focuses on data - sharing arrangements that require compliance with federal or state tax obligations to qualify for state business licensing .