gains are diluted . if short - term traders purchase fund shares and redeem them before their money can be invested in the fund's portfolio , they share in increases in the fund's value , resulting in long - term shareholders receiving a smaller share of these gains — a dilution of fund gains . conversely , short - term traders can often avoid losses by redeeming fund shares before their value decreases , resulting in long - term investors sharing in a higher proportion of the fund's decrease in value . figure 2 demonstrates the dilution effect of abusive short - term trading on long - term shareholders . while a short - term trader can earn large returns from late trading or market timing , the costs of such trades are generally imposed on a large population of shareholders and therefore have a relatively small effect on each individual investor . as shown in the example in figure 2 , market timing reduces the net asset value of a share from $10.90 to $10.89 , or less than 0.1 percent . however , abusive short - term trading on a large scale and over a period of years could cost long - term shareholders , such as plan participants , more significant percentages of their assets . efforts to quantify the total extent and cost of late trading and market timing have yielded varying results . one academic study found evidence of late trading in 15 of a sample of 50 international funds , and in 12 of a sample of 96 domestic equity funds between 1998 and 2001 . on the basis of these samples , the study estimates that during 2001 , late trading diluted the gains of the average long - term shareholder in international and domestic equity funds by 0.05 and 0.006 percent , respectively . we were unable to identify other studies on the extent of late trading , though representatives of a mutual fund trade association that we spoke with believe that these estimates are too high . market timing also appears to have been most prevalent in international equity funds , according to both academic studies and representatives of mutual fund companies we spoke with . studies show that the most profitable market timing strategies involved trading in and out of international equity funds . other funds that were used for market timing were small and midsize company domestic equity funds and some types of bond funds . according to one study , market timing has more negatively affected long - term shareholders than late trading . among the seven studies about market timing we reviewed , estimates of its cost ranged from averages of 0.32 to 2.3 percent of assets per year in international equity funds . the differences in the estimated costs of market timing vary depending on which data and methodology were used by the researchers . these variations also indicate the difficulty of definitively calculating the extent of mutual fund trading abuses and their effect on long - term investors . the extent of late trading and market timing is very difficult to measure because these practices can be hard to identify .