according to the u.s . ambassador to iraq , the demobilization of shi'a militias requires a corresponding reduction in the sunni insurgency . mnf - i established the tra system to assess the capabilities and readiness of iraqi security forces . how does dod assess the reliability of tras and ensure that they present an accurate picture of iraq security forces' capabilities and readiness ? at what tra rating level would iraqi army units not require any u.s. military support ? what u.s. military support would iraqi units still require at tra levels 1 and 2 ? how does dod use unit - level tras to assess shortfalls in iraqi capabilities ? what do dod assessments show about the developmental needs of iraqi security forces ? in late august 2006 , the mnf - i commanding general said that the united states is helping iraq build a force to deal with its current security threats of international terrorism and insurgency . however , he noted that the iraqi government is developing a long - term security plan to shape the type of armed forces the country will need 5 to 10 years from now . what are the current resource requirements for developing iraqi security forces capable of dealing with international terrorism and insurgency ? what have been the u.s. and iraqi financial contributions to this effort thus far ? what u.s. and iraqi contributions will be needed over the next several years ? what are the projected resource requirements for the future iraqi force ? what are the projected u.s. and iraqi financial contributions for this effort ? for further information , please contact joseph a. christoff on ( 202 ) 512- 8979 . according to a july 2006 state department report , the sunni insurgency remains a pressing problem in iraq , even after the death of abu musab al zarqawi , the leader of al - qaeda in iraq , in early june 2006 . as dod recently reported , al - qaeda in iraq remains able to conduct operations due to its resilient , semi - autonomous cellular structure of command and control . the sunni insurgency consists of former baathists , whose goal is to return to power ; terrorist groups such as al - qaeda in iraq , its affiliates in the mujahadeen shura council , and ansar al sunna ; and various other groups that rely on violence to achieve their objectives . sunni insurgents have no distinct leader but share the goal of destabilizing the iraqi government to pursue their individual and , at times , conflicting goals . although these groups have divergent goals , some collaborate at the tactical and operational levels . dod has reported that the relationships among insurgents , terrorists , and criminal opportunists are blurred at times but that the ideological rifts between terrorists and other resistance groups remain . dod also reports that many insurgent groups employ a dual - track political and military strategy to subvert emerging institutions and to infiltrate and co - opt security and political organizations . these groups attempt to leverage the political process to address their core concerns and demands while attacking coalition and iraqi security forces .