we added that information where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report for 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will provide copies of this report to the secretary of transportation , the under secretary of transportation for security , the director of the office of homeland security , the director of the office of personnel management , and the director of the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact me or lisa shames on ( 202 ) 512-6806 . marti tracy was a key contributor to this report . the objective of our review was to describe the transportation security administration's ( tsa ) actions and plans for implementing the results - oriented practices required in the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ) and recommend next steps for tsa to build a results - oriented organizational culture and to establish a positive control environment . to identify results - oriented practices and recommend next steps , we reviewed our models , guides , reports , and other products on strategic planning and performance measurement , strategic human capital management , transformation efforts , and other related areas . see related gao products listed at the end of this report for a list of our products in these areas . we next analyzed atsa in relation to our products to identify any results - oriented practices that were statutorily required in the legislation . in addition , we reviewed tsa and department of transportation missions , performance goals and measures , performance agreements , policies and procedures , and organizational charts and other relevant documentation . to describe tsa's status in implementing these results - oriented practices , we interviewed 25 officials from various tsa offices including strategic planning , human capital , training , budget , public affairs , and policy , among others . leading organizations not only provide information to employees but also commonly seek their employees' input on a periodic basis and explicitly address and use that input to adjust their human capital practices . as tsa matures as an organization it can collect feedback using employee satisfaction surveys , focus groups , employee advisory councils , and / or employee task forces . involve employees in planning and sharing performance information . involving employees in the planning process to develop agency goals helps to increase employees' understanding and acceptance of them and improve motivation and morale . for tsa , employees' understanding and acceptance of its goals is particularly important because they are to be held accountable for achieving the goals set out in their performance agreements . virtually all of the results that the federal government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of two or more agencies .