hood , tex . as reported in an april 2004 version of the strategy , the first two phases together will deliver over 20,000 vehicles . the third phase is scheduled to begin in fiscal year 2005 and the fourth phase , an outgrowth of vehicle component design and integration under ongoing program technology / insertion efforts , does not have an identified start date but is planned to begin shortly after the completion of the current production contract . the apache is a multimission aircraft designed to perform rear , close , deep operations and precision strikes , armed reconnaissance , and security during the day , at night , and in adverse weather conditions . there are two apache variants: the ah - 64a , which entered service in 1984 , and the ah - 64d longbow , an improved version of the ah - 64a , which entered service in 1998 . the army plans to convert most of the ah - 64a helicopters into ah - 64d models , and to improve the safety features on the remaining ah - 64a models . in total , there are about 703 apache helicopters in the army's inventory: 263 a models and 440 d models . the average fleet age of the a model is about 13 years , and the average age of the d model fleet is about 4 years . our assessment of the apache's condition as yellow is unchanged since our prior report . as shown in figure 15 , the average mission capable rates for the ah - 64a models have been below the army's goal between fiscal years 1999 and 2004 , and the average mission capable rates for the ah - 64d fleet have been above goal for 3 of the 6 years . in our december 2003 report , safety restrictions were cited as the cause of not meeting mission capable goals but since then , all of the issues have been addressed throughout the fleet . however , according to officials , elevated flying hours in iraq and afghanistan , coupled with the harsh environment , continue to increase demands for limited spare parts and for maintenance for such items as engines and rotor blades . officials further stated that the peacetime usage rate for the ah - 64 is 15 hours a month and the actual number of flight hours is averaging 31 hours per month in iraq and 55 per month in afghanistan . despite these challenges , officials stated that the ah - 64 is capable of conducting its mission and , between february 2003 and december 2004 , its mission capable rates in both iraq and afghanistan exceeded the army's goal . we assessed the near - term program strategy and funding for the apache as green because the army has recapitalization and sustainment strategies , both of which are funded . as stated in our december 2003 report , the apache recapitalization program addresses cost , reliability , and safety problems , fleet groundings , aging aircraft , and obsolescence . the army is continuing to remanufacture the ah - 64a models to ah - 64d models with the remaining helicopters beginning conversion during fiscal year 2005 .