trade promotion . commerce officials said trade promotion activities have consisted of organizing trade missions , participating in trade policy discussions , organizing industry outreach events , and developing a joint trade promotion declaration to promote the development of civilian nuclear programs worldwide . commerce officials told us they had organized one trade mission on behalf of the u.s. nuclear industry to eastern europe — a july 2010 trip to the czech republic , poland , and slovakia — and two u.s. nuclear trade promotion missions to iaea . commerce officials said they have also certified , supported , and participated in u.s. chamber of commerce - and non - u.s. government - organized trade missions . commerce officials told us they are planning future trade missions to target additional countries , and that they will host a u.s. nuclear industry promotion event at the 2010 iaea general conference . commerce also participated in nuclear trade policy discussions with delegations visiting the united states from japan , lithuania , mongolia , poland , and thailand . in addition , commerce officials have organized two industry outreach events to increase engagement between u.s. government officials and industry representatives . according to commerce , approximately 150 to 200 industry representatives attended these outreach events . furthermore , commerce and doe have jointly developed and signed joint trade promotion declarations with italy and poland that encourage nuclear industry entities to seek opportunities to participate in the construction of nuclear power plants and the provision of related supporting infrastructure and services . the declarations include commitments by the partner countries that they will develop transparent procedures for awarding contracts within their nuclear energy industries and in a way that does not unduly favor companies from countries that may , according to commerce officials , directly subsidize their nuclear industry . we found that the commerce initiative's strategy document has some limitations . stakeholder resources . the initiative's stakeholder resources consist of a may 2009 online civil nuclear exporters guide that presents information generally publicly available on the internet , including overviews of u.s. export licensing procedures and contact information for key u.s. agency export control offices . commerce officials told us they were in the process of updating the guide . commerce has also participated in export control seminars and presented briefings to u.s. companies . future plans include: ( 1 ) developing criteria for prioritizing best prospect markets for u.s. nuclear industry , ( 2 ) developing in - depth export control workshops for u.s. industry , ( 3 ) improving the quality of data from current collection efforts , and ( 4 ) providing a more thorough analysis of existing data on the economic benefits accrued from u.s. civilian nuclear exports . we have reported in the past that it is important to align strategic goals with strategies for achieving those goals . specifically , we have noted that defining the mission and desired outcomes , measuring performance , and using performance information to identify performance gaps , are critical if agencies are to be accountable for achieving intended results . however , the initiative's strategy document does not contain any of these steps or measures .