ii ) . in these comments , hhs generally agreed with our findings and recommendations and stated that the report represented a fair assessment of the department's progress in it investment management . the department added that it will leverage the report in its efforts to improve its investment management processes . hhs expressed differing perspectives on the inclusion of component agency business representation on the investment review board and the performance of postimplementation reviews . specifically , regarding business representation on the board , the department commented that it used a hierarchy of investment reviews ( with the first review occurring at the component agency ) combined with itirb members representing mission support areas , such as finance , acquisition , and human resources , to provide a structure for making the business decisions regarding the department's investments . we disagree with the department that this arrangement provides an adequate structure for managing the department's investments . because allocating resources among major it investments may require fundamental trade - offs among a multitude of business objectives , portfolio management decisions are essentially business decisions , and therefore require sufficient business representation on the board . cios and executives responsible for mission - support functions do not constitute sufficient business representation because , by virtue of their responsibilities , they are not in the best position to make business decisions . portfolio management decisions are better made by executives with business line decision - making authority . regarding pirs , hhs commented that it was currently informally performing them by conducting closeout reviews of recently implemented investments and annual reviews of systems in operations and maintenance . pirs are conducted to determine whether cost , benefit , schedule , and risk expectations that were set for investments were achieved and develop lessons learned about the investment selection and control processes that can be used as the basis for management improvements . however , neither the closeout reviews , nor the reviews of systems in operations and maintenance , are addressing all these elements . specifically , as we stated in our report , the closeout reviews do not address schedule deviations , determine whether the benefits were achieved , or identify lessons learned . in addition , the reviews of projects in operations and maintenance do not capture the benefits realized or identify lessons learned . commenting on departmental - level oversight of component agency investments , hhs stated that it agrees with our recommendation to improve its oversight of component agency investments . it stated that it would use a number of mechanisms to do this , including performing audits to ensure alignment of component agency's processes with those of the department , using earned value management data to identify potential performance problems with most investments , and directly reviewing investments determined to be of high priority . we agree with hhs that these steps would help address some of the weaknesses in project oversight that we identify in this report . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this report .