( fig . as shown in fig . 2 , some of the reusable launch vehicles under development include: virgin galactic's spaceshiptwo , a space tourism vehicle with seats for two pilots and six spaceflight participants . according to the company , about 700 people have already placed refundable deposits on the $250,000 ticket price per flight that is to last for about 2 hours , including 5 minutes of microgravity . xcor aerospace's lynx , another space tourism vehicle with seats for one pilot and one spaceflight participant . the ticket price is $100,000 . blue origin's new shepard vehicle , a vertical takeoff and landing vehicle designed to carry three or more crew . the crew capsule is designed to land with the assistance of parachutes . stratolaunch system's stratolaunch aircraft , which is being designed with a wingspan greater than 380 feet to be powered by six boeing 747 engines , and a multi - stage booster to carry unmanned payloads and manned spacecraft to orbit . according to the company , the aircraft will be the largest ever constructed . in 2004 , the commercial space launch amendments act gave dot , among other things , the specific responsibility of overseeing the public safety aspects of space tourism , but the act prohibited dot from regulating the safety of crew and spaceflight participants before 2012 , except in response to high - risk events , serious injuries , or fatalities — a provision that in 2012 was extended to september 30 , 2015 . under the act , in response to such events during the moratorium , the secretary of transportation may issue regulations governing the design or operation of a launch vehicle to protect the health and safety of crew and spaceflight participants that would: describe how such regulations would be applied in determining whether to issue a launch license , apply only to launches in which a vehicle will be carrying a human being for compensation or hire , and be limited to restricting or prohibiting design features or operating practices that have ( 1 ) resulted in a serious or fatal injury to crew or spaceflight participants during a licensed or permitted commercial human spaceflight or ( 2 ) contributed to an unplanned event or series of events during a licensed or permitted commercial human spaceflight that posed a high risk of causing a serious or fatal injury to crew or spaceflight participants . at the same time , the act maintains faa's authority over protecting the public with regard to commercial space launches , and faa has issued regulations regarding that . if congress decides not to extend the moratorium , faa will have the discretion to propose regulations regarding the safety of crew and spaceflight participants without restriction after september 30 , 2015 . faa's primary means of authorizing space launch activities is through its licensing process . among other things , faa's office of commercial space transportation is responsible for: licensing launch and reentry vehicle operations and launch and reentry site operations ( spaceports ) carried out by u.s. citizens or within the united states , except for those operations that are carried out exclusively by and for the government .