nonetheless , some progress has been made . for example , the north american electric reliability council has partnered with the federal bureau of investigation and the department of energy to establish threat levels that they share with utility companies as threats change . since the office of homeland security plans to address the key issues needing immediate attention — preparing a national strategy , clarifying roles and missions , establishing performance measures , and setting priorities and goals , we are making no recommendations concerning these issues at this time . however , commonly accepted or authoritative definitions of fundamental concepts , such as homeland security , will also be essential to integrate homeland security efforts effectively . without this degree of definition , communication between participants will lack clarity , coordination of implementation plans will be more difficult , and targeting of resources will be more uncertain . we recommend that the president direct the office of homeland security to develop a comprehensive , governmentwide definition of homeland security , and include the definition in the forthcoming national strategy . we presented a draft of this report to the office of homeland security ; the environmental protection agency ; the departments of agriculture , commerce , defense , energy , health and human services , justice , transportation , and treasury ; the customs service ; and the federal emergency management agency . only the departments of justice , defense , health and human services and the customs service provided written comments on a draft of this report . the department of justice was concerned that the draft report did not discuss several key aspects of its efforts related to ensuring homeland security , noting in particular that we did not note the department's role in the development of the five - year interagency counterterrorism and technology crime plan . we agree that this plan is an important contribution to homeland security , and we revised our text to recognize the department's efforts in developing the plan . the department's comments and our evaluation of the comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . the department of defense stated that the draft portrayed the many challenges facing the departments and agencies as they address homeland security efforts . however , the department pointed out that its definition of homeland security , developed for its own use , was still in draft at the time of our report . we were aware of that and revised our report language to clarify this point . we also incorporated technical corrections as appropriate . the department of health and human services and the customs service provided no overall comments but did provide letters in response to our request for comments , which we have included in appendix iv and v , respectively . the department of health and human services also provided technical comments , which have been incorporated in the report , as appropriate . we discuss our scope and methodology in detail in appendix i . as agreed with the offices of our congressional requesters , unless they announce the contents of the report earlier , we will not distribute it until 30 days from the date of this letter .