however , the dod report did not include any of those measures . the implementation effort did not constitute a new investment . according to an omb senior policy analyst , agencies should be able to fund their hspd - 12 implementations through existing resources and should not need to develop a business case or request additional funding . while omb did not direct agencies to develop business cases for hspd - 12 implementation efforts , piv card systems are likely to represent significant new investments at several agencies . for example , agencies such as commerce , hud , and labor had not implemented pki technology prior to hspd - 12 , but they are now directed to do so . in addition , such agencies' previous id cards were used for limited purposes and were not used for logical access . these agencies had no prior need to acquire or maintain card readers for logical access control or to establish connectivity with their id management systems for logical access control and , consequently , had previously allocated very little money for the operations and maintenance of these systems . for example , according to labor officials , operations and maintenance costs for its pre - hspd - 12 legacy system totaled approximately $169,000 , while its fiscal year 2009 budget request for hspd - 12 implementation is approximately $3 million — 17 times more expensive . while these agencies recognized that they are likely to face substantially greater costs in implementing piv card systems , they had not always thoroughly assessed all of the expenses they are likely to incur . issue cards to these employees and require them to begin using their cards by this date . figure 2 shows a timeline that illustrates when hspd - 12 and additional guidance was issued as well as the major deadlines for implementing hspd - 12 . while the technical requirements of complying with hspd - 12 dictated that a major new investment be made , generally , agencies had not been directed by omb to take the necessary steps to thoroughly plan for these investments . for example , six of the eight agencies we reviewed had not developed detailed plans regarding their use of piv cards for physical and logical access controls . in addition , seven of the eight agencies had not prepared cost - benefit analyses that weighed the costs and benefits of implementing different authentication capabilities . without treating the implementation of hspd - 12 as a major new investment by requiring agencies to develop detailed plans based on risk - based assessments of agencies' physical and logical access control needs that support the extent to which electronic authentication capabilities are to be implemented , omb will continue to limit its ability to ensure that agencies properly plan and implement hspd - 12 . omb had not provided guidance for determining which piv card authentication capabilities to implement for physical and logical access controls another factor contributing to agencies' limited progress is that omb had not provided guidance to agencies regarding how to determine which electronic authentication capabilities to implement for physical and logical access controls .