i would be happy to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . i am pleased to be here to participate in today's hearing on reverse mortgages . a reverse mortgage is a loan that converts the borrower's home equity into payments from a lender and , typically , does not require any repayments , as long as the borrower continues to live in the home . available to homeowners aged 62 and older , these loans have become an increasingly popular financial tool for seniors , but concerns have emerged about the adequacy of consumer protections for reverse mortgage borrowers . for example , some consumer advocates have expressed concern about misleading marketing and inappropriate cross - selling — the practice of encouraging borrowers to use reverse mortgage funds to purchase insurance or other products that may be unsuitable for the borrower's financial situation . the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera ) acknowledged some of these concerns by putting in place additional consumer protection measures . according to industry sources , almost all reverse mortgages are currently made under the home equity conversion mortgage ( hecm ) program , which is administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) . this program has experienced dramatic growth with an increase in both the number of hecm loans and the number of lenders participating in the hecm program . since the inception of the hecm program , congress has required prospective borrowers to obtain counseling by an independent third party so that they can make informed decisions about whether to obtain a hecm . “never lose your home”: this claim is potentially misleading because a lender could foreclose on a hecm borrower's home if the borrower did not pay property taxes and hazard insurance or did not maintain the house . my testimony today is based on work we conducted at the request of chairman kohl and senator mccaskill for a report that we are issuing today . claims of time and geographic limits: these claims falsely imply that hecm loans are limited to a certain geographic area , or that the consumer must respond within a certain time to qualify for the loan . examples include “must call within 72 hours,” and “deadline extended,” as well as the claim that a consumer's residence is “located in a federal housing authority qualifying area.” the potentially misleading marketing claims we identified suggest that some hecm providers may not be maintaining sufficient focus on or awareness of federal marketing standards . furthermore , consumers who have not been cautioned about such claims could pursue hecms with misunderstandings about the product . therefore , the report we are issuing today recommends that hud , ftc , and the federal banking regulators take steps to strengthen oversight and enhance industry and consumer awareness of the types of marketing claims discussed in this testimony . concerns exist that reverse mortgage borrowers could be vulnerable to inappropriate cross - selling , a practice involving the sale of financial or insurance products that are unsuitable for the borrower's financial situation using the borrower's reverse mortgage funds .