documentation of these reviews is explicitly required under vha policy . additionally , va medical center officials confirmed that fppes for cause that were required for another 21 providers were never conducted . the medical centers lacked documentation showing that retrospective reviews — which assess the care previously delivered by a provider during a specific period of time — had been conducted for 8 providers after concerns had been raised about their clinical care . one medical center lacked documentation showing that reviews had been conducted for another 12 providers after concerns had been raised about their care . in the absence of any documentation , we were unable to identify the types of reviews , if any , that were conducted for these 12 providers . we also found that the five selected va medical centers did not always conduct reviews of providers' clinical care in a timely manner . specifically , of the 148 providers , the va medical centers did not initiate reviews of 16 providers for 3 months , and in some cases , for multiple years , after concerns had been raised about the providers' care . in a few of these cases , additional concerns about the providers' clinical care were raised before the reviews began . we found that two factors were largely responsible for the inadequate documentation and untimely reviews of providers' clinical care we identified at the selected va medical centers . further details on our scope and methodology are included in our report . the work this statement is based on was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . under vha policy , networks are responsible for overseeing the credentialing and privileging processes at their respective va medical centers . while reviews of providers' clinical care after concerns are raised are a component of credentialing and privileging , we found that none of the network officials we spoke with described any routine oversight of such reviews . this may be in part because the standardized tool that vha requires the networks to use during their routine audits does not direct network officials to ensure that all reviews of providers' clinical care have been conducted and documented . further , some of the visn officials we interviewed told us they were not using the standardized audit tool as required . without adequate documentation and timely completion of reviews of providers' clinical care , va medical center officials lack the information they need to make decisions about providers' privileges , including whether or not to take adverse privileging actions against providers . we found that all five va medical centers lacked at least some documentation of the reviews they told us they conducted , and in some cases , we found that the required reviews were not conducted at all . specifically , across the five va medical centers , we found the following: the medical centers lacked documentation showing that one type of review — focused professional practice evaluations ( fppe ) for cause — had been conducted for 26 providers after concerns had been raised about their care . fppes for cause are reviews of providers' care over a specified period of time , during which the provider continues to see patients and has the opportunity to demonstrate improvement .