the personnel needs will be significant . the congressional research service estimated that about 15,000 additional sailors and aviation personnel might be needed to man the 47 additional ships above the previous 308-ship plan . plans to grow the fleet further to 355 ships — and our findings that manpower validation processes are based on questionable assumptions that likely understate personnel needs — could further exacerbate the mismatch . however , the navy has not fully assessed whether the service will need increased end strength and , if so , how much . navy officials told us that if overall navy end strength is not increased , the billets would likely have to be taken from other organizations as new ships are delivered , potentially continuing to perpetuate the gapped billets challenge . our prior work has shown that identifying needed resources and investments is a key characteristic that helps to establish a comprehensive , results - oriented management framework to guide implementation of plans and strategies . this activity includes identifying what a strategy will cost and the sources and types of resources and investments associated with the strategy . other watchstations were consolidated or eliminated . between 2003 and 2007 , the navy transferred some administrative workload from ship to shore personnel , which further reduced the size of ship crews . this corresponding effort , known as pay and personnel ashore , had the effect of moving two - thirds of the personnel specialist positions responsible for these administrative functions from ship crews to shore support units . to further drive down ship crew sizes , the navy changed workload assumptions and the equation used to determine manpower requirements in 2002 . for example , it increased the navy standard workweek from 67 to 70 productive hours per sailor , which further reduced shipboard manning by up to 4 percent . a time line of reduced manning initiatives that were implemented from 2001 to 2016 is included in figure 2 . in addition to reducing crew sizes on legacy ships through the means described , the navy also designed its newest ship classes to operate with smaller crew sizes , relying on new technologies , automation , and shore support to enable these reductions . profiles of new ship classes designed to operate with reduced crew sizes are included in appendixes iii , iv , v , and vi . as noted in the navy's 2010 fleet review panel report , a primary lesson of the optimal manning period is that using unvalidated assumptions to reduce crews contributed to the erosion of the material condition of the fleet . in response to these findings , the navy has partially restored crew sizes on its legacy ships and has increased the size of shore units to better support its ships ( see app . vii for information on shore support personnel ) . in addition , the navy took several other steps to address the declining material condition of the surface fleet , such as the following: establishing the surface maintenance engineering planning program in 2010 to provide centralized life - cycle maintenance engineering for surface ships , maintenance and modernization planning , and management of maintenance strategies .