( app . i describes our overall objectives , scope , and methodology. ) section 6041a of the internal revenue code requires any service recipient , including federal agencies , to file an annual information return with irs for payments made to any person for services totaling $600 or more during a calendar year . payments to corporations for certain services provided must also be reported , such as attorneys' fees and medical and health care payments . in addition , federal executive agencies must report all payments for services provided by vendors , including payments made to corporations . specific information required on the annual information return — an irs form 1099 misc — includes the name , address , and tin of both the payer and payee , as well as the total amounts paid during the year for the various types of services provided . the purpose of the form 1099 misc filing requirement is to enable irs to identify taxpayers who fail to file an income tax return as well as those who fail to report all of their income on their tax return for the related year . irs enters form 1099 misc information in both a payer master file ( pmf ) and an information returns master file ( irmf ) . the pmf is a database that includes all entities that make payments subject to information return reporting . the pmf includes general information on the total number and dollar value of information returns , including forms 1099 misc , filed by each payer for each year . the irmf is a database that includes specific information on the type and amount of payments made to each payee , including whether the payee tin was valid upon receipt of the information return and if the tin was invalid , whether it was subsequently corrected by irs . both the pmf and irmf include the payer's tin . upon receipt of a form 1099 misc , basic information is entered into a temporary irs database . irs compares the payee tin / name combination with tin / name combinations in its records to determine if there is a match . if there is a match , the information is entered in the irmf without the need for additional action . if there is not a match , irs will try to validate the tin / name combination via a tin “validation” process , which entails matching the tin and name control — the first four characters of an individual's last name or the first four characters of a business name — on the form 1099 misc with ( 1 ) a file which contains all social security numbers ever issued and all name controls ever associated with them and ( 2 ) a file that contains all employer identification numbers ever issued and all name controls ever associated with them . if irs is able to match the tin and name control through this process , the information is entered in the irmf with a code indicating that the tin was corrected and is valid . if irs is unable to match the tin and name control , the information is entered in the irmf with a code indicating that the tin is invalid .