gao . aviation security: tsa has taken actions to improve security , but additional efforts remain . process . further , in july 2011 , s&t and cbp reported starting a joint pilot program to implement a new supply chain security technology on selected rail and truck cargo routes from mexico and canada into the united states to evaluate land cargo security devices intended to monitor unauthorized door openings or anomalies and to provide encrypted in - transit tracking . in addition , dhs has not consistently included cost - benefit analyses in its acquisition decision making . our prior work shows that cost - benefit analyses help decision makers assess and prioritize resource investments and consider potentially more cost - effective alternatives . for example , in 2006 , we recommended that dhs's decision to deploy next - generation radiation - detection equipment , or advanced spectroscopic portals , used to detect smuggled nuclear or radiological materials , be based on an analysis of both the benefits and costs and a determination of whether any additional detection capability provided by the portals was worth their additional cost.dhs subsequently issued a cost - benefit analysis , but we reported that this analysis did not provide a sound analytical basis for dhs's decision to deploy the portals . this report addresses the following question: what progress has dhs made in implementing its mission functions since it began operations ; what work , if any , remains ; and what crosscutting and management issues have affected dhs's implementation efforts ? this report is based on our work on dhs since it began operations , and supplemented with work completed by the dhs office of inspector general ( ig ) , with an emphasis on work completed since 2008 , and updated information and documentation provided by the department in july and august 2011 . it is also based on our ongoing work on key dhs programs for various congressional committees , as noted throughout the report . for this ongoing work , we examined program documentation and interviewed agency officials , among other things . our work and the work of the dhs ig addressed many of dhs's programs , operations , and activities . this report highlights our key work in these areas , but does not address all products we and the dhs ig issued related to dhs , nor does it address all of dhs's homeland security - related activities and efforts . to determine what progress dhs has made in implementing its mission functions and what work , if any , remains , we identified 10 dhs functional areas , which we define as categories or areas of dhs's homeland security responsibilities . these functional areas are based on those areas we identified for dhs in our august 2007 report on dhs's progress in implementing its mission and management functions , and our analysis of dhs's qhsr and budget documents , such as its congressional budget justifications .