the directive applies to all fema personnel . while fema corps and surge capacity force members are not fema employees , ocso officials stated that the investigations process is the same regardless of the workforce category . fema has also documented misconduct policies and procedures regarding options to address misconduct and appeals for title 5 and core employees . for title 5 employees the options to address misconduct include both disciplinary and adverse actions . fema corps disciplinary policies and procedures are the responsibility of americorps nccc and are documented in their member handbook . specifically: ( 1 ) to what extent has fema developed policies and procedures for addressing employee misconduct ? ( 2 ) what data are available on fema employee misconduct cases and their outcomes , and to what extent does fema use these data to identify and address trends in employee misconduct ? ( 3 ) to what extent is information regarding misconduct cases shared within fema's personnel management offices and with the dhs office of inspector general ( oig ) ? to address our first objective we reviewed , where available , fema's documented policies and procedures for reporting , investigating , and adjudicating allegations of misconduct across all of the agency's workforce categories , including the following: title 5 employees , cadre of on - call response / recovery employees ( core ) , reservists , surge capacity force members , and fema corps members . to further understand how these policies and procedures are implemented at the headquarters level , we interviewed officials from fema offices with responsibilities related to managing misconduct . we interviewed cadre management officials from fema's three largest cadres — public assistance , individual assistance , and logistics — to discuss reservist misconduct policies and procedures , and spoke with union representatives from two fema bargaining units to obtain employee perspectives . to further obtain supervisor and management perspectives on the misconduct process , we interviewed the regional administrators or their designated representatives , five federal coordinating officers ( fco ) , and 11 branch chiefs from fema regions 2 , 4 , and 6 . we selected these three regions based on factors such as geographic dispersion and regions that typically respond to different types of disasters , as well as those with the highest number of misconduct allegations from january 1 , 2014 , through september 30 , 2016 . the results of these interviews are not generalizable to all 10 of fema's regions or all of fema's cadres ; however , they provided us with both regional and joint field office perspectives on policies and procedures for addressing employee misconduct and supervisory misconduct training . to address our second objective , we reviewed and analyzed available 2014 through 2016 data contained in three misconduct case tracking spreadsheets maintained by fema . in order to summarize alleged misconduct offenses , we created eight offense category definitions and assigned alleged offenses to the categories . to assess the reliability of these data , we reviewed the spreadsheets for any gaps and inconsistencies and interviewed agency officials to discuss the mechanisms in place to ensure data quality .