these changes will not be easy to make . they require dod to reexamine the entirety of its acquisition process and to make deep - seated changes to the setting , funding , and execution of program requirements . in other words , dod would need to revisit who sets requirements , strategy , monitors performance and what factors to consider in selecting and rewarding contractors . it also involves changing how dod views success , and what is necessary to achieve success . i am encouraged by dod's recent efforts to improve the collaboration and consultation between the requirements and acquisition communities . the tests of these efforts will be whether they produce better decisions . if they do , it is important that they are sustained by more than the force of personality . buying major systems is not the only area where dod needs to improve its acquisition practices . in fact , dod's management of its contracts in general has been on gao's high - risk list since 1992 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . contract management remains a high - risk area at dod to this day , in part , because dod is unable to assure that it is using sound business practices to acquire the goods and services needed to meet the warfighter's needs , creating unnecessary risks and paying higher prices than justified . in this regard , in march 2005 we reported that deficiencies in dod's oversight of service contractors placed dod at risk of paying the contractors more than the value of the services they performed . in other reports , we identified numerous issues in dod's use of interagency contracting vehicles that contributed to poor acquisition outcomes . additionally , earlier this year , we reported that the army acquired guard services under authorized sole - source contract at 46 of 57 army installations , despite the army's recognition that it was paying about 25 percent more for its sole - source contracts than for those it had previously awarded competitively . until the department devotes sufficient management attention to address these longstanding issues , dod remains at risk of wasting billions of dollars and failing to get the goods and services it needs to accomplish its missions . since the january 2005 update of the high - risk series , dod has made some progress toward addressing supply chain management problems . with the encouragement of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , dod has developed a plan to show progress toward the long - term goal of resolving problems and removing supply chain management from our list of high - risk areas within the department . dod issued the first iteration of the plan in july 2005 and , since then , has regularly updated it . based on our initial review of the plan , we believe it is a solid first step toward improving supply chain management in support of the warfighter . the third cause has to do with the lack of accountability .