iii. ) hhs agreed with our findings and recommendation . in its general comments , hhs restated and provided additional information on our discussion of the health center program and the new access point grant process . hhs said that the increased score for need and use of extra points improved the agency's awarding of new access point grants in fiscal year 2011 by targeting resources to higher need communities and populations while still ensuring that organizations with sound health center service delivery plans were funded . hhs also noted that increased emphasis on collaboration contributed to health centers and other area providers maximizing available resources while enhancing the service delivery system to better address the community's primary health care needs . hhs said that these factors support hrsa's goal to expand the current safety net on a national basis by creating new delivery sites in areas not currently served by federally funded health centers . regarding the gao recommendation , hhs said hrsa is taking steps to evaluate the effects of the change in the need score and other actions taken to target grants , including for special populations . according to hhs , hrsa plans to use the findings from its evaluation to improve the new access point application guidance and will make its findings available to the public . in its oral comments , hhs suggested that the title of the draft report did not fully reflect the contents of the report , which provides a detailed discussion of the changes hrsa made to its fiscal year 2011 new access point grant award process , including increased weight given to need . we revised the report title to reflect this . hhs also provided technical comments , and we incorporated information from its general and technical comments as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of hhs and the administrator of hrsa . the report also will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or draperd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . table 5 shows the distribution of new access point grants awarded to applicants in each state and territory in fiscal years 2008 through 2011 . it also shows the number of grantees in each state and territory and the percentage of total grantees in each state and territory in 2010 . we calculated the ratio of total health center grantees to the population living in poverty for every state , a measure of the availability of care for the medically underserved . we then ranked them in order from highest to lowest ratio . ( see table 6. )