advantage for the warfighter . redefined national security threats , rapid technological advances , and redefined national security threats , rapid technological advances , and increasing efforts by adversaries to gain access to u.s. military weapon increasing efforts by adversaries to gain access to u.s. military weapon system technology heighten the need to identify and protect militarily system technology heighten the need to identify and protect militarily critical technologies . given the importance of the mctl and dstl , you critical technologies . given the importance of the mctl and dstl , you asked us to ( 1 ) assess the militarily critical technologies program's asked us to ( 1 ) assess the militarily critical technologies program's process for updating the mctl and dstl and ( 2 ) determine how the lists process for updating the mctl and dstl and ( 2 ) determine how the lists are used to inform export control and dod policy decisions . are used to inform export control and dod policy decisions . to assess how the lists are updated , we met with officials from the to assess how the lists are updated , we met with officials from the militarily critical technologies program and the institute for defense militarily critical technologies program and the institute for defense analyses — the contractor that develops list updates — and also reviewed analyses — the contractor that develops list updates — and also reviewed relevant program guidance , directives , and applicable statutory provisions . relevant program guidance , directives , and applicable statutory provisions . using program guidance , we evaluated how the last five section updates to using program guidance , we evaluated how the last five section updates to the mctl and dstl were conducted . we identified 20 dod components responsible for validating updates prior to issuance and interviewed 19 . we compared when sections of the mctl and dstl were last updated over the past 10 years with stated program goals for updating the lists . we identified intended uses of the mctl and dstl through interviews with program officials and review of program documents and applicable law . to determine how the lists are used , we interviewed officials from various dod organizations within the offices of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and the office of the under secretary of defense for policy , military services , several combatant commands , defense intelligence agency , as well as officials from the department of commerce . in addition , we identified other mechanisms dod has used to identify critical technologies and determined how these efforts are coordinated with the mctl and dstl process . we conducted our work from october 2005 to june 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . dod considers maintaining military superiority a key priority and has established an agencywide policy to treat defense - related technology as a valuable , limited national security resource that should be invested in and protected to pursue national security objectives . many dod organizations and other federal agencies have a need to know what is militarily critical to assist in planning program activities related to technology and to help inform decision making .