however , some problems have persisted . call center officials told us that the number of calls they monitored do not provide a statistically valid assessment of their center's performance . designated call center personnel also monitor individual agents to provide agents individualized feedback on their telephone performance . troubled by high busy - signal rates , ssa in 1996 added a nationwide automated menu to the 800 number that allowed callers to conduct a limited number of transactions without speaking to an agent . in 1997 , we identified a number of conditions that limited the effectiveness of ssa's 800-number service . call center staff told us that they typically apologize to callers and offer to provide the desired assistance whenever callers lodge complaints by phone . moreover , they may not record the complaint or attempt to capture and assess information on the nature of complaints . customer service studies highlight the importance of paying attention to complaints and the benefits of having a good management complaint system . as part of its comprehensive , multiweek training curriculum , ssa teaches interviewing and interpersonal skills to help agents serve callers in a professional and courteous manner . for full - time agents , ssa guidance recommends monitoring as many as five calls per month for agents with more than 1 year of experience and unlimited calls for agents with less than 1 year . officials told us that agents are given timely feedback on assessments of their overall performance . some officials also said that when monitors observe agents making an error , they may interrupt the call to instruct the agent on the correct procedure . we used performance data from oqa's monitoring of agents for fiscal years 1998 through 2003 and from oqa's 800-number customer satisfaction surveys conducted fiscal years 2001 through 2003 . oqa officials told us that such monitoring had the capacity to reveal issues that needed to be addressed at the agency level , such as pinpointing areas needing policy clarification . however , because ssa does not routinely analyze the details of agent discourtesy observed through monitoring , it has no way of determining the circumstances or lessons learned from monitored calls . studies conducted on customer service have shown that building relationships with customers and a having first - rate management complaint system are critical to maintaining good customer relations . one study in particular noted that paying attention to customer complaints , regardless how minor they may be and addressing them quickly and completely helps satisfy customers and build trusting relationships . the network also effectively eliminated the busy signal that callers encountered when using the older system . in 1999 , ssa gave agents access to a computer - based application to assist them in handling telephone calls more efficiently . in 2002 , ssa provided callers the option of having their call routed to a designated group of bilingual agents . ssa also extended the hours of agent availability nationwide . a good management complaint system can provide data and information on complaints that can be compiled and analyzed to give insight into where problems are recurring and what needs to be done to fix them or prevent them from happening in the future .