( see app . i for a more detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) statutory provisions that impose requirements on nonfederal parties might not be identified as federal mandates under umra because some legislative actions do not trigger a review and even if the provisions are subject to review , umra circumscribes the definition of a federal mandate . when legislation containing “mandates” does undergo umra's formal scrutiny , it has to meet three definitional requirements , not fall into any of seven exclusions , and impose costs at or above certain thresholds to be identified as containing federal mandates exceeding the cost thresholds under umra . in 2001 and 2002 , 5 of the 377 statutes enacted were identified as containing provisions that were federal mandates exceeding the thresholds . from the remaining statutes , cbo identified 43 examples that had some kind of impact on nonfederal parties but were not identified during the legislative process as containing federal mandates at or above umra's thresholds . for 24 of those examples , this was because their estimated direct costs were below the thresholds . there is some evidence that the existence of umra served to hinder the introduction of intergovernmental mandates , or led to their modification before enactment in the past . there is also evidence that suggests that some of cbo's cost estimates under umra may have led lawmakers to reduce the cost of some mandates before enactment . the type of legislation that a provision is contained in and how the legislation is considered determines if it is subject to automatic review by cbo . if provisions are subject to automatic cbo review , they are analyzed based on umra's definitional requirements and exclusions . the feasibility of developing a cost estimate and the level of the cost estimate is then compared to applicable thresholds . umra defines a federal mandate as a provision that would impose an enforceable duty upon state , local , or tribal governments ( intergovernmental mandate ) or upon the private sector ( private sector mandate ) . exceptions are defined as enforceable duties that are conditions of federal financial assistance or arise from participation in a voluntary federal program . umra does include as intergovernmental mandates certain conditions on federal assistance programs and reductions in the authorization of appropriations for federal financial assistance and the control of borders under certain conditions . a provision would also meet the definition of a intergovernmental mandate if it relates to an existing federal program of $500 million or more ( annually ) to state , local , and tribal governments if the provision would increase the stringency of conditions of funding , place caps or reduce the funding and the state , local , or tribal governments cannot modify their financial or programmatic responsibilities regarding the federal program . a private sector mandate is also a provision that would reduce or eliminate the amount of authorization of appropriations for federal financial assistance that would be provided to the private sector for the purposes of ensuring compliance with such an enforceable duty . umra also excludes certain provisions from its application .