coleman , susan . “constraints faced by women small business owners: evidence from the data.” journal of developmental entrepreneurship 7 , no . other researchers and officials from banking institutions disagreed . they noted that in some cases lending decisions may be made by officials who do not interact directly with loan applicants . further , for other types of lending , such as credit card lending , the data collection prohibition may mitigate the risk of possible discrimination . “unlocking the risk - based pricing puzzle: five keys to cutting credit card costs.” consumer interests annual 53 ( 2007 ) : 73-84 . an frb official said that lenders largely offer credit cards through the mail and thus do not have specific access to the race and gender of their customers and potential customers . second , lenders' voluntary collection and use of data on personal characteristics for nonmortgage loan applicants outside of the ecoa self - test privilege , would also be subject to varying degrees of regulatory scrutiny and potentially litigation , which could serve to deter lenders from using such data for discriminatory purposes . for example , according to an frb representative , federal bank regulators would be in a position to evaluate federally regulated lenders' collection and use of data on personal characteristics through the fair lending law examination and oversight process . further , all lenders that chose to collect and use such data for discriminatory purposes , would face the risk of public disclosure of such practices through litigation . while frb's 2003 final rule is silent on the potential deterrent effect of regulatory and public scrutiny in deterring lenders from using data on personal characteristics for discriminatory purposes , available evidence regarding hmda suggests that it may be significant . according to a variety of regulatory staff , researchers , and other officials we contacted , as well as frb documents we reviewed , there is no evidence that lenders have used hmda data for discriminatory purposes . these officials generally attributed the transparency of the hmda program , through regulatory reviews and public reporting requirements , as serving to help deter lenders from using the data to discriminate in mortgage lending . finally , frb could potentially have mitigated some of its concerns that voluntarily collected data could be used for discriminatory purposes by including as part of its 1999 proposal minimum procedures for the collection and use of such data . frb established such minimum procedures for federally regulated lenders that choose to conduct a self - test and avail themselves of the nondisclosure privilege . these procedures include developing written policies describing the methodology for data collection and keeping data on personal characteristics separate from loan underwriting data ( eg , credit scores ) that are used to make credit decisions . imposing such minimum procedures and requirements for a voluntary program could serve to enhance regulators' oversight of lenders' data collection , processes , practices , and uses of the data , and further deter possibly discriminatory practices . even so , many researchers , regulatory staff , and representatives from consumer groups and banking trade groups agreed with frb's conclusion that the reliability of voluntarily collected data may be limited in identifying possible discrimination in nonmortgage lending .