autonomous from the sponsoring employer . trustees and employers negotiate in setting plan policies , with assumptions , including the discount rate , and methods subject to a risk - based review by the pensions regulator . discount rates for funding purposes frequently differ between the retired and current worker portions of the plan populations . the projected benefits of retired plan participants are frequently discounted largely with reference to u.k. government bond rates , known as “gilts,” and to corporate bond rates . what approaches have select countries taken to choose discount rates ? to address our objectives , we interviewed experts , including actuaries , economists , and other pension experts , who represent diverse points of view and a variety of organizations and constituencies . we also reviewed relevant literature on pension discount rates . in addition , we also reviewed relevant provisions in the internal revenue code , the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) as amended , relevant federal regulations , and relevant accounting standards , specifically the governmental accounting standards issued by the governmental accounting standards board ( gasb ) , the financial accounting standards issued by the financial accounting standards board ( fasb ) , the international financial reporting standards issued by the international accounting standards board ( iasb ) , and relevant actuarial standards of practices issued by the actuarial standards board . we also modeled different hypothetical pension investment portfolios and cash flows and calculated average investment returns using available historical data . lastly , we reviewed approaches used in other countries by selecting three countries with relatively substantial db coverage and ongoing discount rate discussions — canada , the netherlands , and the united kingdom ( u.k. ) — and spoke to experts from these countries . we did not conduct an independent legal analysis to verify the information these international experts provided about the laws , regulations , or policies of the foreign countries selected for this study . instead , we relied on appropriate secondary sources , interviews with relevant experts , and other sources to support our work . we conducted this performance audit from december 2012 to september 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . employers sponsor two broad categories of pension plans: ( 1 ) defined benefit plans ( db ) — in which employers generally maintain a fund to provide a specified level of monthly retirement income based on a formula specified in the plan — or ( 2 ) defined contribution plans ( dc ) — in which retirement income is based on employer and employee contributions and the performance of investments in individual employee accounts . historically , db benefits have typically been paid as a lifetime annuity ( although lump sum options have increased in prevalence ) .