diversity . fcc seeks to maintain and enhance diversity based on the idea that diverse ownership among media outlets increases the number of viewpoints in broadcast content compared to what would otherwise be the case in a more concentrated ownership structure . a “failed” station is one that has been dark for at least 4 months or is involved in court - supervised involuntary bankruptcy or involuntary insolvency proceedings . under the standard for “failing” stations , a waiver is presumed to be in the public interest if the applicant satisfies each of the following criteria: ( 1 ) one of the merging stations has had an all - day audience share of 4 percent or lower , ( 2 ) the financial condition of one of the merging stations is poor , and ( 3 ) the merger will produce public interest benefits . under the standard for “unbuilt” stations , a waiver is presumed to be in the public interest if an applicant meets each of the following criteria: ( 1 ) the combination will result in the construction of an authorized but as yet unbuilt station and ( 2 ) the permittee has made reasonable efforts to construct the licensed facility and has been unable to do so . § 73.3555 note 7 and in the matter of review of the commission's regulations governing television broadcasting , ¶ 86 , 14 fcc rcd . 12903 , 12941 ( 1999 ) ( local tv ownership report and order ) . see 1996 act , § 202 ( c ) , as amended by consolidated appropriations act , 2004 , pub . 108-199 , § 629 , 118 stat . 3 , 99. example , the newspaper / broadcast cross - ownership rule prohibits ownership of a daily newspaper and television stations that serve the same market . fcc developed attribution rules to determine what interests should be counted when applying these media ownership limits . fcc's attribution rules seek to identify those interests in or relationships to licensees that confer on their holders a degree of influence such that the holders have a realistic potential to affect the programming decisions or other core operating functions of licensees . if an entity , such as a station ownership group , is found to have an attributable interest in a station , that station would be included when determining whether the entity has exceeded fcc's ownership limits . fcc has several carriage and programming rules that are designed to support the provision of local content by local television stations . these rules set forth the conditions under which mvpds carry stations' content . some key rules that affect carriage and programming include: must carry and carry - one carry - all . the must carry and carry - one carry - all rules address the right of television broadcast stations to have their signals carried by mvpds serving their markets . stations that select must - carry or carry - one carry - all status must be carried by the mvpds serving the station's market , but receive no compensation from the mvpds . retransmission consent .