accurate . accurate estimates are unbiased and contain few mathematical mistakes . we reported in june 2016 that the estimate partially met best practices for this characteristic , in part because we could not independently verify the calculations the bureau used within its cost model , which the bureau did not have documented or explained . well - documented . cost estimates are considered valid if they are well - documented to the point they can be easily repeated or updated and can be traced to original sources through auditing , according to best practices . in june 2016 , we reported that , while the bureau provided some documentation of supporting data , it did not describe how the source data were incorporated . credible . credible cost estimates must clearly identify limitations due to uncertainty or bias surrounding the data or assumptions , according to best practices . in june 2016 , we reported that the estimate minimally met best practices for this characteristic in part because the bureau carried out its risk and uncertainty analysis only for about $4.6 billion ( 37 percent ) of the $12.5 billion total estimated life - cycle cost , excluding , for example , consideration of uncertainty over what the decennial census's estimated part will be of the total cost of cedcap . the difficulties facing the bureau's preparation for the decennial in such areas as planning and testing ; managing and overseeing it programs , systems , and contractors supporting the enumeration ; developing reliable cost estimates ; prioritizing decisions ; managing schedules ; and other challenges , are symptomatic of deeper organizational issues . following the 2010 census , a key lesson learned for 2020 we identified was ensuring that the bureau's organizational culture and structure , as well as its approach to strategic planning , human capital management , internal collaboration , knowledge sharing , capital decision - making , risk and change management , and other internal functions are aligned toward delivering more cost - effective outcomes . the bureau has made improvements over the last decade , and continued progress will depend in part on sustaining efforts to strengthen risk management activities , enhancing systems testing , bringing in experienced personnel to key positions , implementing our recommendations , and meeting regularly with officials from its parent agency , the department of commerce . going forward , our experience has shown that the key elements needed to make progress in high - risk areas are top - level attention by the administration and agency officials to ( 1 ) leadership commitment , ( 2 ) ensuring capacity , ( 3 ) developing a corrective action plan , ( 4 ) regular monitoring , and ( 5 ) demonstrated progress . although important steps have been taken in at least some of these areas , overall , far more work is needed . on the one hand , the secretary of commerce has taken several actions towards demonstrating leadership commitment . for example , the previously noted multidisciplinary review team included members with bureau leadership experience , as well as members with private sector technology management experience .