ch . a manufacturer official told our undercover investigator that the x - ray enclosure that we purchased is manufactured and sold to dod on an as - needed basis . the official stated that there is no shelf - life issue associated with this product . in addition , a defense supply center , philadelphia official assigned to the x - ray equipment and supplies / biomedical systems office of the technical , quality , and packaging staff responsible for x - ray equipment and supply items advised us that the x - ray enclosure is currently used by the military services , and the army is the primary user . the supply center official noted that the enclosure is a depot - stocked item . however , after checking the inventory system , the official told us that there were currently none of these items in stock . the supply center official confirmed that the enclosure has no shelf - life issues . at the time we purchased the x - ray enclosure , 40 identical x - ray enclosures with a reported acquisition cost of $289,400 were sold for a total liquidation sales price of $2,914 . figure 18 is a photograph of the excess dod portable x - ray enclosure that we purchased over the internet . the enclosure is stored in an oversized foot - locker - type container approximately 5 feet in length . high - security locks . our undercover investigator purchased 20 new , unused high - security locks from the dod liquidation sales contractor in april 2006 . the locks , which were in the original manufacturer's boxes , had a total reported acquisition cost of $1,675 , and we paid a total of $59 for them . we contacted the manufacturer , whose representative told us that his company sold dla 100 of these locks in september 2005 . the representative explained that the locks are used to secure the back bay of logistics trucks . he said that his company was not aware of any problems with the locks . a u.s. marine corps unit in albany , georgia , turned the locks in as excess , and they were not returned to inventory for reissue . at the time we purchased the 20 locks , dod's liquidation sales contractor had advertised a total of 19 lots consisting of 480 locks for sale . six of the 19 lots , with a reported total acquisition cost of $18,423 , sold for $365 . figure 19 shows a photograph of one of the excess dod high - security locks that we purchased in april 2006 . gasoline engine . our undercover investigator purchased a new , unused teledyne 4-cylinder gasoline engine in march 2006 . the engine , which was manufactured in the 1990s , is part of a generator unit . it can also be used with a compressor . according to fedlog data , the engines are required to be issued until current supplies are exhausted . the item manager for this engine told our undercover investigator that dla currently has about 1,500 of these engines in stock and they are still being issued , primarily to army national guard and reserve units .