id . in particular , the csa prohibits all possession , manufacture , distribution or dispensing of schedule i substances , including marijuana , except in the context of a government - approved research project . id . 823 ( f ) , 841 ( a ) ( 1 ) , 844 . some states have passed laws that create a medical use exception to otherwise applicable state marijuana sanctions . california was the first state to pass such a law , when , in 1996 , california voters passed a ballot initiative , proposition 215 , which removed certain state criminal penalties for the medical use of marijuana . in the wake of proposition 215 , various cannabis clubs formed in california to provide marijuana to patients whose physicians had recommended such treatment . in 1998 , the united states sued to enjoin one of these clubs , the oakland cannabis buyers' cooperative , from cultivating and distributing marijuana . the united states argued that , whether or not the cooperative's actions were legal under california law , they violated the csa . following lower court proceedings , the u.s. supreme court granted the government's petition for a writ of certiorari to review whether the csa permitted the distribution of marijuana to patients who could establish “medical necessity.” united states v. oakland cannabis buyers' cooperative , 532 u.s. 483 ( 2001 ) . although the tension between california's proposition 215 and the broad federal prohibition on marijuana was the backdrop for the oakland cannabis case , the legal issue addressed by the supreme court did not involve the constitutionality of either the federal or state statute . rather , the court confined its analysis to an interpretation of the csa and whether there was a medical necessity defense to the act's marijuana prohibitions . the court held that there was not . while observing that the csa did not expressly abolish the defense , the court stated that the statutory scheme left no doubt that the defense was unavailable for marijuana . because marijuana appeared in schedule i , it reflected a determination that marijuana had no currently accepted medical use for purposes of the csa . the court concluded that a medical necessity defense could not apply under the csa to a drug determined to have no medical use . the oakland cannabis case upheld the federal government's power to enforce federal marijuana prohibitions without regard to a claim of medical necessity . thus , while california ( and other states ) exempt certain medical marijuana users and their designated caregivers from state sanctions , these individuals remain subject to federal sanctions for marijuana use . how states implemented registry requirements in the three registry states , such as which agency administers the registry or the number of staff to manage it , varied in some ways and were similar in other ways . similarly , the county - based registries in california had some differences and commonalities . in oregon , the department of human services is designated to maintain the state medical marijuana registry . a staff of six is responsible for reviewing and verifying incoming applications and renewals , including following up on those that are incomplete , and input and update of the database .