reserve bank officials noted that changes in the u.s . postal service's and local transit authorities' use of coins also affect coin demand . for example , in one district , the local transit authority retrofitted its ticket machines to dispense dollar coins , which resulted in greater demand for dollar coins in that district . most of the districts cited coin recycling companies , such as coinstar , as a factor affecting the number of coins returned by the depository institutions and the number of new coins to be ordered from the u.s. mint . coin recycling machines found in grocery stores , retail stores , and some depository institutions have made it easier now than it was in the past for the public to trade in coins for currency or some form of credit , such as a gift card . in some districts , coin recycling has returned large volumes of coins to circulation and to the reserve banks . the u.s. mint paid about $1.3 million for 638 coin transfers in fiscal year 2006 and about $915,000 for 404 coin transfers in fiscal year 2007 . according to u.s. mint officials , the mint contracts and pays for these coin transfers because balancing inventories among the reserve banks helps to lower the volatility of production for the mint and the mint has ongoing contracts for shipping large quantities of coins . however , according to a u.s. mint official , the u.s. mint is looking to phase out the practice of paying for transfers . the official recognizes that coin inventories may occasionally expand in some areas or regions , but believes that such conditions are temporary . therefore , transferring coins from existing inventories may only temporarily delay the production of additional coins to meet the demands of commerce . see appendix v for data on the number of transfers and the corresponding budget for fiscal years 2002 through 2007 . our analysis of reserve banks' order data shows that cpo reduced orders by about 10 percent in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 by fulfilling reserve bank offices' coin requests with circulated inventory . specifically , the reserve banks submitted requests to cpo for approximately 18 billion coins in fiscal year 2006 and for approximately 16 billion coins in fiscal year 2007 , and cpo was able to reduce these requests through transfers by over 2.2 billion coins in fiscal year 2006 and by over 1.5 billion coins in fiscal year 2007 . once cpo makes adjustments and consolidates the reserve bank offices' orders , cpo submits a final new coin order to the u.s. mint 1 month before the coins are scheduled to be delivered . the order includes a shipping schedule outlining when and where the coins should be shipped as well as a 5-month coin order forecast . to calculate reserve banks' number of coins paid to the depository institutions and reserve banks' number of coins received from the depository institutions at the national and district level for all coin denominations , we converted the data from value of coins to volume of coins and then calculated fiscal year totals for each denomination at the national and district level .