we also toured disciplinary placements . additionally , we visited state departments of education and spoke with special education directors about their state's policy and procedures for disciplinary placements . we distributed 2 survey questionnaires — one to selected school district special education directors and one to middle and high school administrators — in illinois , maryland , and north carolina . these surveys focused on the use of disciplinary placements for special education students during school year 2000 – 2001 . the school district survey was sent to 12 selected school district special education administrators in each state for a total of 36 surveys . the surveyed districts were selected using criteria similar to that used in determining the sites to be visited — variance in the number of special education students served , their geographic location — urban , suburban , or rural — and when possible , their overall rate of free and reduced school lunches . we received 30 responses to the survey ( 83 percent ) . a second survey obtained information concerning special education disciplinary placements from selected middle and high school administrators . appendix i explains our methodology in more detail . idea is the primary federal law that addresses the unique needs of children with disabilities , including specific learning disabilities , speech and language impairments , mental retardation , and serious emotional disturbance . the law mandates that a free appropriate public education be made available for all eligible children with disabilities , ensures due process rights , requires an iep for each student , and requires the placement of children with disabilities in the least restrictive environment . in school year 2002 , more than 6 million children aged 3 through 21 received education services under the act at a federal cost of approximately $8 billion . in addition , state governments provided more than $48 billion in additional funding to implement the act's requirements . under idea and the 1999 implementing federal regulations on discipline , schools must follow certain procedures to remove a student from his or her educational setting for disciplinary purposes . specifically , schools may suspend a special education student for up to 10 school days in a given school year without providing educational services . under the regulations , school personnel in consultation with the child's special education teacher are required to determine the educational services needed to enable the child to appropriately progress in the general curriculum and appropriately advance toward achieving the goals set out in the child's iep . in addition , schools may repeatedly suspend a special education student on a short - term basis ( not more than 10 days ) even if the suspensions cumulatively total more than 10 school days , so long as educational services are provided to the student after the tenth suspension day in a given school year . the regulations also allow schools to remove a special education student for up to 45 days to an interim alternative educational setting if the student commits a weapons or drug violation at school or is determined by a hearing officer to be a danger to self or others . additionally , if school officials request an extension , a hearing officer may extend this 45-day removal period .