rita . building professionals we spoke to stated that inexperienced contractors often increased their prices in order to offset the cost of the learning curve associated with using newer materials and unfamiliar building practices . by using experienced professionals to build green affordable housing , developers could minimize their up - front costs . some up - front soft costs of green building , such as obtaining a green building certification can also add to the overall costs . some of the green building organizations , such as the u.s. green building council , which administers leed and southface , which administers earthcraft , collect fees for certifying green buildings . the size of these fees can vary depending on the level of green building certification . for example , gsa found that the soft costs associated with building either a federal courthouse or an office building to various levels of leed certification — from leed certified to leed gold — could add $0.35 to $0.80 per square foot . in addition to the fees , administrative costs associated with documenting the completion of each point category within an organization's green building standard can add to the costs of certification . the affordable housing developers we spoke to expressed mixed opinions on the cost - effectiveness of obtaining green building certification . some stated that achieving green building certification was useful , but others stated that gaining certification was an unnecessary expense or that it was not cost - effective . using different green building standards or achieving various levels of green can also affect costs . the gsa study estimated that the additional construction costs of building a new federal office building at the leed - certified level would be 1.4 percent , but constructing the same building to meet the leed gold standard would likely increase construction costs by 8.2 percent . similar variations in green building costs were reported in a california study that found that a sample of green buildings in the state had average cost premiums of 0.66 percent at the leed - certified level and 6.5 percent at the leed platinum level . another study comparing the costs of green building and traditional buildings found no statistically significant difference in the square footage cost between the leed - rated and non - leed buildings , and observed a high level of cost variation among the buildings studied . additionally , the study found that when comparing the costs of the leed buildings — from leed certified to leed platinum — the square footage costs were scattered among all buildings studied in no discernable pattern of distribution . building commissioning , which is a third party verification process that seeks to ensure that a building's systems are well designed , can also add to the soft costs of green building . the added costs of commissioning can vary and can depend on a particular building's specific characteristics . for example , one study we reviewed found that the costs of basic commissioning could range from $1.50 to $3.00 per square foot in the buildings reviewed in the study . as with green building certification , developers had mixed opinions about the cost - effectiveness of building commissioning .