we disagree . we understand that developing a formal cost - benefit analysis of the overall ers infrastructure is difficult because of the size of the ers and the influence of diplomatic considerations versus strictly economic considerations . however , our experience has shown that relying exclusively on the budget process to document funding rationales often results only in inferences as to why decisions were made . this process lacks the benefit of clear information on the pros and cons of available choices or on the guiding principles used to make those decisions . dod's annual requests for funds contain no evidence that projects are prioritized by importance or that progress toward an established goal , such as modernizing the ers , is being made in an efficient and timely fashion . dod disagreed with our recommendation to include information on ers limitations in its annual performance plan and report along with the other elements of strategic mobility: airlift , sealift , and prepositioned equipment . dod stated that information on ers performance is already included in other documents such as the mobility requirements studies , the annual budget justification documents , and quarterly readiness reports . we disagree that it is appropriate to exclude information on ers performance from the annual report while including information on the other elements of strategic mobility . the ers is an integral aspect of strategic mobility . in fact , air mobility command reports cite ers infrastructure as the top limiting factor in deployment operations . omitting ers information from the key annual performance report gives an incomplete and misleading view of strategic mobility capabilities . dod also disagreed with our description of the growth in estimated costs for improving the ers . dod stated that the different cost estimates we were provided are not directly comparable because they were produced several years apart and were premised on different sets of bases and analytical methodologies . our report clearly lays out these differences . moreover , dod further claimed that we were using the comparison to point to “unexplained” cost growth . whether dod was aware of the reasons behind the increased estimate was not the primary point we were trying to make . our primary point is that dod did not know how much it would cost to bring ers capacity up to requirements because it does not monitor overall costs . air mobility command officials had to make a special query to all the commands to find out what the current costs were and whether they had changed over previous estimates . similarly , when we requested an updated estimate late in our review , officials responded that obtaining such an update would be very labor intensive and time consuming . we believe that the lack of a strategy or system for monitoring progress and overall costs is symptomatic of the weaknesses in dod's management of the ers . finally , dod disagreed with our description of the modeling approach it used to analyze ers capacity . dod stated that our report asserted that the approach it used is “flawed” and overestimates the shortfalls . dod further stated that any modeling provides only an approximation of real - world systems and that no analysis can provide solutions that are 100-percent accurate .