reducing homelessness . by september 30 2013 , in partnership with the va , reduce the number of homeless veterans to 35,000 by serving 35,500 additional homeless veterans . hud is also committed to making progress towards reducing family and chronic homelessness and is working towards milestones to allow for tracking of these populations . for each goal , we also identify our related past reports and provide an update on the status of any open recommendations and matters for congressional consideration that we previously made related to the goal . we also identify a gao contact for our work related to each goal . improve program effectiveness by awarding funds fairly and quickly . by september 30 , 2013 , hud will improve internal processes to ensure that hud can obligate 90 percent of nofa programs within 180 calendar days from budget passage , ensuring that america's neediest families have the shelter and services they need , when they need them . the timely obligation and subsequent disbursement of funds will positively impact the agency's ability to achieve all of its priority goals . although we have not conducted an in - depth analysis of hud's nofa processes , our recent work and a recent bid protest decision highlight some of the challenges hud has faced when trying to award funds quickly and the importance of using appropriate processes to award funds . in our bimonthly reviews of selected states' and localities' use of funds made available under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) , we commented on the nofa process hud used to award nearly $1 billion in public housing capital funds to public housing agencies based on competition for priority investments , including investments that leveraged private sector funding or financing for renovations and energy conservation retrofit investments . in september 2009 , we reported that hud had received almost 1,800 applications for the funds and that its review process had been slower than expected . according to hud officials , this was due to the number of applications with lengthy narratives needing review . further , hud officials stated that their staff were reviewing these applications while carrying out their ongoing responsibilities related to managing the public housing capital fund program . despite these challenges , we reported in december 2009 that hud had met the recovery act requirement to obligate all of the funds to public housing agencies by september 30 , 2009 . specifically , hud accepted applications from june 22 to august 18 , 2009 , and according to a hud official , 746 housing agencies submitted 1,817 applications for these competitive grants . in september 2009 , hud awarded 396 competitive grants to housing agencies that successfully addressed the nofa requirements . in addition , a recent bid protest decision highlights the importance of using appropriate processes to award funds regardless of the time involved .