security awareness . computer attacks and security breakdowns often occur because computer users fail to take appropriate security measures . fdic has enhanced its security awareness program , which all employees and contractors are required to complete annually . it has also developed specialized security awareness training to address the specific needs of its security managers . periodic risk assessment . regular assessments , assist management in making decisions on necessary controls by helping to ensure that security resources are effectively distributed to minimize potential loss . and by increasing awareness of risks , these assessments generate support for the adopted policies and controls , which helps ensure that the policies and controls operate as intended . further , office of management and budget circular a - 130 , appendix iii , prescribes that risk be assessed when significant changes are made to the system but at least every 3 years . fdic has not fully developed a framework for assessing and managing risk on a continuing basis . while it has taken some action , including developing a framework of assessing risk when significant changes are made to computer systems and providing tools for its security managers to use in conducting risk assessments , it has not developed a process for conducting these assessments . our study of risk assessment best practices found that a process for performing such assessments should specify ( 1 ) how the assessments should be initiated and conducted , ( 2 ) who should participate , ( 3 ) how disagreements should be resolved , ( 4 ) what approvals are needed , and ( 5 ) how these assessments should be documented and maintained . in response , fdic's acting cio said that the corporation is taking steps to develop risk assessment guidance . testing and evaluation . a program that assesses the effectiveness of policies and controls includes processes for monitoring compliance with established information system control policies and procedures and testing the effectiveness of those controls . during the past year , fdic has taken steps to establish such a program of testing and evaluation . specifically , it has established a self - assessment program to evaluate information system controls and has implemented a program to monitor compliance with established policies and procedures that includes performing periodic reviews of system settings and tests of user passwords . nonetheless , fdic's program does not cover all critical evaluation areas . missing is an ongoing program that targets the key control areas of physical and logical access , segregation of duties , system and application software , and service continuity . in response , fdic's acting cio said that the corporation is taking steps to establish an oversight program to cover its control environment that will include steps to assess areas such as access controls , segregation of duties , system and application software , and service continuity . further , fdic plans to address each of these areas as part of its evolving self - assessment process . until a comprehensive program to monitor and test each of these control areas is in place , fdic will not have the oversight needed to ensure that many of the same type of information system control weaknesses previously identified are not repeated .