( see fig . 1 for examples of single - engine and large airtankers ) . according to the federal government's 2009 wildland fire aviation strategy , the availability of single - engine airtankers and helicopters is sufficient to meet national fire demands over the next 15 to 20 years , and the availability of aerial surveillance and smokejumper aircraft is adequate , but the forest service's recent large airtanker strategy notes that the economic difficulty for new vendors to enter the market or existing vendors to upgrade their fleets demonstrates the uncertainty regarding the continued availability of large airtankers . the department of agriculture's forest service and the department of the interior's land management bureaus have a responsibility to respond to wildland fires on federal lands . states and other entities — including tribal and local fire departments — have primary responsibility for responding to wildland fires on tribal , state , local , and private lands . fighting wildland fires — which can burn across federal , state , and local jurisdictions — can require significant investments of personnel , aircraft , equipment , and supplies and can result in substantial fire suppression expenditures , with firefighting aircraft contributing to these costs . from 2007 through 2012 , these agencies reported that more than $2.4 billion was spent on federally - contracted firefighting aircraft , fuel , and retardant . in light of questions about the availability of needed aerial support for firefighting — in particular the decrease in large airtanker availability — you asked us to review federal agencies' efforts to ensure the adequacy of the federal firefighting aircraft fleet . this report examines ( 1 ) forest service and interior efforts to identify the number and type of firefighting aircraft they need , and ( 2 ) the forest service's approach to modernizing the large airtanker fleet and the challenges it faces in doing so . to examine forest service and interior efforts to identify their firefighting aircraft needs , we identified and reviewed agency studies and strategy documents and interviewed agency officials responsible for managing fire aviation programs . we focused on those efforts conducted since 1995 , when the forest service and interior jointly conducted the first major study of their large airtanker needs . for each effort , we reviewed the methodologies used and identified the extent to which they included analysis of key elements , which we identified as important for understanding firefighting aircraft needs based on our reviews of multiple academic and agency studies and interviews with numerous stakeholders throughout the fire aviation community . the key elements we identified are: aircraft types , basing options , acquisition models , aircraft capabilities , suppression methods , and aircraft performance and effectiveness . we also interviewed agency officials about each effort to determine the extent of federal interagency collaboration involved . we compared the agencies' practices with gao - identified leading practices for interagency collaboration .