dhs concurred with our recommendation . since 2014 , the coast guard has undertaken efforts to address this issue , but , as of october 2017 , we found these efforts have not led to the significant trade - off decisions needed to improve the affordability of the coast guard's portfolio . additionally , in september 2012 , we found that the coast guard had established an acquisition governance framework and that the executive oversight council was well positioned to receive information from other cross - directorate groups in order to manage the acquisition portfolio . however , while the executive oversight council had been active in overseeing individual programs , it had not met to oversee the portfolio collectively . officials told us at that time that the portfolio oversight was done through the annual budget process . we found this approach to managing portfolio affordability was ineffective and facilitated immediate trade - offs , and did not provide the best environment to make decisions in developing a balanced long - term portfolio . we recommended that the coast guard identify the executive oversight council as the governing body to oversee the coast guard's acquisition enterprise with a portfolio management approach . in addition , this council should supplement individual program reviews with acquisition portfolio - wide reviews to make performance and affordability trade - off decisions that will help ensure the coast guard is acquiring a balanced portfolio to meet mission needs . dhs concurred and the coast guard updated the executive oversight council's charter in 2014 to require the group to annually oversee the acquisitions collectively as a balanced long - term and affordable portfolio . similarly , in june 2014 , we found that the coast guard had repeatedly delayed and reduced its capabilities through its annual budget process and did not know the extent to which it would meet mission needs and achieve desired results . we reported that this was because the coast guard did not have a long - term fleet modernization plan that identified all acquisitions needed to meet mission needs over the next 20 years within available resources . we recommended that the coast guard develop a 20-year fleet modernization plan that identifies all acquisitions needed to maintain the current level of service and the fiscal resources necessary to build the identified assets . we recommended this plan consider trade - offs in cases where the fiscal resources needed to execute the plan are not consistent with annual budgets . dhs concurred , but , according to coast guard officials , the plan has yet to be approved . in addition to reporting on the coast guard's management of its acquisition portfolio , we have also issued several reports on how it oversees depot - level maintenance funding . for example , in july 2012 , we found that the coast guard's depot - level maintenance cost - estimating process did not fully reflect best practices . we recommended that the coast guard conform its estimated depot - level maintenance expenditures with cost - estimating best practices . dhs concurred ; however , it raised several points that we found could limit the implementation of the recommendation .