ideally , a national strategy should contain all of these characteristics . including these characteristics in a national strategy also enhances its usefulness as guidance for resource and policy decision makers to better ensure accountability . state also consulted with components of the intelligence community . according to an official at the bureau of western hemisphere affairs who helped draft the strategy , state did not conduct a specific data call to all of the u.s. posts in the western hemisphere to seek the posts' input into the strategy . the strategy “does not address” an element when it does not explicitly cite or discuss any characteristics of an element and / or when any implicit references are either too vague or general . for some instances in which we could not review portions of the documents that make up the strategy , we used the testimonial information provided by agency officials ; we noted such instances . we asked to review the entire intelligence community assessment but were unable to do so because of concerns over its security classification . we reviewed some excerpts and interviewed the odni officials who prepared the assessment regarding its contents . in three instances , odni officials told us information addressing an element included in the act was included in the intelligence community assessment , but they did not provide supporting documentation . in those instances , we have reflected the information provided by odni officials but noted that we were not able to independently verify their statements because of a lack of documentation . we also examined the strategy to determine the extent to which the strategy incorporated desirable characteristics of national strategies previously identified by gao . similar to our analysis of the extent to which the strategy addressed elements identified in the act , we analyzed all three documents that make up the strategy and assessed how , if at all , the strategy addressed the elements in the act . two analysts conducted separate assessments of all three strategy documents against the six desirable characteristics of national strategies . they reached agreement on the extent to which the measures fully addressed , partially addressed , or did not address the attributes . a manager reviewed the analysis and the three individuals came together to reach a final consensus . a senior methodologist reviewed the analysis for completeness and balance . coding worked as follows: the strategy “fully addresses” a desirable characteristic of a national strategy when it explicitly cites all aspects of a characteristic , even if it lacks further details . the strategy “partially addresses” a desirable characteristic when it explicitly cites some but not all aspects of a characteristic . within our designation of “partially addresses,” there is a wide variation between addressing most of the elements of a characteristic and addressing few of the elements of a characteristic . the strategy “does not address” an element when it does not explicitly cite or discuss any aspect of a characteristic , and / or when any implicit references are either too vague or general .