b . presentations ( such as keynote addresses , conferences , workshops , symposia , professional society meetings , or congressional hearings ) q10 . overall , how effective or ineffective have nasa's efforts been to help you understand how to comply with its policies regarding the dissemination of research results through each of the following routes ? c. agency releases ( such as press releases , posting on an agency intranet site , or agency reports or fact sheets ) 26.4-29.9 q10 . overall , how effective or ineffective have nasa's efforts been to help you understand how to comply with its policies regarding the dissemination of research results through each of the following routes ? overall , how effective or ineffective have nasa's efforts been to help you understand how to comply with its policies regarding the dissemination of research results through each of the following routes ? regardless of how effective or ineffective nasa's efforts have been , how confident , if at all , are you that you understand the agency's policies regarding the dissemination of research results through each of the following routes well enough to follow them ? regardless of how effective or ineffective nasa's efforts have been , how confident , if at all , are you that you understand the agency's policies regarding the dissemination of research results through each of the following routes well enough to follow them ? regardless of how effective or ineffective nasa's efforts have been , how confident , if at all , are you that you understand the agency's policies regarding the dissemination of research results through each of the following routes well enough to follow them ? regardless of how effective or ineffective nasa's efforts have been , how confident , if at all , are you that you understand the agency's policies regarding the dissemination of research results through each of the following routes well enough to follow them ? e. i am not allowed to discuss the potential policy implications of research results . in the past 5 years , have you sought to disseminate the results of your own scientific research outside of nasa ? which of the following reasons describe why in the past 5 years you have not sought to disseminate the results of your scientific research outside of the agency ? i don't conduct research that requires dissemination . which of the following reasons describe why in the past 5 years you have not sought to disseminate the results of your scientific research outside of the agency ? which of the following reasons describe why in the past 5 years you have not sought to disseminate the results of your scientific research outside of the agency ? someone else disseminates research results on my behalf . which of the following reasons describe why in the past 5 years you have not sought to disseminate the results of your scientific research outside of the agency ? i sought to disseminate results in the past and was not allowed to . which of the following reasons describe why in the past 5 years you have not sought to disseminate the results of your scientific research outside of the agency ? my research is ongoing and is not ready to be released .