and safety . in 2012 , the u.s. aerospace industry contributed $118.5 billion in export sales to the u.s. economy , with this sector remaining strong in the european markets and growing in the emerging markets of asia and the middle east . internationally , according to the general aviation manufacturers association , the u.s. has historically been viewed as setting the global standard for the approval of aviation products . in fact , some countries accept the faa approval outright as evidence that the product is safe for use in their country . some other countries , however , do not accept the faa certification and conduct their own approval processes for u.s. products , which can be lengthy , according to u.s. industry stakeholders . these stakeholders have raised concerns that such practices provide no additional safety benefit and result in u.s. companies facing uncertainty and costly delays in delivering their products to foreign markets . this testimony discusses ( 1 ) faa's progress in implementing the aviation rulemaking committees' recommendations regarding its certification process and the consistency of its regulatory interpretations and ( 2 ) the challenges , if any , that selected u.s. companies reported they have faced when attempting to obtain foreign approvals of their products , and how faa is addressing some of the reported challenges . my statement is based on several gao products issued since 2010 , selected updates on this work , as well as preliminary observations of our ongoing study of the the reports challenges faced by companies seeking foreign approvals . and testimonies cited in this statement contain detailed explanations of the methods used to conduct our prior work . for this testimony , we updated the information in our previous work on faa's certification in january 2015 through a review of more recent faa and processindustry documents , including the committees' reports to faa , faa's reports to congress in response to the committees' recommendations as well as additional government and industry documents and reports related to this topic . for our ongoing work in determining the challenges faced by companies seeking foreign approvals , conducted from march 2014 to january 2015 , we reviewed ( 1 ) faa data on the approximately 1,500 applications for foreign approvals submitted january 2012 through november 2014 , ( 2 ) bilateral aviation safety agreements ( basa ) and related documents , and ( 3 ) faa and industry reports and studies . we also interviewed 15 of the approximately 288 u.s. companies that submitted applications for foreign approvals — these companies submitted about 34 percent of the roughly 1,500 applications to foreign countries from january 2012 through november 2014 . we selected these 15 u.s. companies to interview primarily on the basis of the number of approval applications submitted and to represent a diversity of aviation product types ( eg , engines , large airplanes , small airplanes , rotorcraft , propellers , and parts ) . because the 15 companies represent a non - generalizable sample , their views cannot be attributed to all u.s. company applicants .