iv. ) officials indicated that although none of the fires in our sample posed a threat to the survival and recovery of a threatened or endangered species population in the short term , these 5 fires had at least some local impact on a threatened or endangered species or its habitat . fires have complex effects within and among populations of endangered species because their effects on habitat can both negatively and positively influence their chances of survival . for example , a nearly 2,500 acre fire in louisiana's kisatchie national forest had a negative effect on the red - cockaded woodpecker's nesting habitat , while improving its foraging habitat by thinning vegetation — a factor the forest service official reported is likely to aid in its recovery . during site visits , forest service officials in montana told us that the effect of a wildland fire on endangered fish , such as the bull trout , depends more on whether the affected streams are contiguous to other streams than on the fire itself . locally , some fish may be killed , but if streams are well connected , other fish can find refuge by migrating away until the fire is over and then returning to recolonize burned areas . on the other hand , isolated fish populations living in an environment without these critical stream linkages are likely to be very vulnerable to fire . for example , in arizona after the aspen fire in 2003 , the fish and wildlife service removed the endangered fish , the gila chub , from isolated reaches of sabino creek near tucson to prevent it from being killed by potential runoff from burned lands . effects on other species' habitats: agency officials reported that 10 fires had adverse effects on other species' habitat in the short term , while 5 fires had beneficial effects . in some cases , officials indicated that the loss of vegetation caused a loss of cover and habitat for species such as the sage grouse , which is a species that concerns land managers . however , officials stated that fires had beneficial effects on grasses by increasing their productivity , in turn providing forage for grazing animals . in the long term , officials reported that 9 fires had a beneficial effect on species' habitat , while 6 had neutral effects . for example , officials stated that although short - term effects may be adverse , the return to a historic fire regime increased the diversity of vegetation and would ultimately help species like the snowshoe hare . effects on soil: while officials reported that 10 fires had adverse effects on soil in the short term , they reported that 9 fires had neutral effects in the long term . for example , officials indicated that the short - term loss of vegetation cover after the horse creek fire would cause soil erosion and loss . in the long term , officials reported that most effects on soil would diminish , although an official reported that soil erosion after the pony express ii fire would decrease soil productivity in intensely burned areas , and another official indicated that soil productivity would be increased because of increased organic matter released in the sheep mountain fire .