according to u.s . postal service officials , the main purpose of the ncoa database is to maintain current and updated addresses for mail delivery and a change of address form may reflect a change in mailing address rather than a permanent change in residence . nebraska , oregon , and virginia state officials and officials from three local jurisdictions reported that they have difficulty determining whether a registrant's change in address as indicated in the ncoa data is a permanent change in residence or a change in mailing address due to a temporary move or other mailing needs . for example , military personnel may prefer to maintain their voter registration at their home of record . upon assignment to another duty location they may file a change of address with postal authorities for mailing purposes , even if it is not a change of residence for voting purposes . officials from two local jurisdictions reported similar issues for individuals who retain residency in the jurisdiction while attending college outside the jurisdiction . further , registrants who had vacation homes outside the jurisdiction in the summer or winter months could be identified as registrants who potentially changed residences on a permanent basis using the ncoa data , according to nebraska election officials . as a result of the potential difference between mailing and residential addresses , virginia state election officials and election officials from two local jurisdictions reported that registrants may be inaccurately flagged for confirmation mailings . they told us that registrants would not be automatically removed after being flagged for confirmation mailings ; however , they would be required to respond to the mailing or vote in one of the next two federal elections , as prescribed by the nvra , to stay on the voter registration list . officials also told us that they may have to take additional steps to use ncoa data to identify registrants who potentially moved and to update voter registration lists . for example , officials from one local jurisdiction that matches its county voter registration list to ncoa data noted that it can take a significant amount of time and resources to standardize their voter registration data to the ncoa format and to calibrate their data matching procedures to avoid false positive matches . such false positive matches would inaccurately indicate an address change . these local officials said that they take steps to ensure that they do not get an indication of a change in address based on the standardization of an address ( e.g . a “street” to “st” difference in address between the two data sources ) . postal service . election officials can access the ncoa data by obtaining a license to directly receive the data from the u.s . postal service or having their voter registration list processed by a licensed third - party service provider . election officials in the five states we visited compare selected records or the entire voter registration list against the ncoa database at the state or local level and at varying frequency to identify registrants who have potentially moved and to start the address confirmation and registrant removal process .