● physical security . physical security controls are important for protecting computer facilities and resources from espionage , sabotage , damage , and theft . these controls restrict physical access to computer resources , usually by limiting access to the buildings and rooms in which the resources are housed . with inadequate physical security , there is increased risk that unauthorized individuals could gain access to sensitive computing resources and data and inadvertently or deliberately misuse or destroy them . in summary , through the continued emphasis of information security by congress , the administration , agency management , and the accountability community , the federal government has seen improvements in its information security . however , despite the advances shown by increases in key performance measures , progress remains mixed . if information security is to continue to improve , agency management must remain committed to the implementation of fisma and the information security management program it mandates . only through the development of strong it security management can the agencies address the persistent , long - standing weaknesses they face in information security controls . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . ● continuity of operations . the majority of agencies could benefit from having adequate continuity of operations planning . an organization must take steps to ensure that it is adequately prepared to cope with the loss of operational capabilities due to earthquake , fire , accident , sabotage , or any other disruption . an essential element in preparing for such catastrophes is an up - to - date , detailed , and fully tested continuity of operations plan . to ensure that the plan is complete and fully understood by all key staff , it should be tested , including surprise tests , and test plans and results documented to provide a basis for improvement . among the aspects of continuity planning that agencies need to address should be: ( 1 ) ensuring that plans contain adequate contact information for emergency communications ; ( 2 ) documenting the location of all vital records for the agencies and methods of updating those records in an emergency ; ( 3 ) conducting tests , training , or exercises frequently enough to have assurance that the plan would work in an emergency . losing the capability to process , retrieve , and protect information that is maintained electronically can significantly affect an agency's ability to accomplish its mission . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the committee may have at this time . should you have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6244 . ● incident reporting . omb stated that some agencies continue to report security incidents to the department of homeland security only sporadically and that others report notably low levels of incidents . ● agencywide plans of action and milestones . while igs for 19 agencies reported effective poa&m processes , 6 others reported ineffective processes . ● certification and accreditation process .