this can reduce the cost of doing business . the economy benefits when the cost of doing business is reduced , whether that entails the cost of sending out bills for merchandise and services rendered or sending out advertisements to generate business . in other words , according to prc staff , reducing the cost of doing business “increases the economic welfare of the nation.” consumers may benefit in several ways from usps's worksharing program . first , consumers benefit if , as previously discussed , worksharing helps keep postage rates affordable for all mailers . and ( 3 ) what is the legal basis for establishing worksharing rates ? some postal stakeholders have expressed divergent points of view regarding the rationale for worksharing , raising a series of related detailed technical and policy issues that are beyond the scope of this report . accordingly , among other things , you requested that we issue a second report later this year to address key worksharing issues and stakeholder views regarding these issues . in this first report , we discuss usps's and the postal rate commission's rationale for worksharing but do not assess the benefits that they claimed are derived from worksharing . as you requested , this first report is being issued on july 31 , 2003 . this date coincides with the expected issuance date of the report by the president's commission on the united states postal service . the commission was mandated to report on its proposed vision for usps and recommend reforms to ensure the viability of postal services . to address the three objectives , among other things , we reviewed documents that defined worksharing rates and the rationale for these rates . these documents included materials filed in postal rate cases — postal rate commission proceedings that consider changes to domestic postage rates and fees — by usps , the postal rate commission , and other postal stakeholders . in addition , we reviewed usps requirements for mailer worksharing activities and reviewed published papers and analyses on worksharing . to observe the handling and preparation of workshared mail , we visited usps mail processing facilities in florida and maryland that handle workshared mail as well as mailer facilities in florida that prepare workshared mail . we interviewed representatives of groups that filed material on worksharing issues in the most recent postal rate case that resulted in increases in most postage rates , including the rate for sending a letter via first - class mail . these representatives included officials of usps , the postal rate commission and its office of the consumer advocate , mailer groups , and the american postal workers union . we also reviewed material that some of these organizations provided us on worksharing . to obtain information on the legal basis for worksharing rates , we reviewed pertinent laws , regulations , and the postal rate commission's recommended decisions in rate cases that established worksharing rates . additional information on our objectives , scope , and methodology appears in appendix i . we requested comments on a draft of this report from usps and the postal rate commission , and their comments are discussed later in this report and reproduced in appendixes iii and iv .