the department agreed with this clarification . we agree that the change of emphasis has affected the volume of timber offered for sale , which is already clearly articulated in the report . we agree that both the budget and the volume of timber offered for sale have declined significantly . we have included a reference to the budgetary decline in a section heading . we agree that the volume of timber offered for sale from blm's public domain lands is small compared to offerings from forest service or state or private land . as the report indicates , the forest service offered 4 billion board feet of timber for sale from national forests in 1997 , while blm offered 35 million board feet — 21 million board feet of sawtimber and 14 million board feet of other wood products — from public domain lands . see figure 1 . appendix ii includes more detailed information on the volume of blm public domain timber offered for sale from fiscal year 1990 through 2002 . mirroring the overall national decline , each blm state office experienced declines in the volume of timber offered for sale from fiscal year 1990 through 2002 . eastern oregon experienced the sharpest decline — from 56 million to 8 million board feet — representing nearly two - thirds of the overall decline . a blm official explained that eastern oregon offered an abnormally high volume of timber for sale in fiscal years 1990 and 1991 , primarily due to a large salvage logging effort following a mountain pine beetle epidemic . for perspective , from fiscal years 1985 through 1989 , eastern oregon offered an average of 22 million board feet of timber per year . appendix iii shows the volume of timber that each blm state office offered for sale in 1990 and in 2002 and the amount of decline . as a consequence of the decline in the volume of timber offered for sale during fiscal years 1990 through 2002 , the proportion of the volume's two components also changed . as shown in figure 2 , sawtimber represented over three - quarters of the total volume in fiscal year 1990 , but had decreased to slightly more than one - half of the total volume by fiscal year 2002 . in contrast , the proportion of other wood products increased from about one - fifth of the total volume in 1990 to about one - half of the total volume in fiscal year 2002 . beginning in the late 1980s , the program emphasis on blm public domain lands , like that on most other federal forests , increasingly shifted from timber production to emphasizing forest ecosystem health . this shift in emphasis , required by changing forest conditions and needs , helped cause a reduction in the volume of timber removed from all federal lands , including blm public domain lands . as a result of this decline in supply volume , some sawmills that formerly processed blm timber have closed , making it more difficult for blm to market timber in some areas .