omb circular no . a - 110 , uniform administrative requirements for grants and agreements with institutions of higher education , hospitals , and other non - profit organizations , provided some guidance for grants to other types of grantees like hospitals and other nonprofit institutions . in 1987 , a memorandum from the president directed omb to revise circular no . a - 102 to specify uniform , governmentwide terms and conditions for grants to state and local governments , and directed executive branch departments and agencies to propose and issue common regulations adopting these terms and conditions verbatim , modified where necessary to reflect inconsistent statutory requirements . pursuant to this direction , the first iteration of what has come to be known as the “common rule” system was published on june 9 , 1987 . there are currently a number of omb circulars on grants , which provide guidance only to federal ( grantor ) agencies ; they do not apply directly to grantees . therefore , each federal agency has issued largely identical sets of regulations that prescribe requirements that are binding on their grantees . these regulations are referred to as the “common rules.” each agency's common rule regulations are codified in the code of federal regulations . grant programs also share a common life cycle for administering the grants: announcement of grant opportunity , application , award , postaward , and closeout . during the award stage , the federal awarding agency enters into an agreement with the grantee . the grant agreement stipulates the terms and conditions for the use of grant funds such as the period of time funds are available for the grantee's use , as noted by a start and end date . in addition , the awarding agency establishes an account in a federal payment system to execute payments to the grantee . during the postaward stage , the grantee carries out the requirements of the agreement and requests payments , while the awarding agency approves payments and oversees the grantee . the payment management system ( pms ) , operated by hhs , went online in 1984 and , as of 2006 , was the largest of the nine civilian federal payment systems . the system , which handled about 70 percent of all federal grant disbursements in 2006 , serves nine federal departments , an independent agency , a government corporation , and ondcp . appendix i provides a description of pms and appendix ii provides a recent list of department - and agency - level pms customers . according to hhs , pms is a full - service centralized grants payment and cash management system . the system is fully automated to receive payment requests , edit them for accuracy and content , transmit the payment to either the federal reserve bank or the u.s. treasury for deposit into the grantee's bank account , and record the payment transactions and corresponding disbursements to the appropriate accounts . federal agencies pay hhs a service fee for maintaining accounts and executing payments through pms . pms continues to charge agency customers a servicing fee until an account is closed .