vehicles . a majority of households in each quintile of the wealth distribution owned a vehicle across all years in our analysis , although the bottom quintile had ownership rates that were disproportionately lower . however , despite this , we estimated that vehicles provided higher value , on average , relative to other non - retirement assets for households in the bottom quintile from 2010 onward . for example , in 2016 , the estimated average value of vehicles among households in the bottom quintile was about $7,000 in 2016 , compared to estimated average values of less than $2,000 in home equity and about $3,000 in all other non - retirement assets . raskin , sarah bloom . “downturns and recoveries: what the economies in los angeles and the united states tell us.” remarks at the luncheon for los angeles business and community leaders , los angeles branch of the federal reserve bank of san francisco . april 12 , 2012 . ruiz , john m. , patrick steffen , and timothy b. smith . “hispanic mortality paradox: a systematic review and meta - analysis of the longitudinal literature.” american journal of public health , vol . 3 ( washington , d.c.: september 2017 ) . bosworth , barry p. and kan zhang . “evidence of increasing differential mortality: a comparison of the hrs and sipp.” center for retirement research working paper , vol . bricker , jesse , alice m. henriques , jake a. krimmel , and john e. sabelhaus . “measuring income and wealth at the top using administrative and survey data.” finance and economics discussion series , vol . brookings economic studies program . “income composition , income trends and income shortfalls of older households.” ebri issue brief , no . bee , adam and joshua mitchell . “do older americans have more income than we think ? ” seshd working paper , vol . board of governors of the federal reserve system . “changes in u.s. family finances from 2013 to 2016: evidence from the survey of consumer finances,” federal reserve bulletin , vol . later retirement , inequality in old age , and the growing gap in longevity between rich and poor ( washington , d.c.: brookings institution , 2016 ) . burtless , gary . “what do stock market fluctuations mean for the economy ? ” brookings opinions , february 23 , 2018 . accessed march 14 , 2019 , https: / / www.brookings.edu / opinions / what - do - stock - market - fluctuations - mean - for - the - economy ? / chen , anqi , alicia h. munnell , and geoffrey t. sanzenbacher . “how much income do retirees actually have ? evaluating the evidence from five national datasets.” center for retirement research working paper , vol . chetty , raj , michael stepner , sarah abraham , shelby lin , benjamin scuderi , nicholas turner , augustin bergeron , and david cutler . “the association between income and life expectancy in the united states , 2001-2014.” jama , vol . choi , hwajung and robert f. schoeni . “health of americans who must work longer to reach social security retirement age.” health affairs , vol . congressional budget office . measuring the adequacy of retirement income: a primer .