1 for obligation data ) . dod accounted for the vast majority of both the contracts and obligations . contractor personnel were being double counted . for example , the system used to record contractor personnel numbers for the joint contracting command - iraq / afghanistan was found to have duplicates . as a result , dod reported a 10 percent decrease in personnel in iraq in the first quarter of fiscal year 2009 and a 5 percent decrease in contractor personnel in afghanistan in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009 when duplicates were removed . the process used to collect data changed . for example , a 3 percent decrease in personnel numbers reported in the first quarter of fiscal year 2009 compared to the previous quarter was attributed to the joint contracting command - iraq / afghanistan's decision to begin using a monthly data call to contractors to collect personnel numbers . data submitted by the dod components were often of poor quality or inaccurate , which created challenges for centcom to compile quarterly totals . while we obtained data on prime contracts and orders , dod , state , and usaid were unable to provide data on the number or value of individual subcontracts . contract files may contain information on subcontracts , but none of the agencies systematically tracked this information . the value of subcontracts is captured in the total value of the prime contract , but the agencies were unable to provide us with data on what portion of the total contract value went to subcontractors . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from november 2008 through september 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . section 861 of the ndaa for fy2008 directed the secretary of defense , the secretary of state , and the usaid administrator to sign an mou related to contracting in iraq and afghanistan . the law specified a number of issues to be covered in the mou , including the identification of each agency's roles and responsibilities for matters relating to contracting in iraq and afghanistan , responsibility for establishing procedures for the movement of contractor personnel in the two countries , responsibility for collecting and referring information related to violations of the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) or the military extraterritorial jurisdiction act ( meja ) , and identification of common databases to serve as repositories of information on contract and contractor personnel . the ndaa for fy2008 requires the databases to track at a minimum: for each contract , a brief description of the contract , its total value , and whether it was awarded competitively ; and for contractor personnel working under contracts in iraq or afghanistan , total number employed , total number performing security functions , and total number who have been killed or wounded .