planned . the program office has made changes that are to improve overall program management and , according to its december 2006 quarterly report to congress , the program office plans to measure the impact of future management improvements . moreover , this report stated that the program anticipates more changes , including creation of a cargo requirement management board to decide the disposition of all change requests to production systems ; establishment of a new invoice review policy ; and colocation of personnel within a given business area . however , program officials told us that they have yet to define measures to determine the impact of such changes and thus are not yet positioned to determine their success . recommendation: minimize the degree of overlap and concurrency across ongoing and future ace releases and capture and mitigate the associated risks of any residual concurrence . in progress . since may 2006 , the program office has reduced overlap and concurrence of ace releases and has taken actions to reduce potential contention for limited resources by , for instance , decoupling ( i.e. , reducing dependencies among ) certain program components ; dividing releases into smaller subreleases to provide more flexibility in scheduling ; improving planning for development , integration , testing , training activities , and milestones to better schedule use of development and test environments ; and centralizing management of shared software services . further , the program office conducts regular integration meetings with the teams supporting each release to discuss concerns , decisions , and schedules associated with resource availability and is using a software tool to track and mitigate release - specific concurrency risks . however , this tool contains vague or incomplete data relative to mitigating these risks . these data limitations make it difficult to determine the status or the effectiveness of the efforts to reduce the risks associated with overlap and concurrence among releases . recommendation: direct the appropriate departmental officials to fully address those legislative conditions associated with having an approved privacy impact assessment ( pia ) and ensuring architectural alignment . in progress . the program has established an accountability framework that is providing input for both the annual expenditure plan and quarterly congressional reports . however , as with prior expenditure plans , the fiscal year 2007 expenditure plan did not reflect the most current program information . for example , information on milestones , earned value management , and risks were about 4 months old when the plan was submitted to the appropriations committees in february 2007 , and program commitments were no longer current . further , while program officials continue to use the quarterly ace status reports to provide the appropriations committees with more detailed information , these reports are generally submitted to congress 3 to 4 months after the end of each quarter , thus limiting their currency and relevance as well . cbp and dhs officials told us that the delays were due to the dhs review and approval process and that they are exploring ways to accelerate the process . the 2007 expenditure plan did not adequately report on progress against previous plan commitments .