climate change . fs r&d's climate change research is crucial in helping land managers plan for managing natural resources in the future , according to several stakeholders , who told us that because potential effects of climate change are complex and riddled with uncertainty , land managers are increasingly relying on researchers for new information and tools . one such tool cited by a stakeholder is the template for assessing climate change impact and management options , a web - based tool produced in part by fs r&d and intended to help land managers and planners integrate climate change science into land management planning . vegetation management . several different types of accomplishments related to vegetation management and restoration were cited by stakeholders as important accomplishments . wildland fire . fs r&d research has also led to a number of accomplishments in the area of wildland fire and fuel management , according to many stakeholders . some forest service officials in national forest system regional offices noted that fs r&d's research has helped them understand the role of fire , fire behavior , and how fire can be used as a management tool , including ways to effectively reintroduce fire into ecosystems from which it was excluded for many years . in addition , fs r&d has developed a number of tools that help land managers predict fire's effects on the landscape , such as potential paths a wildland fire might take , and thus support better decisions on wildland fire response , particularly in communities close to forests . fs r&d has also contributed key accomplishments in the area of smoke management and air quality . for example , one fs r&d official told us that in california , fs r&d work has facilitated forecasting the severity of smoke and effects on air quality due to wildland fire , allowing the california air resources board to warn the public about air quality concerns . invasive species . invasive species , including nonnative plants and insects , have become one of the most significant environmental threats facing the nation's natural resources , costing the public more than $138 billion per year in damage , loss , and control costs , according to fs r&d estimates . several stakeholders told us that fs r&d work in this area has helped them identify ways to better manage infestations and assess potential or actual damage . for example , an exotic beetle from asia called the emerald ash borer has , since its arrival in the united states in 2002 , killed tens of millions of ash trees in a number of eastern and midwestern states and parts of canada . fs r&d has done research into the beetle's life cycle , methods for detecting infestation , and the potential for using native enemies or pathogens to control the beetle biologically . most significantly , according to one stakeholder , fs r&d developed a model that users , including state foresters , can apply to estimate the efforts and funding needed to most effectively attack this beetle . some stakeholders also cited fs r&d's research into the mountain pine beetle , a native species that has caused significant tree mortality in the west recently , as another important accomplishment .