open . omb staff told us that they do not expect to be able to identify programs for the purposes of data act reporting until sometime after may 2017 . however , they said that they are studying a program definition and alignment to identify a more consistent framework for defining federal agency programs with the aim of improving government - wide comparability and tying programs to spending . the effort is supported by a working group comprised of representatives from the chief financial officers ( cfo ) community and other federal communities . omb staff stated that they are incorporating ongoing feedback from this group into omb's efforts to identify a framework for defining federal agency programs . this was identified as a high priority recommendation in letters sent from the comptroller general to the director of omb in december 2015 , july 2016 , and spring 2017 . recommendations 2 . to ensure that the integrity of data standards is maintained over time , the director of omb , in collaboration with the secretary of the treasury , should establish a set of clear policies and processes for developing and maintaining data standards that are consistent with leading practices for data governance . to help ensure that agencies report consistent and comparable data on federal spending , we recommend that the director of omb , in collaboration with the secretary of the treasury , provide agencies with additional guidance to address potential clarity , consistency , or quality issues with the definitions for specific data elements including award description and primary place of performance and that they clearly document and communicate these actions to agencies providing this data as well as to end - users . implementation status open . omb and treasury have taken some initial steps to build a data governance structure including conducting interviews with key stakeholders and developing a set of recommendations for decision - making authority . in september 2016 , omb and treasury took another step toward establishing a data governance structure by creating a new data standards committee that will be responsible for advising omb and treasury on new data elements and revisions to established standards . according to omb staff , the committee has held several meetings but has not yet provided recommendations to omb . however , more remains to be done . as part of our ongoing feedback to omb , we shared five key practices that we believe should inform their plans to develop a data governance framework moving forward . this was identified as a high priority recommendation in letters sent from the comptroller general to the director of omb in december 2015 and to the director of omb and the secretary of the treasury in july 2016 and spring 2017 . open . in may 2016 , omb issued additional guidance for implementing the data act entitled implementing the data - centric approach for reporting federal spending information ( management procedures memorandum no . this memorandum provided guidance on new federal prime award reporting requirements , agency assurances , and authoritative sources for reporting .