initial military training . in april 2015 , we submitted our preliminary observations in a briefing your committees . for our first objective , we obtained solider identification information and medical - , training - and administrative - related data for the army reserve and the army national guard for fiscal years 2010 through 2014 . we identified inconsistencies in the way the medical availability data were reported around the june to july 2012 timeframe , which we determined had resulted from a change in how soldiers with certain medically limiting conditions were being accounted for . as a result , we analyzed data from the time period after the policy change , july 2012 through the end of fiscal year 2014 , in order to have consistent data over the entire time frame for our review . however , due to the magnitude of discrepancies that we found using these data , we decided we could more comprehensively analyze these discrepancies with a snapshot of the most current data available ( january 2015 ) , from a non - generalizable sample of a combination of six units — two army reserve commands and four army national guard states — based on individual soldier availability data . the lack of training for personnel clerks , staffing shortages , and budget constraints may certainly be additional causes for the data problems identified . we encourage the army national guard to take all necessary actions to remedy these problems they have identified . however , we continue to believe that the completeness , accuracy , and timeliness of solider availability - related data will be improved by taking actions to strengthen the internal control procedures and developing and implementing ways to facilitate timely updates of availability data between all systems . in their comments related to the reliability of its soldier availability - related data , the army reserve stated that the report contains an inaccuracy regarding the data quality index and its intended use and capability . more specifically , the army reserve contends that the data quality index is an “on - demand” report that can identify blank , invalid , and pay - related data discrepancies , and are available to unit commanders to run as needed and to monitor the data quality of their assigned unit . in our report , we state that unit administrators can create “on - demand” discrepancy reports to help address data , but the administrators have to suspect a potential problem with the data before they run the corresponding , issue - specific “on - demand” reports to identify and help resolve any problems . we also state that unit officials are running their unit level data quality reviews , intermittently and that these unit reviews do not check the full range of potential errors , missing or invalid values , and inconsistent data among all the data systems used to track soldier availability .