we welcome any questions you have at this time . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact michael brostek at ( 202 ) 512-9039 or brostekm@gao.gov or george scott at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or scottg@gao.gov . individuals making contributions to this testimony include david lewis , assistant director ; jeff appel , assistant director ; shirley jones , sheila mccoy , john mingus , jeff procak , carlo salerno , andrew stephens , and michael volpe . the federal government helps students and families save , pay for , and repay the costs of postsecondary education through grant and loan programs authorized under title iv of the higher education act of 1965 , and through tax preferences — reductions in federal tax liabilities that result from preferential provisions in the tax code , such as exemptions and exclusions from taxation , deductions , credits , deferrals , and preferential tax rates . can tax preferences and title iv programs be better coordinated to maximize their effectiveness ? mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes our statement . assistance provided under title iv programs include pell grants for low - income students , the newly established academic competitiveness and national science and mathematics access to retain talent grants , plus loans , which parents as well as graduate and professional students may apply for , and stafford loans . while each of the three grant types reduces the price paid by the student , student loans help to finance the remaining costs and are to be repaid according to varying terms . stafford loans may be either subsidized or unsubsidized . the federal government pays the interest cost on subsidized loans while the student is in school , and during a 6-month period known as the grace period , after the student leaves school . for unsubsidized loans , students are responsible for all interest costs . stafford and plus loans are provided to students through both the ffel program and the william d. ford direct loan program ( fdlp ) . how can congress best evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of postsecondary education aid provided through the tax code ? the federal government's role in financing and administering these two loan programs differs significantly . under the ffel program , private lenders , such as banks , provide loan capital and make loans , and the federal government guarantees ffel lenders a minimum yield on the loans they make and repayment if borrowers default . the department of education and its private - sector contractors jointly administer the program . title iv also authorizes programs funded by the federal government and administered by participating higher education institutions , including the supplemental educational opportunity grant ( seog ) , perkins loans , and federal work - study aid , collectively known as campus - based aid . to receive title iv aid , students ( along with parents , in the case of dependent students ) must complete a free application for federal student aid form .