evaluate project results . establish procedures for outreach efforts to potential applicants . provide relevant information , prior to making award decisions , on program requirements , time frames , and review processes . establish a process to provide pre - application assistance . establish a process to notify successful and unsuccessful applicants of selection decisions in writing and provide feedback on applications . ensure transparency by making program documents , policies , procedures , and decisions publicly available . publish information on the number of grants and loans awarded annually . mark l. goldstein , ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , faye morrison ( assistant director ) , martha chow ( analyst in charge ) , melissa bodeau , richard bulman , russell burnett , marcia carlsen , carol henn , ken rupar , terence lam , hannah laufe , benjamin licht , saraann moessbauer , joshua ormond , cheryl peterson , mathew scirè , and sarah veale made key contributions to this report . usda agreed with our recommendations . usda , fcc , and ntia provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the united states department of agriculture , the usda's under secretary for rural development , the chairman of the federal communications commission , the secretary of the department of commerce , and the assistant secretary for communications and information at the national telecommunications and information administration . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or members of your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . appendix i: description of leading practices and gao's assessment key activities associated with the leading practice assessment establish a process that ensures program goals are identified , tracked , and fulfilled . develop performance measures that link directly to stated program goals . establish a process to evaluate and document the results of program measurement activities , including plans for corrective actions . define program objectives . define the program's risk tolerances . establish a process to conduct risk assessments to identify and analyze risks to achieving program objectives . conduct risk assessments to identify and analyze risks for credit programs . determine the program's fraud risk factors and the types of fraud for which the program is most at risk . determine and conduct the appropriate responses to identified risks . develop procedures for the review of grant and loan applications that describes the process ( describing , for example , the number of panels or reviewers , the methods for assigning applications to panels or reviewers , how the results of the review are recorded , how scoring variances across panels or reviewers are resolved , how panels or reviewers ensure consistent reviews , etc. )