( see app . the process is generally the same for 504 lenders . according to sba officials , this process for calculating lender risk ratings will likely change in the near future because its contractor is redeveloping the lender risk rating system . several major changes are being contemplated . first , the contractor plans to use an updated version of the sbps . second , the contractor may use additional variables to calculate lender risk ratings . finally , rather than varying the equation by peer group , sba officials stated that they are considering a new variable that captures the size of the lender's portfolio and the age of its loans . the contractor is still in the process of designing , testing , and documenting the new risk rating system . sba rarely overrides risk ratings , but it may do so for several reasons . these include early loan default trends ; abnormally high default or liquidation rates ; lending concentrations ; rapid growth in sba lending ; inadequate , incomplete , or untimely reporting to sba ; and nonpayment of required fees to sba . sba's lender risk rating system uses some of the same types of data that federal financial regulators and selected lenders rely on for off - site monitoring . the federal financial regulators we interviewed rely on lender information , performance data , and prospective measures to conduct off - site monitoring . although the specific factors included in each regulator's off - site monitoring tools can vary , each regulator uses these three types of data . much of the lender and performance information they use are from the call reports that banks submit quarterly and include data on equity , loans past due , and charge - offs . prospective measures include — when available — borrowers' credit scores from lender files . one federal regulator is also working with a third party to obtain predictive scores , similar to the sbps , to use as part of its off - site monitoring . the large lenders with whom we spoke also use performance data to rate loans , focusing on factors such as portfolio performance , delinquencies , and trends by state and industry type in order to forecast future losses . lenders also incorporate prospective measures , such as fico scores and sbpss . like federal financial regulators and large lenders , sba uses performance data and prospective measures to calculate lender risk ratings . as we have seen , to calculate risk ratings for 7 ( a ) lenders , sba relies on performance data ( the past 12 months' actual purchase rate and the problem loan rate ) and prospective measures ( the 3-month change in the sbps and the projected purchase rate ) . the 3-month change in the sbps is also a portfolio trend that has been incorporated into the rating system . however , unlike the federal financial regulators , sba does not use lender information such as equity and loan concentrations as inputs into its lender risk rating system .