the investigation phase . federal investigative standards and opm's internal guidance are typically used to conduct and document the investigation of the applicant . the scope of information gathered in an investigation depends on the level of clearance needed and whether the investigation is for an initial clearance or a reinvestigation for a clearance renewal . for example , in an investigation for a top secret clearance , investigators gather additional information through more time - consuming efforts , such as traveling to conduct in - person interviews to corroborate information about an applicant's employment and education . after the investigation is complete , the resulting investigative report is provided to the agency . the adjudication phase . adjudicators from an agency use the information from the investigative report to determine whether an applicant is eligible for a security clearance . to make clearance eligibility decisions , the adjudication guidelines specify that adjudicators consider 13 specific areas that elicit information about ( 1 ) conduct that could raise security concerns and ( 2 ) factors that could allay those security concerns and permit granting a clearance . in addition , once the background investigation and adjudication for a security clearance are complete , the requesting agency determines whether the individual is eligible for access to classified information . however , often the security clearance — either at the secret or top secret level — does not become effective until an individual needs to work with classified information . at that point , the individual would sign a nondisclosure agreement and receive a briefing in order for the clearance to become effective . dod commonly employs this practice and , in some cases , the individual ultimately never requires access to classified information . therefore , not all security clearance investigations result in an active security clearance . finally , once an individual is in a position that requires access to classified national security information , that individual is reinvestigated periodically at intervals that are dependent on the level of security clearance . for example , top secret clearanceholders are reinvestigated every 5 years , and secret clearanceholders are reinvestigated every 10 years . in addition to the contact named above , david moser ( assistant director ) , sara cradic , cynthia grant , nicole harris , jeffrey heit , kimberly mayo , richard powelson , jason wildhagen , michael willems , and elizabeth wood made key contributions to this report . personnel security clearances: continuing leadership and attention can enhance momentum gained from reform effort . gao - 12-815t . washington , d.c.: june 21 , 2012 . background investigations: office of personnel management needs to improve transparency of its pricing and seek cost savings . gao - 12-197 . washington , d.c.: february 28 , 2012 . high - risk series: an update . gao - 11-278 . washington , d.c.: february 2011 . personnel security clearances: overall progress has been made to reform the governmentwide security clearance process . gao - 11-232t . washington , d.c.: december 1 , 2010 . personnel security clearances: progress has been made to improve timeliness but continued oversight is needed to sustain momentum . gao - 11-65 . washington , d.c.: november 19 , 2010 .