accordingly , we do not express such an opinion . the purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of compliance with selected provisions of applicable laws , regulations , contracts , and grant agreements and the results of that testing , and not to provide an opinion on compliance . this report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards in considering compliance . accordingly , this report on compliance with laws , regulations , contracts , and grant agreements is not suitable for any other purpose . these two significant deficiencies are discussed in more detail below . we considered these significant deficiencies in determining the nature , timing , and extent of our audit procedures on irs's fiscal year 2019 financial statements . although the significant deficiencies in internal control did not affect our opinion on irs's fiscal year 2019 financial statements , misstatements may occur in unaudited financial information reported internally and externally by irs because of these significant deficiencies . in addition , because of the significant deficiencies in internal controls over unpaid assessments and financial reporting systems that existed during fiscal year 2019 , irs's financial management systems did not comply substantially with federal financial management systems requirements as required by the federal financial management improvement act of 1996 . we will be reporting additional details concerning any new issues relating to these significant deficiencies separately to irs management , along with recommendations for corrective actions . we also identified other deficiencies in irs's internal control over financial reporting that we do not consider to be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies . nonetheless , these deficiencies warrant irs management's attention . we have communicated these matters to irs management and , where appropriate , will report on them separately along with related recommendations for corrective actions . further , as we have reported in past audits , irs continues to face significant ongoing financial management challenges relating to safeguarding taxpayer receipts and associated information , and preventing and detecting fraudulent refunds based on identify theft . although these challenges do not rise to the level of significant deficiencies in internal control , we believe they are sensitive matters requiring irs management's attention . we have made several recommendations to irs to enhance its internal controls to mitigate these challenges . it is important that irs continue its efforts to minimize the risks these challenges pose to taxpayers and any associated losses to the federal government . limitations in the financial systems irs uses to account for federal taxes receivable and other unpaid assessment balances , as well as other control deficiencies that led to errors in taxpayer accounts , continued to exist during fiscal year 2019 . as a result of these deficiencies , irs's systems were unable to provide the timely , reliable , and complete transaction - level financial information necessary to enable irs to appropriately classify and report unpaid assessment balances .