practices , and unit procedures . we noted two instances of issues in record keeping . in one instance , we found that a notation in an internal audit checklist was not noted in the audit report . the problem pertained to equipment calibration documentation and did not have any negative impact on the laboratory's performance . in the other instance , the laboratory was unable to provide us a 2013 audit report upon request . to provide the audit report , the laboratory had to reissue the report with signatures of the current supervisors . we determined that neither of these record keeping issues was detrimental to the audit program or any of the casework conducted by the units . the fbi laboratory contracts with accreditation bodies to conduct external audits of the fbi laboratory at least once every 2 to 5 years . these audits range from the accreditation of the laboratory's quality assurance process and overall management systems to an assessment of how laboratory staff carry out specific methods and follow standard operating procedures . as noted above , ascld / lab is the main accreditation organization that the fbi laboratory utilizes . in addition to the full on - site assessment of the laboratory every 5 years , ascld / lab also conducts abbreviated reviews of specific laboratory processes and records annually . according to an ascld / lab representative , ascld / lab provides an audit team made up of a lead assessor , employed by ascld / lab , and subject matter experts from other accredited laboratories for on - site assessments . the subject matter experts represent every forensic discipline in which the laboratory seeks accreditation . the subject matter experts participate on a voluntary basis and receive training from ascld / lab . ascld / lab first accredited the fbi laboratory in 1998 , and then later accredited it to the international program ( meeting the iso / iec 17025:2005 standard ) in 2008 . ascld / lab reassessed the fbi laboratory in 2013 to maintain the accreditation . ascld / lab also conducted surveillance visits of the fbi laboratory in 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , and 2015 ; and off - site document reviews in 2012 and 2014 . on the basis of our review of ascld / lab documents from 2008 through 2015 , the fbi laboratory generally met accreditation requirements in each instance . the ascld / lab representative stated that the fbi laboratory will undergo its next full assessment for accreditation in april 2018 . in addition , the american board of forensic toxicology conducts on - site audits of the toxicology subunit , within the fbi laboratory chemistry unit , every 2 years and off - site reviews in the intervening years . the audits examine the toxicology subunit based in part on the society of forensic toxicology / american academy of forensic sciences standards that go beyond ascld / lab standards , and according to an fbi official , are more specific to the subunit's work . the american board of forensic toxicology has accredited the toxicology subunit of the fbi laboratory since 2007 , and the subunit has met accreditation requirements in each instance .