thus , we present both calculations . the cpa did not dissolve the ministry of interior . moi's role is to manage more than 300,000 staff in the iraqi police services , the national police , the border enforcement , and other services . managerial functions include setting qualifications and training for the forces , vetting all police and other employees , and conducting the budgeting and financing for moi forces . the moi directly controls the national police forces . however , the moi exercises only limited administrative control over regular iraqi police forces in the provinces , controlling issues such as recruiting standards and yearly budget allocations . operational control of provincial police rests with the governor and his council . mnf - i leads u.s. and coalition military efforts in iraq . under the command of mnf - i , mnstc - i is responsible for leading coalition efforts to train and equip iraqi security forces and to build moi and mod capabilities . mnstc - i helps develop moi and mod capabilities through ministry transition teams and the joint staff transition team , which have a total of about 215 coalition advisors assigned to work with iraqi officials at the ministries . the iraqi government and the coalition transition teams confront a challenging national environment to develop iraq's security ministries . corruption is reportedly widespread and poses a major challenge to building an effective government . a march 2007 dod report states that the prime minister has committed to reforming the government beginning with his cabinet and the ministries . this commitment recognizes the government's failure to counter corruption and reduce sectarianism , which hampers the government's ability to perform . in addition , capacity building efforts are taking place amid ongoing violence and sectarian tension , posing a threat to iraqi government employees . the 2007 increase in iraq's security budget is attributable to increases in planned expenditures and an appreciation of the iraqi currency against the u.s. dollar . in 2006 , inflation in iraq averaged over 50 percent . iraq's official budget is presented and executed in iraqi dinars , not u.s. dollars . the percentage changes we calculated using a constant 2006 exchange rate are the same as those in the official budget based on iraqi dinars . for example , mod's 2007 budget shows a decline in the number of iraqi dinars budgeted for goods and services compared with 2006 . however , when converted to u.s. dollars at the new appreciated exchange rate , the budget shows an increase in planned expenditures . it is therefore important to know the source of changes in the budget . for imported products , the appreciated exchange rate ( which means the iraqi dinar exchanges for relatively more u.s. dollars than before ) allows iraq to buy relatively more imported products for the same number of dinars . however , for expenditures made in iraq , especially salaries , the appreciated exchange rate may not best reflect changes in iraq's budget expenditures . table 1 shows how the projected growth rate of iraq's security budget varies with the foreign exchange rate used to convert iraqi dinars into u.s. dollars .