we agree with that action . although dod concurred with the intent of our second and third recommendations , dod did not agree with the need to replace the aggregate 85-percent supply availability goal with a minimum 85-percent supply availability goal for critical spare parts , establish annual performance targets for achieving the minimum goal , or prioritize funding to achieve it . instead , dod said dla is working toward a readiness - based sparing concept of tailoring different support level goals by item with a link between an item's availability and desired inventory levels rather than one standard level of support for all critical items . additionally , dod stated that setting an 85-percent minimum goal across the universe of critical items would undermine the efficiencies of optimization that may be achieved by working toward different supply availability goals for different parts based on readiness impact . it cited that its customer relationship management initiative , which is scheduled to start in fiscal year 2005 and be fully operational in fiscal year 2009 , will use service level agreements to provide this type of tailored support . it stated that funding would then be prioritized accordingly in concert with the implementation of the new tailored approach . we disagree that the actions dod prescribes will be sufficient , particularly in the near term , to address the need for dla to increase critical spare parts availability . as our report notes , dla is responsible for managing hundreds of thousands of critical parts that the services have identified as crucial to weapons systems readiness . however , many of these parts are not available to meet service needs . dla has been using the same 85- percent aggregate goal for stocking these critical parts as it has for non - critical parts . based on our work , dla was not managing its inventory by developing individual item supply availability targets tailored to desired readiness levels . although dla has started using service level agreements , which are a component of dla's customer relationship management initiative , as our report notes , these agreements have a limited scope and are considered a work in progress . dla plans to execute 11 agreements by the end of fiscal year 2003 and as noted , full implementation for the customer relationship management initiative is scheduled for fiscal year 2009 . furthermore , managing to an 85-percent aggregate goal does not reveal the significant shortages in availability of many individual critical parts . for example , after 3 years of focused investment to increase the availability of over 10,000 critical aviation parts , 53 percent were not available at the 85-percent aggregate goal and over half of these parts were available below 35 percent of the time . dod's response proposes , what we agree is , an optimum approach that is consistent with the desire expressed in the august 2002 office of secretary of defense inventory management study for supply managers to make purchase decisions based on readiness impacts instead of aggregate availability goals .