postal service . the proposed house legislation would authorize appropriations of $1.5 million to interior beginning in 2012 and through 2024 , to subsidize postal services . under the proposed house bill , interior would be authorized to transfer these funds to the u.s . postal service under the condition that domestic postage may be used for mail to these countries . chairman fleming , ranking member sablan , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time . for further information about this statement , please contact david gootnick at ( 202 ) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . emil friberg ( assistant director ) , ming chen , david dayton , brian hackney , reid lowe , grace lui , and valérie l. nowak made key contributions to this statement . robert alarapon , benjamin bolitzer , rhonda horried , farahnaaz khakoo , jeremy sebest , cynthia taylor , and anu mittal provided technical assistance . table 2 shows the assistance provided to palau under the compact from 1995 through 2009 . table 3 shows the proposed assistance to palau for 2011 through 2024 , as outlined in the agreement . ( see fig . in contrast , in 2008 , we estimated discretionary program funding accounted for less than one - third of total u.s. assistance to palau from 1995 through 2009 . legislation has been introduced in both the senate and the house that would approve and implement the september 2010 agreement between the u.s. and palau governments . in february 2011 , a bill was introduced in the senate that would implement the agreement , as written . the senate bill would authorize and appropriate funds to interior for specified assistance . the senate bill would also extend the authority , and authorize appropriations , for the provision of compact federal services in palau . however , the proposed legislation does not appropriate funds for compact federal services . as of september 2012 , the senate has not acted on this bill . in june 2012 , a bill was introduced in the house that would approve and implement the agreement , with some modifications . specifically , the pending house bill:  shifts the timing of the provision of some specified agreement assistance to account for the fact that fiscal year 2011 has passed .  extends the full faith and credit provision of the compact to the u.s. commitments of assistance under the agreement for direct economic assistance , the trust fund , the infrastructure maintenance fund , the fiscal consolidation fund , and infrastructure projects .  applies an inflation adjustment to the agreement assistance for direct economic assistance and infrastructure project grants , and payments to the trust fund , infrastructure maintenance fund , and fiscal consolidation fund .  extends a pledge of the full faith and credit of the united states for the full payment of the amounts necessary to conduct the audits of the assistance provided , as called for under the agreement .