the program . servicers are required to report data when borrowers request a modification , during the trial period , when the trial is converted to a permanent modification , and to report the monthly performance of the permanent modification . the data used for the analysis consist of 4.7 million loans , representing 92 percent of the hamp applications as of april 17 , 2013 . see table 2 for details of the hamp data used in our analysis , by phase of the hamp process . about 11 percent of the loans not approved / not accepted contain npv data . pretrial or application stage completed applications trial modification stage successful trial modifications within 6 months unavailable outcome permanent modification stage ongoing or paid - off permanent modifications within 12 months paid - off loans comprised about 1 percent of the loans . 2001-1 ( march 2011 ) . gao . foreclosure mitigation: agencies could improve effectiveness of federal efforts with additional data collection and analysis . gao - 12-296 . washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2012 . gao . troubled asset relief program: further actions needed to fully and equitably implement foreclosure mitigation programs . gao - 10-634 . washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2010 . gao . troubled asset relief program: home affordable modification program continues to face implementation challenges . gao - 10-556t.washington , d.c.: march 25 , 2010 . huck , p. “home mortgage lending by applicant race: do hmda figures provide a distorted picture ? ” housing policy debate , vol . karikari , j . “why homeowners' documentation went missing under the home affordable mortgage program ( hamp ) ? : an analysis of strategic behavior of homeowners and servicers.” journal of housing economics , vol . karikari , j . “race / ethnicity , gender and redefault of hamp loan modifications,” paper presented at the annual meeting of the american real estate society , kohala coast , hi , april 2013 . mayer , n. and m. piven , experience of people of color , women , and low - income homeowners in the home affordable modification program . the urban institute , washington , d.c. , june 2012 . national community reinvestment coalition . hamp mortgage modification survey 2010 ( washington , d.c: 2010 ) . orlando , james . “comparison of state laws on mortgage deficiencies and redemption periods.” olr research report , no . hartford , conn.: office of legislative research , december 9 , 2011 . accessed december 22 , 2012. http: / / www.cga.ct.gov / 2010 / rpt / 2010-r - 0327.htm . voicu , i. , v. been , m. weselcouch , and a. tschirart . “performance of hamp versus non - hamp loan modifications — evidence from new york city.” new york university law and economics working papers , no . zhang , y . “fair lending analysis of mortgage pricing: does underwriting matter ? ” journal of real estate finance and economics , vol . unemployment . borrowers can receive a 12-month forbearance period during which monthly mortgage payments are reduced or suspended . servicers can extend the forbearance period at their discretion if the borrower is still unemployed .