the selected options were representative of the range of possible options . we did not attempt to evaluate the prospective effect of these options and , therefore , did not come to any conclusions about the advisability of implementing these options . we conducted this audit in atlanta , georgia ; boston , massachusetts ; chicago , illinois ; new york , new york ; san diego , california ; san francisco , california ; and washington , d.c. , from january 2008 to september 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . according to a naic representative , while practices vary by state , state regulators generally regulate prices for personal lines of insurance and workers' compensation policies but not for commercial property / casualty policies . in most cases , state insurance regulators perform neither rate nor form review for large commercial property / casualty insurance contracts because it is presumed that businesses have a better understanding of insurance contracts and pricing than the average personal - lines consumer . we also spoke with risk modeling firms and credit rating agencies . to obtain views on the advantages and disadvantages of some public policy options that have been proposed in legislation , discussed in our prior reports , or suggested by industry participants to increase insurers' capacity ( that is , their willingness or ability ) to provide terrorism coverage , we relied on our interviews with industry participants described above . we also interviewed academics who have written on the topic of terrorism insurance , research organizations , and consumer interest groups . although we selected industry participants to provide broad representation of market conditions geographically and by industry , the number of participants may not necessarily be representative of the universe of insurers , insurance brokers , policyholders , and regulators . as a result , we could not generalize the results of our analysis to the entire national market for commercial property terrorism insurance . for example , according to one large insurance broker , terrorism insurance premiums in new york city can be twice as high as prices for similar buildings in other cities considered to be at high risk of a terrorist attack , and more than five times higher than prices in lower - risk cities . the premium amount dedicated to insuring properties in certain locations against terrorism risks may , on a relative basis , significantly exceed the amount necessary to cover such risks in other geographic areas . for example , a broker in the san francisco bay area told us average terrorism pricing for owners of certain buildings there can be from 20 to 30 percent of the all - risk property premium , whereas the national median was around 4 percent in 2007 . while some policyholders in high - risk cities face challenges , we note that this is not necessarily the case in all such cities .