some of these plans include improvements to deficient bridges . f or example , pennsylvania is using some recovery act funds to reduce t number of structurally deficient bridges in the state , in part because a significant percentage ( about 26 percent , as of 2008 ) of the state's bridges is rated structurally deficient . as of june 30 , 2010 , 29 percent of recovery act funds in pennsylvania were obligated for bridge improvement and replacement . nationally , about $3.2 billion of the $26.7 billion in highwa recovery act funds were obligated for bridge projects as of june 30 , 2010 . this includes funding for 61 new bridge construction projects ( $719 million ) , 644 bridge replacement projects ( $1.3 billion ) , and 554 bridge improvement projects ( $1.2 billion ) . the impact of the federal investment in the hbp is difficult to measure in part because there are no comprehensive and complementary data for state and local spending on bridges . for example , while fhwa tracks a portion of bridge capital spending on a state - by - state basis , the data do not include ( 1 ) state spending on bridges located on local roads and ( 2 ) most local government spending on bridges , thus making it difficult to determine the hbp contribution to overall bridge expenditures . also , while fhwa generates a single , national - level estimate for total bridge expenditures at all government levels , this estimate cannot be used to determine the impact of the hbp by state or by bridge . in addition , while two of the state dots we visited as part of our prior work had data on state bridge spending , none was able to provide comprehensive data on total state and local investment in bridges . some officials we interviewed estimated that , in their states , such spending ranged from the minimum match amount — generally 20 percent of the hbp apportionment amount — to more than four times the state's apportioned hbp funds . the lack of comprehensive information on state and local spending makes it impossible to ( 1 ) distinguish the impact of hbp funding from other funding to improve bridge conditions and ( 2 ) determine the extent to which states may be substituting increased hbp funding for state and local funds that they would otherwise have spent on bridges . more detail on scope and methodology is available in each prior report . to update this report , we analyzed fhwa data and interviewed relevant officials . this suggests that increased federal highway e funding influences states and localities to substitute federal funds for stat and local funds they otherwise would have spent on highways and bridges . the impact of the hbp is also difficult to measure because available bridge condition data cover only some of the improvements funded by the program . as discussed earlier , states can and do use hbp funds for a variety of activities in addition to rehabilitating and replacing their deficient bridges . gao provided a draft of this testimony to fhwa for review and comment . fhwa provided technical comments , which were incorporated , as appropriate .