see comment 2 . the general accounting office , the investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to daily e - mail alert for newly released products” under the gao reports heading . web site: www.gao.gov / fraudnet / fraudnet.htm , e - mail: fraudnet@gao.gov , or 1-800-424-5454 or ( 202 ) 512-7470 ( automated answering system ) . our position remains unchanged . the details in the body of our report demonstrate rhs's lack of progress . most importantly , 5 years after the passage of dcia , rhs had not established an adequate framework or systems capacity to effectively carry out its responsibilities . rural development stated that the department and the agency were committed to fully implementing the recommendations provided by gao and that it had already established an aggressive schedule for doing so . the agency specifically stated that it had implemented or was in the process of implementing three of our four recommendations . rural development disagreed with our recommendation to report the entire accelerated balance of delinquent direct sfh loans to fms as delinquent debt consistent with treasury's instructions for preparing the tror . rural development stated that the inclusion of only the delinquent portion of collateralized installment loans is consistent with industry standards for delinquency reporting and reporting the entire amount accelerated would not represent the amount legally collectible , and would distort actual risk of loss . rural development's response is not consistent with either rhs's own governing debt collection policy and practices or treasury's instructions to federal agencies for reporting accelerated debt balances on the tror . as stated in this report , when a direct sfh installment loan becomes more than 90 days delinquent , rhs is to notify the debtor by certified mail that the entire loan balance is accelerated and that the full outstanding loan balance is due and payable .