gao - 14-832 . washington , d.c.: september 24 , 2014. international labor grants: labor should improve management of key award documentation . ( see app . v for a sample checklist used by dcma in afghanistan. ) dcma's checklist included questions about foreign worker housing , employment contracts , and policies and procedures for reporting potential tip abuses . dcma also interviewed a sample of foreign workers to further validate contractor compliance with requirements related to combating tip . for example , in kuwait , dcma inspectors asked workers about wages , hours , overtime , identity documents , and return travel . the inspectors asked workers how the contractor paid their wages , if the contractor held their passports , and if the contractor paid for their return travel . dcma documented contractor noncompliance with contract requirements related to labor practices and efforts to combat tip through corrective action requests . dcma issued such requests related to contractor labor practices — including housing , wage , and tip issues — on three out of the four contracts it was responsible for administering in our sample . according to agency officials , none of these requests was issued in response to a serious or unacceptable contract violation . for example , on a facilities support contract in afghanistan , the contractor was issued a corrective action request in january 2012 for not providing foreign workers an employment contract in their native language . this request was closed in december 2012 after the contractor provided dcma a corrective action plan . dcma officials stated that it is transitioning its contract administration responsibilities , including its process for monitoring efforts to combat tip in iraq and afghanistan , to the military services . in 2009 , dod directed selected contract administration service tasks to be transferred from dcma to the military services . although dcma continued to administer selected contracts until after the beginning of fiscal year 2014 , dcma officials said that it is currently developing a plan to transition contract administration responsibilities to the military services , including the army's contracts in kuwait , qatar , and afghanistan . state monitored contract requirements related to labor practices and efforts to combat tip for two contracts in our sample in iraq . for a security contract , state used an inspection checklist to help it monitor contractor compliance with these requirements . this checklist included verification of wages and access to identity documents , as well as other labor practices . state officials responsible for monitoring this contract conducted monthly foreign worker housing inspections and verified that workers ( 1 ) willingly accepted their living and working conditions , ( 2 ) were paid in accordance with the terms of their employment contracts , ( 3 ) had access to their passports , ( 4 ) had access to their employment contracts and fully understood them , and ( 5 ) were free to end their employment contracts at any time , acknowledging that certain penalties may apply .