we disagree . for example , we report that without information on the number of bankruptcy cases involving environmental liabilities , epa's efforts in identifying and pursuing relevant bankruptcies cannot be evaluated . further , our report provides information on some of the reasons epa may choose not to pursue bankruptcy cases in court — for example , many chapter 7 bankruptcies involve businesses with few or no assets . our report accurately reflects that epa does not maintain information on bankruptcies it does not pursue . epa's comments show that only one region maintains such data . further , while epa states that there have been discussions concerning collecting these data agencywide , the agency does not report a decision or plan to do so . the fact that one region is documenting its decisions regarding bankruptcy cases does not demonstrate that the agency as a whole is taking steps to better track and document all bankruptcies of which it receives notice . we note that expanding the use agencywide of the close - out memo used by region iii is the type of action / documentation we had in mind in recommending that epa develop a formal process for monitoring bankruptcy proceedings and maintaining data on bankruptcy filings reviewed . in addition to the individual named above , christine fishkin , assistant director ; nancy crothers ; richard johnson ; les mahagan ; and susan swearingen made key contributions to this report . also , catherine hurley ; william o. jenkins , jr. ; jean mcsween ; jamie meuwissen ; mary mohiyuddin ; jennifer popovic ; aaron shiffrin ; and gary stofko made important contributions . finally , greg carroll ; terrance n. horner , jr. ; mike kaufman ; jerry laudermilk ; karla springer ; and joseph d. thompson provided important assistance during final report review . superfund program: breakdown of appropriations data . gao - 04-787r . washington , d.c.: may 14 , 2004 . superfund program: updated appropriation and expenditure data . gao - 04-475r . washington , d.c.: february 18 , 2004 . superfund program: current status and future fiscal challenges . gao - 03-850 . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2003 . hazardous materials: epa's cleanup of asbestos in libby , montana , and related actions to address asbestos - contaminated materials . gao - 03- 469 . washington , d.c.: april 14 , 2003 . superfund: half the sites have all cleanup remedies in place or completed . gao / rced - 99-245 . washington , d.c.: july 30 , 1999 . superfund: progress made by epa and other federal agencies to resolve program management issues . gao / rced - 99-111 . washington , d.c.: april 29 , 1999 . hazardous waste: progress under the corrective action program is limited , but new initiatives may accelerate cleanups . gao / rced - 98-3 . washington , d.c.: october 21 , 1997 . superfund: duration of the cleanup process at hazardous waste sites on the national priorities list . gao / rced - 97-238r . washington , d.c.: september 24 , 1997 . superfund: number of potentially responsible parties at superfund sites is difficult to determine . gao / rced - 96-75 . washington , d.c.: march 27 , 1996 .