postal service . once borrowing authority is granted , the treasury sets the terms and conditions for borrowing . faa could borrow from the treasury , using revenue options such as taxes , user fees , or appropriations to repay the debt , depending on the type of bond . figure 8 describes the process for borrowing from the treasury . in borrowing from the private capital market , faa could issue general revenue ( gr ) or general obligation ( go ) bonds . both types of bonds would require faa to pay interest and principal to bond holders , but the revenue sources used to make these payments would differ . ( 3 ) what are the advantages and disadvantages of authorizing faa to use debt financing for capital projects ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant economic literature , policy analysis , congressional testimony , industry group publications , and stakeholders' responses to questions faa asked them about its funding and alternative options . we also interviewed key stakeholders , including officials from faa , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and the department of the treasury ( treasury ) ; representatives of aviation industry groups ; and academic and financial experts . in addition , we examined faa budget data , trust fund revenue data , faa forecasts , and aviation activity data . we reviewed the reliability of these data and concluded that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted our work from may 2005 through august of 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . details of our scope and methodology are provided in appendix 1 . faa engages in three primary activities: aviation safety oversight , atc , and airport infrastructure development ( see fig . depending on how congress writes the statute , faa could use any revenue option — taxes , user fees , or appropriations — to secure the bond . the costs associated with each of these activities generally depend on the nature and usage of the specific service faa provides . faa safety activities include the licensing of pilots and mechanics , as well as the inspection of various aspects of the aviation system , such as aircraft and airline operations . according to faa , the costs associated with these safety activities are primarily driven by the volume of each ( eg , the number of licenses and inspections ) . atc includes a variety of complex activities that guide and control the flow of aircraft through the nas . generally , commercial aircraft fly under instrument flight rules ( ifr ) that require atc services throughout a flight . such flights rely on faa staff in control towers to guide them from the terminal to the runway , and through takeoff . once in the air and beyond the immediate vicinity of the airport , they rely on terminal radar approach control centers ( tracons ) to guide them out of the airspace in a broader area surrounding the airport . services provided by control towers and tracons are referred to as terminal services .