you asked us to evaluate the program . this report examines ( 1 ) trends in the patriot express program and related sba guarantee programs , including performance of these loans , and what is known about the costs of the patriot express program , ( 2 ) the benefits and challenges of the patriot express program for members of the military community eligible to participate as well as training and counseling opportunities available to them , and ( 3 ) what internal controls sba has in place to ensure that the patriot express program is available only to eligible members of the military community . to describe how patriot express loans approved from 2007 through 2012 have performed , we obtained sba loan - level data from the second quarter of 2007 through the fourth quarter of 2012 for the patriot express program and analyzed them for various performance measures , including default rates . to obtain the perspectives of veteran entrepreneurs who were aware of the patriot express program and appeared to meet the eligibility requirements for a patriot express loan but instead obtained a 7 ( a ) loan , we selected and interviewed a nongeneralizable stratified random sample of four veteran entrepreneurs who obtained a 7 ( a ) loan . we conducted interviews with these recipients to inquire about their experiences with the 7 ( a ) loan and obtain their views on the patriot express program . we also interviewed sba officials and selected lenders and veteran service organizations . to describe other ways in which veteran entrepreneurs accessed capital , as part of our interviews of patriot express and 7 ( a ) loan recipients , we inquired about other ways in which they had gained access to capital . for this purpose , we also interviewed selected lenders and veteran service organizations . to describe the training and counseling efforts sba has in place for veteran entrepreneurs , we obtained and reviewed sba annual reports and other documents related to training and counseling efforts . we also interviewed sba officials responsible for these efforts . to obtain the perspectives of veteran entrepreneurs on the effectiveness of sba's training and counseling efforts , we interviewed veteran service organizations and selected patriot express and 7 ( a ) loan recipients . to evaluate sba's internal controls related to ensuring that the patriot express program is available only to members of the military community eligible to participate in the program , we reviewed sba's standard operating procedures related to oversight of lenders , federal internal control standards , and gao's fraud - prevention framework . we interviewed officials from the office of credit risk management to inquire about sba's oversight of its lenders , including how it addresses the program's vulnerability to fraud and abuse . to determine how sba examiners review lenders for compliance with eligibility requirements for the patriot express program , we reviewed examination reports for the top 10 patriot express lenders ( based on the number of loans made ) from 2007 through 2012 . in return for the expanded authority and autonomy provided by the program , sba express lenders agree to accept a maximum sba guarantee of 50 percent .