, legacy ) systems . the fbi agreed with our recommendations . in july 2007 , we reported on sentinel's implementation of a number of key system acquisition management controls that are grounded in best practices . specifically , we reported that the fbi was managing sentinel according to a number of these best practices . however , we also reported , among other things , that the sentinel cost and schedule estimates were not reliably derived , and that the bureau lacked corporate policies and guidance for cost and schedule estimating that reflected a number of best practices . accordingly , we recommended that the fbi amend its it handbook to incorporate these practices and that it ensure that they are implemented on all it programs , including sentinel . the fbi agreed with this recommendation . in acquiring sentinel , the fbi is implementing leading practices associated with effectively acquiring commercial it solutions . for each of the five acquisition methods that we examined , key acquisition practices are being satisfied . moreover , this is occurring even though corporate policies and guidance do not address all of the methods . in implementing them , the bureau is relying on either its prime contractor's approaches or sentinel - specific plans . the steps that sentinel is taking in light of this void in fbi policies and guidance are notable . to the extent that these steps can be reflected in the fbi life - cycle management directive or other corporate policies and guidance that are used to plan and execute it investments , they can become more repeatable across all programs and projects . effective requirements management is fundamental to successfully acquiring any it system . among other things , managing system requirements includes ( 1 ) controlling changes to requirements by establishing a baseline set of requirements and formally reviewing and approving changes to the baselines in light of expected costs , benefits , and associated risks ; and ( 2 ) ensuring that the different levels of requirements ( eg , high - level operational or user requirements and detailed system and technical requirements ) and their associated design specifications and test cases are aligned and consistent with one another ( bidirectional traceability ) . the sentinel program office has defined plans and processes governing these two vital requirements management practices . regarding the first practice , the program office has developed a configuration management plan that , among other things , establishes a process for submitting requirements change requests and for reviewing and approving these requests . as defined , this process provides for controlling changes to requirements baselines and associated documents . further , it provides for only allowing changes to those baselines that have traversed a series of reviews and approvals by a hierarchy of contractor and program office review boards . more specifically , a proposed change request must be technically analyzed and approved by two levels of contractor review boards before it can be submitted to the fbi for program office review . change requests submitted to the program office are first logged in by the configuration management team and analyzed for technical content .