dod concurred with all of these recommendations . in march 2011 , the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness provided congress with a status report of the department's efforts to implement the database . specifically , the status report noted that a contract was awarded in august 2010 for the development , implementation , and maintenance of the database , and that the database was expected to be functional by august 2012 . the report also highlighted the department's adherence to key information technology management practices , and that its actions were consistent with the recommendations in our own february 2010 report . the dod inspector general's office has not carried out its responsibilities pursuant to dod instruction 6495.02 , which was required by statute . the instruction directs that office to develop policy for the dod criminal investigative organizations , to oversee sexual assault investigations , and to provide oversight over sexual assault training within the dod investigative community . specifically , the dod inspector general's office has developed some guidance on the general conduct of criminal investigations , but it has not developed a policy specifically for investigations of sexual assault incidents . further , the dod inspector general's office is not monitoring or evaluating the services' investigations of sexual assault and the related training of investigators . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 required the secretary of defense to develop a comprehensive policy for sexual assault prevention and response that addresses , among other things , command and law enforcement personnel's investigation of such complaints . further information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from april 2010 through june 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the military justice system is governed by a collection of statutes and regulations , including the uniform code of military justice , which is codified in title 10 of the united states code . according to the manual for courts - martial , the purpose of military law is to promote justice , to assist in maintaining good order and discipline in the armed forces , to promote efficiency and effectiveness in the military establishment , and thereby to strengthen the national security of the united states . all members of the armed forces are subject to the uniform code of military justice , including the punitive articles that define specific offenses . the punitive articles include offenses similar to those found in civilian criminal law ( eg , murder , rape , wrongful use of controlled substances , larceny , and drunken driving ) as well as other offenses that specifically affect good order and discipline in the military ( eg , absence without leave , disrespect toward superior commissioned officer , or dereliction of duty ) .