level 3 – theater hospital care . this level provides the most advanced medical care available in iraq and afghanistan . furthermore , dod's report to congress on deployed dod civilians stated that the department believes it is imperative that each federal civilian understands where , when , and how they can receive medical treatment in theater . although we did not learn of any deployed dod civilians being turned away from receiving routine care in theater during the time of our review , officials in theater said it could be a concern if the number of dod civilians that deploy increases , and that theater medical officials would assess the impact of any increase on the planning process for determining medical personnel requirements . however , if theater officials concluded that they needed more medical personnel due to increases in numbers of dod deployed civilians , we recognize that an increase in medical resources would have to be balanced against other high - priority needed resources due to the force cap limiting the overall numbers of military personnel that can be in theater . for example , the former commander who oversaw military medical units in afghanistan noted to us that while there is no medical - specific force cap , including a limit on the number of medical personnel within the larger force cap , any additional military personnel needed in theater must be balanced by the loss of other military personnel in other areas , such as a transportation unit , and that the force cap has played a role in their decisions in determining medical personnel requirements . additionally , the current commander who oversees military medical units in afghanistan stated that local base commanders can request additional medical personnel if they believe that the number of u.s. soldiers or civilians merits an increase . the official stated that an increase of about 800 to 1500 civilians would have to occur before they would consider revising military medical personnel requirements . at the conclusion of our audit , an army official agreed that if there is an inconsistency between departmental guidance and theater guidance , it should be examined . as long as theater guidance differs from the requirements of departmental directives , uncertainty about deployed civilians' eligibility for routine care in theater will remain and the military medical personnel requirements planning process may not be fully informed by department - level expectations . theater commanders in iraq and afghanistan are providing quicker access to advanced emergency medical care by placing more medical units in more geographical areas to save lives . however , army doctrine , which is the starting point for defining and planning a unit's capabilities , has not been updated fully to reflect these changes in theater . also , the organizational design of these medical units used in theater , which indicates the number and mix of skilled medical personnel these units should have , has not been updated to reflect current practice in theater . specifically , commanders in iraq and afghanistan have been splitting or reconfiguring medical units typically designed to operate in one location into multiple smaller units to cover a wider geographical area .