a number of factors contributed to this decrease . for example , within the airline industry , the growth of the internet as a means to sell and distribute tickets , the growth of low - cost airlines , and fare reductions by legacy carriers all transformed the industry and led to lower average fares . these lower fares have resulted in lower ticket taxes and less revenue going into the trust fund . in addition , in the same time period , a series of largely unforeseen events , including the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , war in iraq and associated security concerns , the severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , and global recessions seriously affected demand for air travel , resulting in a decrease in airline industry and trust fund revenue . since the beginning of 2004 , however , trust fund revenues have been increasing . in fact , revenues from tax sources in 2005 were nearly as high as in 1999 , although total revenues were still below peak level because less interest was earned due to a lower trust fund balance . similar to the revenue picture , the annual amount of expenditures from the trust fund also has generally increased since the fund's inception , but with some fluctuation . one source of fluctuation has been that the share of faa operations paid by the trust fund has varied over time . figure 3 shows how expenditures from the fund have changed over time and how they have compared with revenues . in some years , they have exceeded revenues , but in other years they have been less than revenues . in the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century ( air - 21 ) , the congress created a link between trust fund revenues and appropriations from the fund to try to ensure that all fund receipts , including interest , were committed to spending for aviation purposes on an annual basis . according to a provision of air - 21 , which was continued in the century of aviation reauthorization act ( vision 100 ) — faa's current authorizing legislation — total appropriations made available from the fund in each fiscal year shall equal the level of receipts plus interest in that year , and these appropriations can be used only for aviation investment programs , which are defined as faa's capital accounts plus the trust fund's share of faa operations . further , the level of receipts was specified to be the level of excise taxes plus interest credited to the fund for a fiscal year as set forth in the president's budget baseline projection for that year . as shown in figure 4 , with the exception of its first four years , the trust fund has ended each year with an uncommitted balance ; however , the amount of the uncommitted balance has fluctuated substantially over time , generally increasing when trust fund revenues exceed appropriations from the fund and decreasing when they are less than appropriations . as noted in the figure , the uncommitted balance has decreased substantially in recent years .