dod partially concurred with our first recommendation . dod stated that it concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense refine department - level performance measures so that they clearly demonstrate results , but that it did not concur with the notion that effectively cascading the risk management framework has been inhibited by the current suite of performance measures . dod noted that that a number of defense components — including the army , dod comptroller , the defense logistics agency , and the defense information systems agency — have successfully cascaded departmentwide strategic goals and implemented frameworks to measure their organization's performance . dod also believes that empowering the leadership at the component level to develop measures , while ensuring strategic alignment , is the most effective way of encouraging performance management and increasing its utility . a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . our work was performed from october 2004 through september 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in our report , high - risk series: an update , we identified agencies' lack of comprehensive risk management strategies as an emerging challenge for the federal government . increasingly limited fiscal resources across the federal government , coupled with the emerging requirements from the changing security environment , emphasize the need for dod to develop a risk - based strategic investment approach . for this reason , we have advocated that dod adopt a comprehensive risk management approach for decision making . furthermore , dod and other federal agencies are required by statute to develop a results - oriented management approach to strategically allocate resources on the basis of performance . the balanced scorecard — a concept to balance an organization's focus across financial , customer , internal business , and learning and growth management areas — is one approach for developing results - oriented management that government agencies have recently started to adopt . at the direction of the secretary of defense , dod developed a risk management framework that dod later aligned with its results - oriented management activities through a dod balanced scorecard . an emerging challenge for the federal government involves the need for the completion of comprehensive national threat and risk assessments in a variety of areas . for example , emerging requirements from the changing security environment , coupled with increasingly limited fiscal resources across the federal government , emphasize the need for agencies to adopt a sound approach to establishing resource decisions . we have advocated that the federal government , including dod , adopt a comprehensive threat or risk management approach as a framework for decision making that fully links strategic goals to plans and budgets , assesses values and risks of various courses of actions as a tool for setting priorities and allocating resources , and provides for the use of performance measures to assess outcomes . based on our review of the literature , as shown in figure 1 , the goal of risk management is to integrate systematic concern for risk into the usual cycle of agency decision making and implementation .