yes . please add your agency's definition of unnecessary here: no . in response to omb m - 07-16 , did your agency develop a baseline inventory of agency and contractor systems and programs2 that collected ssns as part of your initial plan / efforts to reduce the unnecessary collection and use of ssns ? yes . ( mm / yyyy ) c. what is your level of participation in this group ? if no , please explain why . does your agency have a current and complete inventory of agency and contractor systems and programs that collect and use ssns ? yes . if yes , please provide the inventory to gao in an excel file format . please include the name of each system and program and the approximate number of records in each , as of june 30 , 2016 . if no , please explain why . since the issuance of omb m - 07-16 , has your agency conducted or participated in any: committees , task forces , inter - agency committees , external groups or associations , or other governance groups whose purpose included the reduction of unnecessary collection and use of ssns in governmental systems and programs ? for which of the following reasons do your systems and programs collect and use ssns ? please provide the following information regarding your participation in each group . ( check all that apply ) a . federal employment ( hiring , pay , benefits ) b . government benefits / services ( including , but not limited to: debt collection , entitlement programs or benefits , grant programs , healthcare , loans , and other services ) c. criminal law enforcement d. statistical and other research purposes f. other ( please describe ) 4 . does your agency and / or contractors collect and use ssns from the members of the public , contractors , or agency employees ? ( check all that apply ) 5 . the office of management and budget ( omb ) memorandum m - 07-16 required agencies to develop a plan to reduce the unnecessary collection and use of ssns . for this purpose , did your agency define what would constitute an unnecessary collection and use of ssns ? yes – please answer question 9 no – please continue to question 10 don't know – please continue to question 10 9 . external group ( private sector ) a . when was the group formed ? ( mm / yyyy ) ____________ b . is the group still in operation ? if no , when did the group stop operating ? leadership role ( chair , co - chair ) d. briefly describe the purpose and major goals or initiatives of this 10 . since the issuance of omb m - 07-16 , please describe the challenges , if any , your agency has faced in reducing the unnecessary collection and use of ssns . does your agency have any suggestions or additional information that could be helpful to the continued government efforts to reduce of unnecessary collection and use of ssns ?