schools that do not reach the state target will generally not make ayp . the law indicates that states are expected to close achievement gaps , but does not specify annual targets to measure progress toward doing so . states , thus , have flexibility in the rate at which they close these gaps . to determine the extent that achievement gaps are closing , states measure the difference in the percentage of students in designated student groups and their peers that reach proficiency . for example , an achievement gap exists if 40 percent of a school's non - economically disadvantaged students were proficient compared with only 16 percent of economically disadvantaged students , a gap of 24 percentage points . to close the gap , the percentage of students in the economically disadvantaged group that reaches proficiency would have to increase at a faster rate than that of their peers . if a school misses its status model target in a single year , the law includes a “safe harbor” provision that provides a way for schools that are showing significant increases in proficiency rates of student groups to make ayp . safe harbor measures academic performance in a way that is similar to certain growth models do and allows a school to make ayp by reducing the percentage of students in designated student groups that were not proficient by 10 percent , so long as the groups also show progress on another academic indicator . states may submit proposals for the pilot again this fall . states must ensure that test results are comparable from one year to the next and possibly from one grade to the next , both of which are especially challenging when test questions and formats change . for example , in a state with a status model target of 40 percent proficient , a school could make ayp under safe harbor if 63 percent of a student group was not proficient compared to 70 percent in the previous year . the upcoming reauthorization of the law presents an opportunity to discuss some key issues associated with the act . to measure whether schools are making adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) toward having all students proficient by 2014 , states set annual proficiency targets using an approach known as a status model , which calculates test scores 1 year at a time . with status models , states or districts determine whether schools make ayp based on performance for the year while generally not taking into account how much better or worse the school did than during the previous year . thus , a school that is showing significant improvement in student achievement but has too few students at the proficient level would not likely make ayp . in addition to determining whether schools meet proficiency targets , some states have interest in also recognizing schools that make progress toward nclba goals .