administration . fema also obligates funds from the drf to cover its administrative costs — that is , costs that support the delivery of disaster assistance . fema's administrative costs include the salary and travel costs for the disaster workforce , rent and security expenses associated with field operation locations , and supplies and information technology for field operation staff , among other things . in march 2011 , the white house issued presidential policy directive 8: national preparedness ( ppd - 8 ) with the goal of strengthening the security and resilience of the nation through systematic preparation for the threats that pose the greatest risk . ppd - 8 called for the development of a series of policy and planning documents in five mission areas — prevention , protection , mitigation , response , and recovery — to explain and guide the nation's approach for ensuring and enhancing national preparedness for a wide range of threats and hazards . these national planning frameworks serve as the basis for mission area activities within fema , throughout the federal government , and at the state and local levels . among other functions , the frameworks describe the coordinating structures and alignment of key roles and responsibilities to federal agencies and are integrated to ensure interoperability across all mission areas in mitigating , responding to , and recovering from a wide range of both stafford - act and non - stafford act disasters and emergencies . the following three frameworks are relevant to this report: the national mitigation framework establishes a common platform and forum for coordinating and addressing how the nation manages risk through mitigation capabilities . mitigation reduces the impact of disasters by supporting protection and prevention activities , easing response , and speeding recovery to create better prepared and more resilient communities . this framework addresses how the nation will develop , employ , and coordinate core mitigation capabilities to reduce loss of life and property by lessening the impact of disasters . mitigation activities are not limited to eligible activities within the stafford act . the national response framework ( nrf ) describes how the nation responds to all types of disasters and emergencies . the nrf is the overarching interagency response coordination structure for both stafford act and non - stafford act incidents , and describes specific authorities and best practices for managing incidents ranging in scope from local to large - scale , among other things . the nrf identifies 14 emergency support functions ( esf ) that serve as the federal government's primary coordinating structure for building , sustaining , and delivering response capabilities . esf annexes to the nrf describe the federal coordinating structures that group resources and capabilities into functional areas that are most frequently needed in a national response . each esf consists of a federal department or agency designated as the coordinating agency along with a number of primary and support agencies . the national disaster recovery framework ( ndrf ) establishes a comprehensive structure to enhance the nation's ability to work together , both before and after a disaster , to effectively deliver recovery assistance through the coordinated efforts of federal , state , local , and tribal governments and nongovernmental organizations .