events . terrorist attacks , both successful and foiled , can also lead to the issuance of directives . for example , in response to a terrorist plot in july 2017 , tsa issued security directives and emergency amendments in september 2017 requiring air carriers transporting cargo to the united states from last point of departure airports in turkey to submit advance cargo data to dhs . results of foreign airport assessments and air carrier inspections . tsa may issue directives requiring air carriers to implement security measures to account for vulnerabilities at foreign airports identified during tsa assessments ( eg , inadequate perimeter fencing ) . through its foreign airport assessment program , tsa determines whether foreign airports that provide service to the united states maintain and carry out effective security measures . tsa does not have authority to impose or otherwise enforce security requirements at foreign airports and , therefore , often seeks to address security vulnerabilities it identifies by working with domestic and foreign air carriers to implement security measures to mitigate any identified vulnerabilities , as appropriate , while also working with the foreign governments to address the vulnerabilities . measures required by directives to mitigate vulnerabilities identified during foreign airport assessments include screening passengers at the boarding gate and posting guards around parked aircraft . air carriers must implement the security measures set forth in applicable directives in addition to other requirements imposed and enforced by tsa to remain compliant with tsa security requirements . however , tsa may approve the use of an alternative measure used in place of an existing measure required by a directive if tsa determines the alternative measure will achieve the required level of security . for example , an air carrier may request to use a different screening technology than specified in a directive , which tsa could approve if it determines the security outcome is commensurate , according to tsa officials . to ensure that air carriers meet applicable security requirements , including those imposed through directives , tsa conducts inspections of domestic and foreign air carriers . as of march 2019 , there were 46 tsa directives related to air carrier operations at last point of departure airports in effect . these directives most often applied to passenger operations in specific foreign locations ( see fig . the characteristics of the 46 directives vary in a number of ways . for example: of these directives , 25 were for foreign air carriers and 21 were for domestic air carriers . more than half of the current directives were issued prior to 2014 , and most have a stated duration of 2 years or less . according to tsa officials and corroborated by our analysis , threat - driven directives , just over 60 percent of all directives , are generally in effect for about a year . our analysis also shows that all directives with 3-year durations pertain to cargo - related threats , which tsa officials said are unlikely to change in the near term .