transition assistance . usaid has begun its transition assistance , including rebuilding shelters and helping restore livelihoods through microenterprise support . however , usaid may face difficulties meeting its shelter construction cost and schedule estimates . for example , 2 months after agreeing to build 1,000 houses for $4,500 each , the ngo implementing the project informed usaid that , because of escalating prices for fuel , building materials , and labor , the unit cost had risen more than 60 percent , to $7,000 . the ngo has tentatively agreed to reduce its budget for other usaid - funded activities , such as upgrading an ice - making facility to assist the fishing industry , and will attempt to solicit private donations to meet its housing commitment . usaid has begun many of its longer term reconstruction efforts in sri lanka . by the end of 2005 , the agency had obligated 100 percent of its funds and expended approximately 2 percent of reconstruction funding . usaid has started its signature project , which includes building a bridge and other infrastructure , addressing coastal management issues , and constructing vocational education facilities . however , primarily because of shortages of labor and materials , the project faces potential cost and schedule overruns even though it is currently slightly ahead of schedule . usaid has also begun its small - scale infrastructure , governance , and transition assistance projects . as of january 31 , 2006 , usaid had obligated all $85 million ( 100 percent ) and expended about $2 million ( 2 percent ) of the funds budgeted for longer - term reconstruction efforts in sri lanka ( see table 5 ) . usaid's signature project in sri lanka began in september 2005 , when the agency signed a contract with a major u.s. design and construction management firm . all components of the project — particularly the construction of a bridge at arugam bay in eastern sri lanka , where tourism is a vital component of the local economy — are consistent with the government of sri lanka's strategic reconstruction plan . the signature project has three components ( see fig . 5 for the planned locations ) . construction of a bridge and other infrastructure . these activities , largely focused on the arugam bay area of eastern sri lanka , include rebuilding a bridge spanning the bay and constructing a water treatment facility for nearby towns . three ports in southern sri lanka will also be rehabilitated . provision of coastal management training . a management organization will provide training in construction and tourism - related skills that usaid considers essential to rebuilding and reactivating the economy in the arugam bay area . as of december 31 , 2005 , the contractor had completed some assessments and plans , but construction work had not yet begun . construction of vocational education facilities . this component of the project includes constructing two schools and reconstructing approximately eight others . as in indonesia , several factors may hamper the completion of usaid's signature project in sri lanka . limited availability and rising costs of materials and skilled labor .