not provided . not provided . reason not to implement . since dod components already encourage return home visits , roundtrip travel for spouse is more costly . dod will not pursue legislatively authority . much of the hiring processes within dod have already been automated . are currently reviewing their individual hiring processes to streamline and find additional automation opportunities where appropriate . as of september 30 , 2001 , approximately 5,300 employees across dod were participating in the project to improve the quality and morale of the at&l workforce as well as the management of it . the principal deputy under secretary of defense ( at&l ) chartered ses - level experts to serve as functional advisors ( fas ) for each at&l career field to act as subject matter experts on the qualifications and career development requirements for their assigned career fields . opm established higher pay rates for new and currently employed computer specialists , computer engineers , and computer scientists at grades gs - 5 , 7 , 9 , 11 , and 12 . establish special pay rates for information technology specialists 5 . increase bonus ceilings the managerial flexibility act of 2001 provided authority to pay larger recruitment and relocation bonuses based on the length of an agreed - upon period . authority was granted . the fy 2002 national defense authorization act includes vera and vsip authority for workplace restructuring in fy 2002 and fy 2003 . the administration has introduced legislation to make authority permanently available throughout the federal workforce . dod is not pursuing legislation allowing this program . not provided . dod reported actions taken or future milestonesnot provided . not provided . not provided . not provided . expand course equivalencies . functional advisors chartered to advise dau on training management . full implementation of online registration capability . all the directors of the acquisition career management ( dacm's ) are actively involved in training resources and training quota management as a primary function of their offices . dod reported actions taken or future milestonesservices have well - established career broadening programs . army / ousd ( at&l ) rotational program will be established . defense contract management agency ( dcma ) professional enhance program . the defense information systems agency ( disa ) – executive development leadership program . handbook published ( see #14 ) to encourage use of existing authorities for employee incentive programs . dod tele - work policy published that requires dod components to offer tele - work to 25 percent of the eligible civilian workforce the first year of implementation and to increase that by 25 percent in each of the subsequent 3 years . dod also encourages use of other flexibilities such as leave sharing , sick leave to care for family members , and job sharing . dod's components provide health and wellness programs , employee assistance and family advocacy programs , alternative dispute resolution , and other programs designed to increase the morale and productivity of the civilian workforce . expand distance learning opportunities . conduct workforce survey to determine workforce enhancements .