this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that either subcommittee chairman or members may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact me at ( 312 ) 220-7600 . sheila avruch , bonnie brown , paul cotton , and robert dee also made key contributions to this statement . medicare could benefit from various contracting reforms . medicare contracting for intermediaries and carriers differs from that of most federal programs . program officials have told us they are optimistic about their ability to act more quickly if contracting reform legislation were enacted , given the lessons they have learned . however , we expect that it would take cms a significant amount of time to develop its implementation strategy and undertake all the necessary steps to take full advantage of any changes in its contracting authority . cms took an incremental approach to awarding its psc task orders , and the same would be prudent for implementing any changes in medicare's claims administration contracting authorities . even after new contractors are hired , cms should not expect immediate results . the psc experience demonstrates that it will take time for them to begin performing their duties . pscs had to hire staff , obtain operating space and equipment , and develop the systems needed to ultimately fulfill contract requirements – – activities that often took many months to complete . without sufficient start - up time , new contractors might not operate effectively and services to beneficiaries or providers could be disrupted . developing a strategy for how to incorporate functional contractors into the program and coordinate their activities is key . while there may be benefits from specialization , having multiple companies performing different claims administration tasks could easily create coordination difficulties for the contractors , providers , and cms staff . for example , between 1997 and 2000 , hcfa contracted with a claims administration contractor that subcontracted with another company for the review of the medical necessity of claims before they were paid . intermediaries process claims from hospitals and other institutional providers under part a while carriers process part b claims . agencies are to use contractors that have a track record of successful past performance or that demonstrate a current superior ability to perform . pscs and the claims administration contractors need to coordinate their activities in cases where the pscs assumed responsibility for some or all of the program safeguard functions previously performed by the contractors . the social security act now limits the agency's ability to terminate intermediaries and carriers , and the provisions are one - sided . the intermediaries' and carriers' responsibilities include: reviewing and paying claims ; maintaining program safeguards to prevent inappropriate payment ; and educating and responding to provider and beneficiary concerns . most federal agencies , under the competition in contracting act and its implementing regulations known as the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , generally may contract with any qualified entity for any authorized purpose so long as that entity is not debarred from government contracting and the contract is not for what is essentially a government function . for example , there is no full and open competition for intermediary or carrier contracts .