workforce . fai reported that while its spending plan for fiscal year 2012 could provide $3 million for courses , training requests submitted by the agencies totaled in excess of $18 million . fai is working with a number of vendors who provide acquisition workforce training to establish government contracts that would provide uniform costs for standardized training courses needed for the fac programs . fai plans to have contracts in place in 2013 that would be available for agencies to use to provide fiscal year 2014 training . assisting federal agencies with their acquisition human capital fai offers guidance and direction on human capital planning through its instructions for agencies' annual ahcp submissions . beginning in 2010 , ofpp has required agencies to submit an annual ahcp each march that provides the agency's strategies and goals for increasing both the capacity and capability of the acquisition workforce . to assist the agencies in preparing each submission , fai provides them with a report template that includes specific topics to be included . we observed that the fiscal year 2012 ahcp submissions provided information on the agencies' goals for strengthening the acquisition workforce , including certification goals , and planned training initiatives for the current and future fiscal years . pub . 101-510 , ยง 1202 ( 1996 ) , ( codified at 40 u.s.c . all agencies can order goods and services directly through the schedules contracts and gwacs . board of directors , works closely with ofpp as well as the dau to collaborate on many issues involved with training and developing the federal acquisition workforce . the defense acquisition workforce improvement act required the secretary of defense to establish and maintain dau in order to provide training for the dod acquisition workforce.8 fai differs notably from dau , however , in that it shares much of the responsibility for training the civilian acquisition workforce with the agencies and has fewer budgetary and staffing resources . for example , fai currently has 12 staff , while dau has over 700 faculty and staff . the administrator of ofpp is also required to ensure that agencies collect and maintain standardized information on the acquisition workforce . agencies , in consultation with ofpp , can structure their management and oversight of training for their acquisition workforce in such a manner as best supports the agency . key agency positions involved in managing the acquisition workforce within the agencies are described in table 1 . acquisition training - related responsibilities responsible for developing and maintaining an agency acquisition career management program to ensure an adequate professional acquisition workforce . participates in the strategic planning and performance evaluation process to develop strategies and specific plans for training to rectify deficiencies in the skills and abilities of the acquisition workforce . responsible , in consultation with the acquisition career manager , for reporting acquisition workforce data to the human capital office for the agency's human capital plan . responsible for providing management direction of an agency's procurement system . in some agencies , caos oversee or assume this role to help ensure implementation of agency acquisition workforce policy . responsible for identifying training and development needs of the acquisition workforce .