the other instance involved the award of an other transaction to a consortium . in this instance , the consortium and agreements officer set out to negotiate general terms and conditions that would flow down to subsequent prototype projects carried out by consortium members . the agreements officer plans to make the determination about whether a non - traditional company is participating or meeting another statutory condition on a case - by - case basis for each subsequent prototype project that is funded . agreements officers typically used more than one method to determine if a company was a non - traditional company for the nine transactions in our sample . for example , agreements officers considered , in varying combinations , a contractor's assertion , data from government information systems , subject matter expert input , or market research when making the determination ( see table 3 ) . as reflected in table 3 , in none of the cases we reviewed did an agreements officer rely solely on the contractor's assertion that a company was a non - traditional company . the following two examples illustrate the type of actions agreements officers took to determine that a contractor was a non - traditional company: in a $19.3 million prototype other transaction awarded by washington headquarters services for a large autonomous ship , the prime contractor stated that it and a subcontractor were non - traditional companies . this was because neither had performed work on a dod contract or subcontract that was subject to full cost accounting standards in the preceding year , which is one of the statutory criteria to be considered a non - traditional company . to confirm that the prime contractor and the subcontractor were non - traditional companies , the agreements officer checked the system for award management , leveraged market research , and relied on input from technical officials from the navy's surface warfare directorate and unmanned maritime systems program office with industry knowledge about contractors . in a $10 million army prototype other transaction for an artificial intelligence war - gaming capability , the contractor that was to perform all the work stated that it met the statutory definition of a non - traditional company . to verify its status , the agreements officer determined that the contractor did not have a record in the system for award management , which would ordinarily be required if the company had previously done business with the federal government . appendix i shows more detailed information . the army was responsible for over two - thirds of the new awards and actions made from fiscal years 2016 through 2018 — valued at nearly $5.3 billion — but some of these were awarded on behalf of other dod components , such as the air force , navy , and defense innovation unit . officials from the air force research laboratory and navy's office of naval research told us that they relied on the army to award prototype other transactions on their behalf because , in some cases , the army had previously awarded a transaction , such as to a consortium , which they could leverage to meet their own components' needs .