see figure 2 . company 4 claimed that donor 3's risk of developing prostate cancer was above - average , company 3 found that he was at below - average risk , and companies 1 and 2 found that he was at average risk . for hypertension , company 3 found that he had an above - average risk of developing the condition , company 2 found that he was at below - average risk , and company 1 found he was at average risk . see figure 3 . donor 4 was told by companies 1 and 4 that he was at above - average risk for celiac disease , but company 2 reported that he was only at average risk . he also told our fictitious consumers that they could earn commission checks and receive free supplements if they could convince their friends to purchase the products . more detailed information on our experiences with this company follows table 2 . another flagrant example of deceptive marketing involved several companies' claims that they could predict which sports children would excel in based on dna analysis . we also found examples of highly misleading representations about the reliability of the tests and the ability of health care practitioners to use the results to help treat patients . in addition , two companies are placing consumers' privacy at risk by condoning the potentially illegal practice of testing dna without prior consent . selected audio clips from our undercover calls and meetings are available at http: / / www.gao.gov / products / gao - 10-847t . table 2 contains a selection of representations made by these companies . note that companies 1 through 4 are the same companies we proactively tested , as discussed earlier in this testimony . company 5: on its web site , company 5 claimed that it would use a consumer's dna to “create a personalized formula for nutritional supplements and skin repair serum with 100% active ingredients individually selected to enhance or diminish the biological processes causing you to age.” to investigate these claims , we posed as a fictitious consumer interested in purchasing the product and met in person with a company representative . during our initial meeting , the representative not only fraudulently suggested that michael phelps and representatives for lance armstrong endorsed the product , he also implied that the company's supplements could cure high cholesterol and arthritis , claims that one of our experts characterized as “absolute lies.” moreover , the fda and the national institutes of health have clearly stated that no dietary supplement can treat , prevent , or cure any disease . as part of the company's promotional materials we found that the company's dna assessment cost $225 and that the customized supplements cost about $145 per month . however , if our fictitious consumer immediately purchased a 3-month supply of supplements , she would be able to get the dna test for free . the representative also told her that she could become a company affiliate and earn commission checks and free products by recruiting new affiliates . she , along with another fictitious consumer , subsequently registered as company affiliates , and ultimately received commission checks totaling more than $250 .