appendix i . categories of incidents in the significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) . eta's definition an incident involving the discovery of alcohol on center , or involving any student found in possession of alcohol or charged by local law enforcement agencies with illegal alcohol consumption or possession . incidents which require medical treatment due to the physical effects of drug use ( alcohol poisoning , etc. ) should be reported under the “medical incident” primary incident code . this code applies when a student is arrested for an incident that occurred prior to his / her enrollment in job corps . these are acts that are commonly known as assault , battery , or mugging ; any assault with a weapon or object ; or any altercation resulting in medical treatment for injuries . mugging ( robbery ) is included in this category because it pertains more to an assault upon a person than on property . homicide has been removed as a primary incident code and is now listed under assault as a secondary incident code . this code applies to any incidents that threaten the security and safety of center students , staff , and property which may result in injury , illness , fatality , and / or property damage . examples include arson , bomb threat , gang - related incidents , possession of gun , possession of an illegal weapon , unauthorized access to center buildings , grounds , or restricted areas , and verbal threats . attempted suicide is a deliberate action by student to self - inflict bodily harm in an attempt to kill one's self . centers need only report a suicide threat ( suicidal ideation ) if it results in evaluation by a physician or mental health consultant . centers must report the death of any student who is enrolled in job corps regardless of his / her duty status . centers are only required to report the death of a staff member if the death occurs while on duty , either on center or off center . incidents involving any student or staff found in possession of or charged by local law enforcement agencies with a drug offense ( e.g . the illegal use , possession , or distribution of a controlled substance ) , or the discovery of drugs on center . incidents which require medical treatment due to the physical effects of drug use ( overdose , etc. ) should be reported under the “medical incident” primary incident code . eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category . sexual misconduct includes the intentional touching , mauling , or feeling of the body or private parts of any person without the consent of that person . sexual harassment or unsolicited offensive behavior such as unwelcome sexual advances , requests for sexual favors , and other verbal or physical contact of a sexual nature is also included . eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category . eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category .