dod plans further increases in funding for the command . the president's fiscal year 2007 budget request for the special operations command is $8 billion , and the department plans additional increases for the command through fiscal year 2011 . the special operations command is comprised of special operations forces from each of the military services . to overcome this challenge , we gathered additional information from the special operations command's service components . in addition , we interviewed officials with the service headquarters and the special operations command's service components who were knowledgeable about the data to discuss the validity of the information provided to us . we concluded the data were sufficiently reliable to answer our objectives . we focused on these processes for the active components of the military services . we analyzed the plans for growth in these personnel through fiscal year 2011 . to assess the progress the military services and the special operations command have made since fiscal year 2000 in increasing the number of special operations forces personnel , we discussed the processes used by the army , navy , and air force to recruit , train , and retain these forces with officials from the office of the secretary of defense , the special operations command , and the military services . however , officials stated that this has not degraded overall readiness , because not all of these training tasks are currently being performed in the central command . in addition , officials stated that if mission priorities were to shift away from the central command and different missions needed to be performed , not all of its special operations forces personnel would be required to have achieved those training tasks in order for a mission to be successfully carried out . additionally , although our analysis shows that special operations forces deployed less frequently for skills proficiency training from fiscal year 2000 through fiscal year 2005 , we were told that the amount of training that special operations forces accomplished may not have been greatly affected . section 167 ( e ) of title 10 , u.s. code directs that the commander of the special operations command be responsible for and have the authority to conduct all affairs of such command related to special operations activities . under this section , the commander is also responsible for and has the authority to conduct certain functions relating to special operations activities whether or not they relate to the special operations command , including: preparing and submitting to the secretary of defense program recommendations and budget proposals for special operations forces and for other forces assigned to the special operations command ; exercising authority , direction , and control over the expenditure of funds ; training assigned forces ; and monitoring the promotions , assignments , retention , training , and professional military education of special operations forces officers .