training . more agriculture specialists and supervisors at cbp now believe they are sufficiently trained to perform their agriculture inspection duties than did in 2006 , according to our analysis of responses to the closed - ended questions in our 2012 survey . specifically , we estimate that 76 percent of agriculture specialists and supervisors at cbp employed before the merger believe they are definitely sufficiently trained to perform their agricultural inspection duties , and 51 percent employed after the merger believe they are definitely sufficiently trained . this represents an increase from 2006 , when we estimated 58 and 36 percent , respectively . ( see table 1. ) additionally , based on our analysis of the responses to our closed - ended questions , we estimate 28 percent of agriculture specialists and supervisors at cbp believe that the sufficiency of training is not a challenge to conducting agriculture duties at their port , and another 29 percent believe it is only a minor challenge . we did not ask about whether or not training was a challenge in our closed - ended questions in 2006 , but at that time , training was the fourth most frequent response to our open - ended question , “what would you like to see changed or improved with respect to your work as an agriculture specialist ? ” our analysis of the responses to our 2012 survey shows that views about training have generally improved , but out of 406 respondents , we received 68 comments in response to an open - ended question listing certain aspects of training they would like to see changed or improved . for example , some respondents commented that they would like to see more specific or refresher training on agriculture pests that they may encounter on the job , and one respondent commented that he would like the opportunity for more hands - on — rather than web - based — training . information - sharing . according to our analysis of 2006 and 2012 survey responses , information - sharing has also improved . based on the responses to our closed - ended question on whether information is delivered in a timely manner , we estimate that 36 percent of agriculture specialists and supervisors at cbp believe that information on agriculture regulatory changes is always delivered in a timely manner , and another 48 percent believe the information is delivered in a timely manner most of the time . pub . 103-62 , 107 stat . 285 , amended by gpra modernization act of 2010 , pub . 111-352 , 142 stat . 3866. divisions , programs , or initiatives.established aphis and cbp roles in the aqi program also emphasized the need for coordination between the two agencies . in 2007 , a task force comprising of aphis and cbp employees identified the need to create a joint agency aqi strategic plan , but an official with the task force told us that this effort was not successful because the two agencies took fundamentally different approaches to strategic planning that could not be resolved . instead , according to aphis and cbp officials , the two agencies have incorporated elements of aqi activities into each agency's separate strategic planning efforts .