routing . upon completion of tin research , fresno ict clerical staff use the guidelines to route information referrals to irs divisions or other units or to retain them for destruction . after determining the appropriate routing , clerical staff manually sort the paper referrals into 31 boxes — each labeled with key words drawn from the guidelines and the name of the corresponding irs unit . for example , the box for routing business tax issues to sb / se audit lists key words for unreported business income , such as “company or corporation,” “rental property,” and “self - employed.” for alleged issues with form 1040 individual tax returns , such as itemized deductions or refundable credits , fresno ict clerical staff sort the information referrals into separate boxes for w&i and sb / se routing based on the idrs tax identification research . on an intermittent basis ( or when a box is full ) , fresno ict lead staff count the number of information referrals in a box , attach a form 3210 document transmittal , and route the referrals by mail to the designated operating division or other irs unit for further review . fresno ict routes information referrals to 26 different locations across about 15 other irs operating divisions and units . sb / se and w&i audit divisions are the most common recipients of information referrals from the fresno ict , as shown in figure 4 . from fiscal years 2012 through 2015 , sb / se received over 170,000 information referrals and w&i received over 100,000 — about two - thirds of all information referrals routed for further review . retention . referrals that cannot be routed as instructed by the guidelines are retained for destruction for 90 days . these may include information referrals that do not allege a federal tax issue or do not have key words specified in the guidelines . for example , the referral may allege that the taxpayer owes paid child support , has unpaid state taxes , or is improperly receiving benefits from another federal program . those retained may also include referrals without the name , address , or tin where the clerical staff cannot identify the alleged taxpayer . irs officials told us that some referrals have only vague insinuations of wrongdoing and that a small number of individuals repeatedly submit multiple claims of this type . for example , a few individuals send in bulk referrals with similar allegations about businesses in certain industries or geographic areas . since fiscal year 2012 , the share of referrals sent for destruction has increased , with 25 percent of referrals retained for destruction in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 . if the referral does not have audit potential , it is held for the retention period and then destroyed . after classifying those information referrals with audit potential , irs determines each referral's priority . the prioritization process varies among irs operating divisions . w&i and sb / se both perform correspondence audits — in which a letter is sent to taxpayers asking them to provide information about an item on their tax return .