( see app . ii for information on selected nih autism activities. ) many of these activities were developed to respond to the children's health act's general requirement that nih expand , intensify , and coordinate its autism research activities and to the act's specific requirements , such as that nih establish centers for conducting research on autism and establish a program through which tissue samples and genetic materials would be available for research . nih research that focuses on determining the causes of autism includes efforts to identify genes that increase susceptibility to the disorder and efforts to ascertain the role of environmental exposures . for example , nih's national institute of environmental health sciences , in partnership with the environmental protection agency , supports a national network of centers to examine the effect of environmental exposures on children's health . of the 11 centers this program supports , 2 centers conduct research on environmental causes of autism and perform clinical evaluations of children with autism . nih also conducts research evaluating specific treatments for the symptoms associated with autism . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 or bascettac@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii . to determine the autism - related activities and programs that the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) national institutes of health ( nih ) and centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) have under way , we collected documents from and interviewed agency officials about their fiscal year 2005 research and surveillance activities . to help confirm that we had a complete list of agencies' programs , we compared the information agency officials gave us with programs in the online catalog of federal domestic assistance and the computer retrieval of information on scientific projects . we identified in the children's health act of 2000 the specific autism - related mandates and authorizations for nih and cdc and reviewed agency - provided lists of activities and interviewed agency officials to determine which activities the agencies had conducted to respond to the act . we also compared the agencies' autism - related programs to goals developed by the interagency autism coordinating committee ( iacc ) . to determine nih's and cdc's funding of activities related to autism , we asked agency officials to provide funding for autism , by institute and center , for fiscal year 2000 — one fiscal year before passage of the children's health act — through fiscal year 2005 . the funding data we obtained generally represented obligated funds — funds the agencies had legally committed to spend but might not yet have expended . in addition , nih's data represent the agency's estimated funding of autism research . we did not verify the accuracy of these data ; however , we interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data , and we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .