u . a. e . we found several instances in which existing dod and army regulations and guidance in the pay and allowance area were outdated and conflict with more current legislation and dod regulations . some existing guidance reflected pay policies and procedures dating back to operations desert shield and desert storm in 1991 . while we were able to associate pay problems with only one of these outdated requirements , there is a risk that they may also have caused as yet unidentified pay problems . further , having out - of - date requirements in current regulations may contribute to confusion and customer service issues . with respect to human capital , we found weaknesses including ( 1 ) insufficient resources allocated to pay processing , ( 2 ) inadequate training related to existing policies and procedures , and ( 3 ) poor customer service . the lack of sufficient numbers of well - trained , competent military pay professionals can undermine the effectiveness of even a world - class integrated pay and personnel system . a sufficient number of well - trained military pay staff is particularly crucial given the extensive , cumbersome , and labor - intensive process requirements that have evolved to support active duty pay to army guard soldiers . gao's standards for internal control in the federal government state that management should take steps to ensure that its organization has the appropriate number of employees , and that appropriate human capital practices , including hiring , training , and retention , are in place and effectively operating . our audit identified a lack of knowledgeable personnel dedicated to entering and processing active duty pays and allowances to mobilized army guard soldiers . as discussed previously , both active army and army guard military pay personnel play key roles in this area . army guard operating procedures provide that the primary responsibility for administering mobilized army guard soldiers' pay rests with the 54 uspfos . these uspfos are responsible for processing pay for drilling reservists along with the additional surge of processing required for initiating active duty pays for mobilized soldiers . our audit work identified concerns with uspfo military pay sections operating at less than authorized staffing levels and recruiting and retention challenges due to the positions being at a lower pay grade level . in addition , few of the military pay technicians on board at the six locations we audited had received formal training on pay eligibility and pay processing requirements for mobilized army guard personnel . although the army and dfas have established an agreement that in part seeks to ensure that resources are available to provide appropriately skilled pay personnel at mobilization stations to support surge processing , no such contingency staffing plan exists for the uspfos . as discussed previously , pay problems at the case study units were caused in part by uspfo military pay sections attempting to process large numbers of pay transactions without sufficient numbers of knowledgeable personnel . lacking sufficient numbers of personnel undermines the ability of the uspfo pay functions to carry out established control procedures .