some examples include the following . providing support: to provide support to youth working on prevention and education efforts , a grantee sponsors a “yearly youth summit,” which is organized partially by their 20 member youth coalition . the youth coalition selects the topics and guest speakers for the summit and invites up to 75 peers who discuss and brainstorm ideas for activities and ways to address a specific substance abuse problem at their school . additionally , tables are assigned to encourage communication outside an individual's immediate peer group . according to ondcp and samhsa officials , samhsa did routinely relay reports to ondcp on grantees' status . however , samhsa officials acknowledged that they were unaware that files were missing , which calls into question the effectiveness of their program monitoring . it also challenges the accuracy and validity of the grantee status reports that samhsa provided to ondcp . in particular , ondcp officials told us they were never made aware that any required grantee documents were not included in the official record . samhsa officials said that in march 2016 , to strengthen their grants administration process , they instituted a new internal review process in which they randomly select 50 grant files per month from their various grant programs to assess the completeness and accuracy of grantees' documentation . as part of the internal review process , samhsa has also taken other steps including enhancing training , developing policies and procedures , and implementing a step - by - step guide and training for grant managers on entering information into the official grant file . while this review process had not included the dfc support program initially , in november 2016 , while our audit work was nearing completion , officials said they were planning to expand their focus to incorporate all of samhsa's grant programs . while officials provided information on how they planned to address particular deficiencies on a case by case basis , they did not explain how they planned to ensure systemic remediation of any issue found repeatedly or a timeframe for implementing the changes . according to standards for internal control in the federal government , managers are to ( 1 ) promptly evaluate findings from audits and other reviews , including those showing deficiencies and recommendations , ( 2 ) determine proper actions in response to these findings and recommendations , and ( 3 ) complete , within established time frames , all actions that correct or otherwise resolve the matters brought to management's attention . enhancing skills: to enhance the skills of those in the community to be on alert for and vigilant against potential drug abuse , one grantee sponsored a session for local realtors on precautions to take when preparing for open houses — warning realtors that leftover prescription drugs in medicine cabinets present the potential for abuse among those walking through the home for sale . enhancing access / reducing barriers: to reduce cultural barriers , one grantee developed signs emphasizing the legal purchase age for alcohol in multiple languages to respect the diversity of languages spoken across its community — as seen in figure 4 . the grantee then provided these signs to local business owners .