gershwin . “airborne environmental injuries and human health.” clinical reviews in allergy and immunology , vol . bush r.k. , portnoy j.m. , saxon a. , terr a.i. determine the association of dampness problem with athma development and ymptom by reearchin the cauative aent ( e.. , mold , dut mite alleren ) and documentin the relationhip between dampness and alleren expoure . identify funal alleren or pattern of cross - reactivity amon funal alleren . collect and analyze data on the interaction amon multiple indoor aent ( uch a mold , peticide , and volatile oranic compound ) and environmental factor ( uch a humidity , temperature , and ventilation ) . develop information on the possible advere health effect of dampness - related emission of mold pore from buildin material and furnihings . determine how to meaure the effectiveness and health effect of mold remediation effort . better characterize the possible influence of the duration of moiture damae on health . develop tandardized metric and protocol to assss the nature , everity , and ex - tent of dampness and effectiveness of pecific meaure for dampness reduction . advance the undertandin of pecific bioaerool in relation to athma by tudyin the epidemioloy of buildin - related athma in problem buildings where there are excess chet complaint amon occupant in comparion to buildings where there are not complaint ; or provide expoure - repontudie of many buildin environment and population . assss the effect of houin intervention ( uch a prevention or remediation of moiture problem , etc. ) on dampness and advere health effect , includin the extent to which intervention are associated with a decreae in the occurrence of advere health effect , and identify effective and efficient intervention trateie . better characterize the effectiveness of variou mean of protection ued durin mold remediation activitie . determine the effect of human expoure to stachybotrys chartarum in indoor environment . determine , for mycotoxin , the doe required to caue advere health effect in human via inhalation and dermal expoure ; technique for detectin and quantify - in mycotoxin in tissue ; or the effect of lon - term ( chronic ) expoure to mycotoxin via inhalation . reearch the relationhip between mold and dampness and acute pulmonary hemorrhae or hemoidero in infant . in fact , many of the activities are reported to address three or more gaps . summaries of the 65 research activities conducted or sponsored by epa , hhs , and hud are provided in a supplement to this report ( gao - 0-94sp ) . agency officials reported that eight federal mold research activities currently being conducted do not directly address any of the data gaps identified by the 2000 and 2004 institute of medicine reports . some of these studies were directed at medical treatments and others were focused on other potential causes of asthma . for example , one study is evaluating whether chronic rhinosinusitis is induced by an abnormal immune response to mold and therefore whether an anti - fungal agent will be an effective treatment of the disease . another study is developing and validating dna - based methods for identification and fingerprinting medically important fungi . several of these research activities focused on asthma .