( see fig . premarket notification , or 510 ( k ) , process: most medical devices requiring premarket review are subject to fda's premarket notification or 510 ( k ) process . in its written comments , hhs agreed that appropriate implementation of the least burdensome requirements is essential to fda's evaluation of its pma and 510 ( k ) medical device submissions , and agreed that it is important for fda to evaluate how successfully it is implementing the requirements . the guidance outlines fda's interpretation of the least burdensome concept as described in fdama , and explains its application to activities associated with pma and 510 ( k ) reviews . the guidance also states that fda was in the process of developing tools to be used by both agency staff and its stakeholders to periodically assess the implementation of the least burdensome principles . it noted some measurement tools had already been developed and that additional tools were also needed to assess the impact of the least burdensome approach on expediting the development of new medical technologies . in addition , fda has included language about those requirements in other guidance documents . for example , in 2014 , fda issued guidance on the 510 ( k ) program that describes how the least burdensome principles may affect the type of information necessary to demonstrate substantial equivalence at different decision points in the review of a 510 ( k ) . fda requested sponsors provide additional information for a majority of the pmas and 510 ( k ) s it reviewed . for the period 2001 through 2016 , fda issued a large number of deficiency and ai letters relative to the number of submissions , although there was variation annually . for pmas , the number of deficiency letters as a percentage of new pma applications submitted ranged from about 54 percent to 113 percent annually , or 82 percent on average , from 2001 through 2016 . the pma process is the most stringent type of premarket review . a successful application results in fda's approval to market the device . from 2001 through 2016 , medical device sponsors submitted 651 pma applications , and fda approved for marketing 506 of those submissions . this includes class i and ii device types that are not specifically exempted from the 510 ( k ) notification requirement . under this process , the medical device sponsor must notify fda at least 90 days before it intends to market a new device and demonstrate to fda that the new device is substantially equivalent to a predicate device , and therefore does not require a pma . for most 510 ( k ) notifications , clinical data are not required and substantial equivalence will normally be determined based on comparative descriptions of intended device uses and technological characteristics , and may include performance data . a successful 510 ( k ) submission results in fda's clearance to market the device . from 2001 through 2016 , medical device sponsors submitted 61,439 premarket notifications and fda cleared 51,028 devices for market . ( see fig .