collections . we analyzed the subject matter of all of the collections in our scope and , for a representative sample of 106 surveys , analyzed agencies' reported efforts to identify duplication and consult with persons outside of the agency . we interviewed experts on the federal statistical system and officials at omb and the four agencies that administer the case - study surveys to learn about coordination among agencies , efforts agencies take to identify improvement , and experts' and officials' perspectives on current and potential uses of administrative data and acs . we also interviewed and discussed these topics with officials at the department of agriculture's economic research service ( ers ) , which is a member of several interagency statistical committees and the lead agency for the statistical community of practice and engagement . in evaluating omb , agency , and interagency actions to improve efficiency , we used as criteria the requirements of the pra and practices identified in our prior work on agency collaboration . for the purposes of this review , we assessed the reliability of the data from the reginfo.gov website and determined that they were reliable for some of our purposes but not others . specifically , we reviewed related documentation , conducted interviews with omb officials , and compared selected data elements from the reginfo.gov website to supporting documents . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for purposes of identifying the collections within our scope and obtaining information on the collections' subject matter and actions taken by agencies to identify duplication and solicit input . as described later in this report , data provided on the website were not sufficiently reliable for the purpose of assessing collections' annual cost to the federal government and annual respondent burden hours . appendix i includes additional information on our scope and methodology . appendix ii contains more detailed descriptions of our case - study surveys . we conducted this performance audit from december 2010 to february 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . section 6103 of the internal revenue code provides that federal tax information is confidential and may not be disclosed except as specifically authorized by law . in contrast to many other countries , the united states does not have a primary statistical agency . instead , the statistical system is decentralized , with statistical agencies generally located in different government departments . this structure keeps statistical work within close proximity to the various cabinet - level departments that use the information . there are 13 federal agencies , referred to as the principal statistical agencies , which have statistical activities as their core mission . these agencies conduct much of the government's statistical work , though there are more than 80 additional federal agencies that carry out some statistical work in conjunction with their primary missions .