tariff commission . in 1975 , the name was changed to the u.s. international trade commission by section 171 of the trade act of 1974 . usitc is headed by six commissioners who are appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate for terms of 9 years , unless appointed to fill an unexpired term . the terms are set by statute and are staggered so that a different term expires every 18 months . no more than three commissioners may be members of the same political party . from among the appointed commissioners in office , the president designates a chairman and vice chairman to each serve for a 2-year term . the chairman may not be of the same political party as the preceding chairman , and the chairman and the vice chairman may not be of the same political party . the chairman is responsible , within statutory limits , for the administrative functions of usitc . the mission of usitc is to ( 1 ) administer u.s. trade remedy laws within its mandate ; ( 2 ) provide the president , the u.s. trade representative , and congress with independent high - quality analysis , information , and support on matters relating to tariffs and international trade and competitiveness ; and ( 3 ) maintain the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states ( hts ) . through the director of operations , five offices — offices of economics , industries , investigations , tariff affairs and trade agreements , and unfair import investigation — are responsible for usitc's operations regarding international trade . see appendix ii for additional information on usitc operations . the inspector general act of 1978 ( ig act ) , as amended , provides the legal foundation for the federal executive branch ig offices . currently there are 59 igs established by the ig act throughout the executive branch with broad authority to conduct independent audits and investigations . of the 59 igs , the president , with the advice and consent of the senate , appointed 29 . these presidentially appointed igs may only be removed by the president . the other 30 ig offices were established by the 1988 amendments to the ig act in designated federal entities ( dfe ) named in the legislation . the usitc ig is one of the 30 dfe igs . generally , the dfe igs have the same authorities and responsibilities as those igs established by the original ig act of 1978 ; however , they are appointed and may be removed by their entity heads rather than by the president and are not subject to senate confirmation . for purposes of the ig act , the usitc chairman was the head of usitc during our review period . the act provides the igs with independence by authorizing them , among other things , to select and employ their own staffs , make such investigations and reports as they deem necessary , and report the results of their work directly to congress . in addition , the ig act provides the igs with a right of access to information , and prohibits interference with ig audits or investigations by agency personnel .