of individual projects . however , obo produced no long - range facilities plans after 2008 . in december 2013 , obo rescinded its long - range facilities plans policy and procedures directive based on an explanation that the office responsible for that function no longer existed and that the function had been replaced by master planning . what master planning entailed within obo , nor did it explain and justify how master planning could substitute for strategic facilities planning . according to obo officials , master planning is defined and conducted via stakeholder meetings and generally accepted practices within the organization . however , obo was unable to provide any current policy governing either post strategic facilities planning or site master planning . a senior obo official acknowledged that mpe had generally not conducted strategic facilities planning in the past few years . without policies that clearly define strategic facilities planning and master planning , as well as outline the content and methods to conduct such planning , it will be difficult for obo to fulfill these responsibilities . according to obo policy , a policy and procedures directive may be rescinded when replaced or superseded by a new directive or at the request of the proponent office . the responsible office must sufficiently explain and justify why the directive is no longer needed . schedule reflects the value of state's existing risk management process for construction . as state pursues further construction to address the facility needs of the u.s. embassy in kabul , it is imperative that it follow its current policy to contain costs and manage risk where possible . future state construction in kabul and other high - threat posts will likely entail the continued use of temporary office or housing facilities , especially in conflict areas . we did not assess the implementation of the recommendations . state's policy states that cost containment disposition memos should include defensible rationale as to why a recommendation was rejected . the explanations for rejecting the twelve were brief . for eleven of the twelve rejected recommendations , state provided no further documentation for rejecting the proposals other than a preliminary and a final summary paper . further , it was unclear from state's documentation memo what construction and operating life - cycle cost savings obo expected to achieve in relation to the consultant's estimates and recommendations . the risk assessment identified over 30 risks to the project . figure 3 shows these investments . in the case of the current kabul embassy expansion , as of march 2015 , state has allocated $1.11 billion to cover the 2009 and 2010 contract costs as well as state's project costs outside the two contracts . the original cost of the 2009 and 2010 construction contracts was $625.4 million . when we discuss increased costs in this report , we are referring to those costs agreed to between state and its construction contractors for the 2009 and 2010 contracts . the costs for the 2009 and 2010 contracts are now almost 27 percent higher than the original contract costs . the completed project will be delivered just over 3 years later than originally planned .