national export strategy . gao / nsiad - 96-132r . washington , d.c.: march 26 , 1996 . export promotion: governmentwide plan contributes to improvements . gao / t - ggd - 94-35 . washington , d.c.: march 15 , 1993 . export promotion: federal programs lack organizational and funding cohesiveness . gao / nsiad - 92-49 . washington , d.c.: january 10 , 1992 . the tpcc agreed with our findings and recommendation . however , in 2006 we determined that the committee had not implemented our recommendation ; we found that the committee's annual strategies did not review agencies' allocation of resources in relation to identified priorities . in 2009 , we observed that the tpcc's most recently published national export strategy continued to lack an overall review of agency resource allocations relative to government - wide priorities . export promotion has recently been emphasized as a high priority for the federal government . in his 2010 executive order announcing the nei , the president emphasized that creating jobs and sustainable economic growth in the united states was his top priority , and that increasing exports was a critical component of those efforts . he also laid out eight priority areas to be addressed through the nei . omb subsequently identified the nei's goal of doubling u.s. exports as one of 14 interim crosscutting priority goals under the gpra modernization act . additionally , as part of his 2013 and 2014 budget proposals , the president proposed consolidating six departments and agencies involved in export promotion into one new cabinet - level department . in his directives regarding the nei , the president established a new body , the export promotion cabinet , to develop and implement the initiative . the export promotion cabinet is coordinated by a white house official , has most of the same member agencies as the tpcc , and is to coordinate its efforts with the tpcc . among other things , the president tasked the export promotion cabinet to work with the tpcc to determine how resources should be allocated . in particular , a february 2012 presidential memorandum instructed the export promotion cabinet , in consultation with the tpcc , to evaluate the current allocation of federal government resources , make recommendations to the director of omb for their more effective allocation , and propose a unified federal trade budget , consistent with the administration's priorities , to the director of omb as part of the annual process for developing the president's budget . the export enhancement act states that the tpcc's strategies should establish a set of priorities for federal export promotion activities and propose a unified federal trade promotion budget that supports the plan . additionally , we have previously reported that one of the six characteristics of an effective interagency national strategy is that it identifies the resources needed to carry out the strategy . specifically , an effective national strategy should address what it will cost , the sources and types of resources and investments needed , and where resources and investments should be targeted based on balancing risk reductions with costs .