work space . some frcs noted that they had been assigned work space at the facility that was unsuitable for conducting sensitive conversations with enrollees , family members , and coworkers . at a major medical center , we observed that frcs were located in tightly spaced cubicles that allowed nearby staff to easily overhear their conversations . a recently transferred frc told us that when she arrived at her new medical center , she found that she had no office and had been located in an open room that serves as the call center for triage nurses . lacking the privacy needed to make confidential calls to her enrollees , this frc resorted to making sensitive phone calls from her car in the parking lot . at another treatment facility , an frc who shared an office with staff from another program had to take phone calls with enrollees in the stairwell in order to have privacy . finally , two recently hired frcs were not only placed in the same office but also had to share the same desk . the provision of equipment , technology support , and work space is covered by memoranda of agreement between the frcp and the dod and va facilities where frcs are located . however , an frcp deputy director told us that obtaining compliance with the memoranda of agreement at some facilities is an ongoing challenge and that equipment maintenance and systems upgrades are persistent issues for all frcs . in some instances , after frcs had made repeated requests for needed resources without result , the frcp executive director intervened with medical center officials or through the senior oversight committee to obtain a resolution . a leadership official for a wounded warrior program told us that some military medical centers have difficulty satisfying requests for equipment and space from programs such as the frcp because these facilities house and support various dod and va support programs and all make requests for resources . this official pointed out that at one military treatment facility , a military case manager was relocated in order to make an office available to an frc . an frcp deputy director added that given the frequent turnover of military staff , medical center officials are sometimes unaware that their facility is responsible for providing resources and services to frcs . frcp officials reviewed existing memoranda of agreement between the frcp and dod and va medical facilities to determine where improvements could be made to ensure that the frcs have the tools and privacy required to do their work . the program has developed three new templates for memoranda of agreement that will be used when frcs are located in new settings: one each for military treatment facilities , va medical centers where servicemembers and veterans with polytrauma injuries receive care , and military wounded warrior programs . these new memoranda are more detailed than the previous versions , and they identify who is responsible for providing specific resources and services . the frcp is using the revised agreements in its negotiations for logistical support for newly placed frcs at two va medical centers and with the special operations command wounded warrior program .