contract reform . doe estimated that revised contracting strategies would also result in significant cost reductions . however , at two of doe's largest sites — savannah river and hanford — doe will not award some major new contracts until 2006 . until then , the final price of doe's new contracts and any potential cost reductions associated with them are uncertain . for example , doe has assumed it will reduce overall costs by more than 20 percent under its new savannah river site contract . however , the details and final cost of the contract will not be finalized until the contract is awarded . external auditors acknowledged this uncertainty at hanford in their assessment of doe's fiscal year 2004 environmental liabilities estimate , noting that it was “not appropriate” to assume cost reductions from future contracts since those reductions are “neither probable nor susceptible of reasonable estimation.” revisions to cleanup agreements . doe estimated additional cost reductions would result from revising site - specific waste cleanup agreements with federal and state regulators . however , regulators have not agreed to or are resisting revisions to agreements that accounted for most ( at least 75 percent ) of these expected cost reductions . for example , doe expected to be able to determine that some radioactive tank waste is not high - level waste but transuranic waste , thereby allowing doe to ship the treated waste to the waste isolation pilot plant for permanent disposal and reducing costs by $1.5 billion . however , in late 2004 , the head of new mexico's environment department — the state regulator for the repository — said the state would refuse to accept doe's tank waste for disposal at the repository because new mexico considers that waste to be high - level , not transuranic , waste . in addition , because of the uncertainty about the disposal path for this radioactive tank waste , the state of idaho — which has a regulatory agreement with doe to treat and dispose of the waste out of the state — prefers that doe apply more extensive high - level waste treatment technologies . work completed sooner . doe also expected cost reductions resulting from completing work sooner through improvements that , in many cases , also depend on the assumptions discussed above . because of the uncertainty surrounding assumed improvements in its cleanup operations , doe's anticipated cost reductions from completing work sooner are also in jeopardy . for example , doe estimated approximately $2.8 billion in cost reductions at its savannah river site from accelerating the cleanup of radioactive tank waste . however , that reduction depends on implementing a new waste treatment technology that has not yet been fully tested outside a laboratory . as a result , the uncertainties surrounding technological improvements raise doubts about doe's ability to accelerate its schedule . in addition , several of the projects that doe expects to complete in less time are already experiencing problems . for example , doe estimated that an approximately $2.8 billion cost reduction would result , in part , from revising its schedule for shipping transuranic waste to the repository in new mexico . however , as we noted above , transuranic waste packaging and shipping is already behind schedule .