colorado used a combination of these approaches . high - risk pool premiums are higher than standard premiums for individual insurance paid by healthy applicants although not necessarily higher than a high - risk individual would be charged in the individual market if coverage were available . high - risk pools are subsidized . because enrollees often have major health problems , medical claims costs are high and would exceed unsubsidized premiums collected from their enrollees . one state , colorado , provided a 20 percent premium discount to certain low - income individuals . across the three states we reviewed that had high - risk pools , undiscounted premiums for nonelderly adults ranged from less than 10 percent to close to 100 percent of the average unemployment benefit in the state . although ohio , oregon , and utah collected data on the number of uninsured residents , none of the states that we reviewed had data sufficiently current to determine how many of their residents had lost health insurance during the recent economic decline . states' knowledge of any changes in the numbers of individuals benefiting from the different states' protections varied by option and the state , with data most often available for the three states' high - risk pools . none of the states we reviewed tracked how many of its residents obtained health coverage through state - mandated continuation coverage . of the four states that required insurers to offer conversion plans , only utah tracked the number of policies issued but it did not have data current enough to determine whether usage increased during the current economic decline . medicaid eligibility for nondisabled adults is more limited . federal law requires states to provide medicaid coverage to pregnant women up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level , and mandatory eligibility for parents is linked to the medicaid family coverage category established in the 1996 federal welfare reform law . at a minimum , federal law requires states to offer medicaid coverage to parents in families that meet the income and other eligibility rules that the state had in place on july 16 , 1996 , for determining eligibility for welfare assistance . nationwide , considerable variation in medicaid eligibility thresholds for parents exists . for example , alabama covers parents whose family income is up to 13 percent of the federal poverty level . at the other end of the spectrum , minnesota covers parents with family incomes up to 275 percent of the federal poverty level . the medicaid statute does not generally provide for mandatory or optional coverage of nondisabled childless adults . however , some states have received federal approval to expand their medicaid programs to include coverage for some of them . in 1997 , the congress created schip to provide health coverage to children living in families whose incomes exceed the eligibility limits for medicaid . while schip is generally targeted to children in families with incomes at or below 200 percent of the federal poverty level , each state may set its own income eligibility limits , within certain guidelines . as of january 2002 , states' upper income eligibility threshold for schip ranged from 133 to 350 percent of the federal poverty level .