estimates . all estimates produced from the district sample in this report are for a target population defined as all public school districts in the 50 states and the district of columbia for the 2002-03 school year . estimates to this target population were formed by weighting the survey data to account for both the sample design and the response rates for each stratum . for our estimates of high - and low - poverty districts , we defined high - poverty districts as those with participation rates in the free and reduced meals program of 70 percent or above . low - poverty districts were defined as those with free and reduced meals program rates at 30 percent and below . one of the advantages of this approach was that it allowed for a sufficient number of cases in each category to conduct statistical analyses . sampling error . because we surveyed a sample of school districts , our results are estimates of a population of school districts and thus are subject to sampling errors that are associated with samples of this size and type . our confidence in the precision of the results from this sample is expressed in 95 percent confidence intervals . the 95 percent confidence intervals are expected to include the actual results for 95 percent of the samples of this type . we calculated confidence intervals for our study results using methods that are appropriate for a stratified , probability sample . for the percentages presented in this report , we are 95 percent confident that the results we would have obtained if we had studied the entire study population are within plus or minus 10 percentage points of our results , unless otherwise noted . for example , we estimate that 34 percent of the districts target at least some funds to specific types of schools . the 95 percent confidence interval for this estimate would be no wider than plus or minus 10 percent , or from 24 percent to 44 percent . our sample was not designed to produce geographical area estimates , and we did not explicitly stratify our sample by state or region . however , our sample was selected nationally and all regions are represented in our sample . the following table summarizes sample size and responses for 10 regions . on the basis of the national distribution of our sample and on the result of our comparison of a set of survey estimates to known population values from the ccd file , we chose to include the survey results in our report and to produce sample based estimates to the total population of school districts in our study population . we chose not to report the survey responses to questions asking about the number of highly qualified teachers because other information from the survey and our in - depth discussions with officials during our site visits indicated that the respondents could not accurately answer the question . for example , three of five officials who completed the survey but did not answer this question commented in the survey that they could not answer because they could not count the number of teachers .