iii ) . we conducted this performance audit from september 2010 to april 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the goals of the recovery act are to preserve and create jobs and promote economic recovery ; to assist those most impacted by the recession ; to provide investments needed to increase economic efficiency by spurring technological advances in science and health ; to invest in transportation , environmental protection , and other infrastructure that will provide long - term economic benefits ; and to stabilize state and local government budgets , in order to minimize and avoid reductions in essential services and counterproductive state and local tax increases . the eecbg program was authorized in the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ) , which intended to move the united states toward greater energy independence and security and to increase the production of clean renewable fuels , among other things . the eecbg program was funded for the first time by the recovery act , through formula and competitive grants . through the program , doe allocates formula grants to the 50 states , the district of columbia , and five territories ; to city and county recipients based on their resident and commuter populations ; and to native american tribes based on population and climatic conditions . applicants eligible for formula funding include cities or city - equivalent units of government , such as towns or villages with populations of at least 35,000 ; counties , which include county - equivalent units of local government , such as parishes or boroughs with populations of at least 200,000 ; and all indian tribes and any alaska native village . a city or county is also eligible for direct funding if it is one of the 10 highest - populated cities or counties of the state in which it is located . the eecbg program has broad goals for energy - related outcomes . doe encourages eecbg recipients to develop new and innovative approaches to meet the purposes of the program: to prioritize energy efficiency and conservation ; develop projects in a cost - effective manner that will maximize benefits over time ; stimulate the economy ; leverage other public or private resources ; promote energy market transformation ; and to the extent possible , to develop programs that will provide sustainable , and measurable energy savings , job creation , and economic stimulus benefits that will continue beyond the funding period . doe announced the funding opportunity for interested applicants to submit applications for eecbg formula grant funding on march 26 , 2009 . doe required applicants to submit an energy efficiency and conservation strategy ( eecs ) that described their strategy for achieving the recovery act's goals of the program . doe had 120 days to review and approve or disapprove recipients' eecss .