provision of support to advisor teams . we found that brigades in afghanistan sometimes faced challenges providing the necessary support to advisor teams such as transportation assets , force protection resources , and equipment because support requirements had not always been clearly identified , these items and capabilities were in limited supply and were , at times , also needed to support combat operations . we made several recommendations to dod to enhance the department's ability to support the advising mission , including clearly defining the requirements for the number , ranks , and capabilities of advisors , the relative priority of the advising mission , and the support that advisor teams require . dod concurred with our recommendations and has taken some actions to implement them . given the key role of advising teams in supporting the transition process , these areas will be important considerations for dod as it continues to refine its plans for forming , deploying , and using advisor personnel to mentor and develop the ansf . chairman wittman , ranking member cooper , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes our prepared statement . we would be happy to answer any questions you may have at this time . for further information on this statement , please contact charles michael johnson , jr. at ( 202 ) 512-7331 or johnsoncm@gao.gov , or sharon l. pickup at ( 202 ) 512-9619 or pickups@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . dod has previously noted that the development of leaders for ansf is essential to improving its capability . additionally , despite reported progress in providing ansf with literacy training — a key prerequisite for learning specialized skills , such as logistics , needed to reduce reliance on coalition forces — dod states that illiteracy remains a challenge . view gao - 12-951t . for more information , contact charles michael johnson , jr. at ( 202 ) 512-7331 or johnsoncm@gao.gov , or sharon l. pickup at ( 202 ) 512-9619 or pickups@gao.gov . as part of the overall transition of lead security responsibility to ansf , starting in early 2012 , the army and marine corps began training and deploying small teams of advisors with specialized capabilities , referred to as security force assistance advisory teams ( sfaats ) . these teams will be located throughout afghanistan and will work with ansf personnel from the headquarters to the battalion level and advise and assist in areas such as command and control and intelligence . gao's past work examining the use of training and advisor teams in iraq and afghanistan highlighted certain areas relevant to dod's plans to provide sfaats in support of the current mission in afghanistan . in april 2012 , dod reported that the mod was assessed as requiring some coalition assistance to accomplish its mission — an assessment unchanged since october 2010 , while the moi was assessed as needing significant coalition assistance — an assessment unchanged since 2009 . additionally , dod reported that the ministries face a variety of challenges , including , among others , mod's lack of human capital in areas requiring technical expertise and moi's continuing problems with corruption .