iv. ) among districts that reported facing challenges in meeting moe , officials described a number of reasons for those challenges that were not covered by allowable exceptions . in response to our survey , 17 districts reported challenges due to local actions to increase efficiencies in the provision of direct services , and 14 districts reported challenges due to efficiencies in administrative functions ( see fig . for example , a new jersey district official commented on our survey that his district failed to meet moe after reorganizing to share the cost of a special education director with another district . for the school years when your lea met moe , was it a challenge or not a challenge to meet the moe requirement ? don't know - b . local actions to increase efficiencies in administrative functions c. local actions to increase efficiencies in the provision of direct services to children with disabilities d. reductions in the state contribution to your district's local funding of special education e. reductions in state funding of general k - 12 education f. decline in local revenue g. lea does not have authority to raise its own revenue 5 . what additional resources , if any , from the u.s. department of education would your state find useful for monitoring or assisting leas with moe compliance ? this data set is comprised of fiscal and non - fiscal data collected annually about all public schools , public school districts , and state educational agencies in the united states . the ccd data elements and years we used for each part of our analysis are summarized in table 5 . to assess the reliability of the ccd data elements used for our analysis , we reviewed existing documentation about the data system from the national center for education statistics and conducted electronic testing . in a few cases where a district's variable values were illogical , we changed the values or set them to missing for purposes of our analysis . we linked the ccd data to three different sources of information on district experiences with moe . the methodology and results of each of these analyses are described below . gao's 2011 survey of school districts . to examine the characteristics of districts facing challenges and not facing challenges meeting moe , we linked the ccd data to responses to the question on gao's 2011 survey of school districts that asked , “do you currently anticipate your lea having trouble meeting the idea maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement for 2011-12 ? ” this survey was sent to a nationally generalizable sample of school districts , which means that the results of our analysis are generalizable to the total population of school districts in 2011 . for our characteristic analysis of 2011 survey respondents , we primarily used ccd data from the 2010-11 school year , which described district characteristics in the year of the survey . see table 6 below for the findings of this analysis . gao's 2015 follow - up survey of a subset of school districts .