individuals . for individuals who are notified that they are at risk of a blood - borne pathogen infection , costs may be incurred for testing . for example , in response to a large hepatitis c outbreak in nevada — which required notification of more than 60,000 patients to seek blood - borne pathogen testing — the southern nevada health department estimated that the laboratory costs for testing all of the potentially exposed patients would be $13.8 million . additionally , for individuals who are infected , costs include those for short - and long - term treatment . for example , the southern nevada health department estimated that the cost of treatment for an infected patient would be about $30,000 , including the direct costs for professional services , laboratory testing , and medication , but excluding the costs of annual monitoring and possible complications related to cirrhosis or liver transplants . state and local health departments . state and local health care departments may incur costs for investigating and responding to potential outbreaks , including the costs of notifying and potentially providing blood - borne pathogen testing for patients who may have been exposed to unsafe injection practices . generally , according to health department officials we interviewed , state and local health departments do not track such costs because investigating and responding to such outbreaks is considered part of their normal duties . one exception is the case of the nevada outbreak , where officials said such costs were calculated because of the magnitude of the outbreak . specifically , the southern nevada health department estimated that from january 2008 through may 2009 , the outbreak investigation and response cost the health department about $830,000 , including $255,605 in staff time by health department employees . clinicians and health care facilities . clinicians and health care facilities that are directly involved in outbreaks may incur costs associated with lawsuits and settlements . for example , following the nebraska outbreak in 2002 , the nebraska excess liability fund — a fund administered by the nebraska department of insurance for medical professional liability coverage — paid nearly $9 million in indemnity costs to settle 83 cases as of december 2010 . in addition , clinicians who cause blood - borne pathogen outbreaks through their use of unsafe injection practices may be at risk of losing their medical licenses or facing felony charges related to the outbreak . for example , the physician and two nurse anesthetists involved in the nevada outbreak currently face state criminal charges tied to the outbreak . in 2009 , cms substantially expanded its oversight of unsafe injection practices in ascs by increasing both the intensity of the examination of safe injection and other infection control practices and the number of on - site surveys conducted in ascs to determine compliance with cms's health and safety standards . within these health and safety standards , those relating to infection control specifically require ascs to maintain an infection control and prevention program designed to minimize the occurrences of hais , such as blood - borne pathogen infections resulting from unsafe injection practices , and have a qualified professional direct this program .