gao - 13-384 . washington , d.c.: june 25 , 2013 . medicaid demonstration waivers: lack of opportunity for public input during federal approval process still a concern . gao - 07-694r . washington , d.c.: july 24 , 2007 . medicaid waivers: hhs approvals of pharmacy plus demonstrations continue to raise cost and oversight concerns . gao - 04-480 . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2004 . funding pools for incentive payments to hospitals . hhs also approved new expenditure authorities in five states for funding pools to make incentive payments to promote health care delivery system or infrastructure improvements for nearly $18.8 billion ( federal and state share ) in spending . these expenditure authorities were for payments to incentivize hospitals or their partners to make a variety of improvements , such as lowering hospitals' rates of adverse events or incidence of disease , improving care for patients with certain conditions , and increasing delivery system capacity . as with approvals of expenditure authorities for state programs , we found that hhs's approvals of expenditure authorities for funding pools also did not consistently document how expenditures would likely promote medicaid objectives . the approvals of incentive payment funding pools we reviewed established a structure for planning , reporting on , and getting paid for general , system - wide improvements — for example , increasing primary care capacity or lowering admission rates for certain diseases — but most provided little or no detail on how the initiatives related to medicaid objectives , such as their potential impact on medicaid beneficiaries or low - income populations . further , the criteria for selecting providers eligible to participate in incentive pools were not apparent in most of the approvals we reviewed . hhs's approvals typically listed eligible providers but with no additional information about their role in providing services to medicaid populations . for example , none of the terms and conditions for the five states' demonstrations that we reviewed established a minimum threshold of medicaid or low - income patient volume as the basis for participation ; however , three of the five states' approvals required that the payment allocations be weighted in part on measures of medicaid or low - income patient workload . we also found that the approvals for incentive payment funding pools varied in the extent to which they provided assurances that medicaid funding for these initiatives would not duplicate other sources of federal funding . the terms and conditions for only one of the five states required the state to demonstrate that its funding pool was not duplicating any other existing or future federal funding streams for the same purpose . two other states' terms and conditions required hospitals to demonstrate that incentive projects did not duplicate other hhs initiatives . the extent to which approvals for uncompensated care pools included protections against potential duplication of federal funds was somewhat mixed . the approvals placed some limits on the potential overlap between payments to individual providers from the uncompensated care pool and medicaid's disproportionate share hospital program , which provides allotments to states for payments to hospitals that serve a disproportionate share of low - income and medicaid patients .