here the results are mixed . we have seen some positive changes to the policy , such as a greater emphasis on attaining knowledge about technologies , but we remain concerned that the policy still allows programs to begin before those technologies are actually demonstrated in an operational or simulated environment . my testimony today describes the condition we have found in our system - focused reviews and lays out the problems across systems and the changes that need to be made if dod is to break the cycle of acquisition problems . let me start by recognizing that developing satellites is a very complex task and one which does differ from other military systems . however , we have not been convinced that those differences merit distinction in how system development and production are approached . nor should those differences ever excuse the department from achieving the outcomes it promises when requesting and receiving funding . for decades , space acquisition programs have been encountering large cost increases and schedule delays . as a result , dod has been unable to deliver capabilities as promised . this past year alone , for example , costs have continued to climb on the space based infrared system high ( sbirs - high ) program — triggering another nunn - mccurdy review and certification of the program and pushing dod's investment in this critical missile warning system to over $9.9 billion , from the initial $3.9 billion estimate made 9 years ago . at the same time , programs focused on developing new communications satellites are facing cost increases and schedule delays , the national polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite system has been restructured and is facing cost increases and schedule delays , and unit cost increases for launch vehicles have now increased by 81 percent since 2002 due to erroneous assumptions about the commercial launch market upon which the program's business case was based . taken together , these problems have had a dramatic impact on dod's overall space portfolio . this is particularly important since dod is undertaking a range of initiatives — collectively known as operationally responsive space — designed to facilitate evolutionary development , more testing of technologies before acquisition , and ultimately , enable dod to deliver space - based capabilities to the warfighter much faster and cheaper . critical components of an investment strategy would include identifying overall capabilities and how to achieve them , that is , what role space will play versus other air - , sea - , and land - based assets ; identifying priorities for funding ; and implementing mechanisms that would enforce the strategy . while dod has made revisions to its requirements - setting and budgeting processes to strengthen investment planning , it is unclear as to how these changes will be implemented over time and whether they can serve as a foundation for direction of space s&t and acquisition investments . dod has had to shift scarce resources to poorly performing programs and has pushed off starting a new version of the global positioning system ( forcing costs to increase for the current version under development ) . cost increases have also kept dod from investing more in science and technology efforts that support space .