cpsc concurred with our recommendation . the 2011-2016 strategic plan states that cpsc has been seeking to create and strengthen partnerships with domestic and international stakeholders , including foreign regulators and manufacturers , to improve product safety throughout the supply chain . also , cpsc's office of education , global outreach , and small business ombudsman has separately developed and issued plans for addressing consumer product safety on a country - specific and regional basis . industry representatives and consumer groups we spoke to said that compliance with voluntary standards developed through the consensus process is generally considered to be high , although they do not track compliance . some representatives and consumer groups said that it can reach 90 percent for some standards . however , consumer product safety experts suggested that standards for some products have lower compliance , especially commonly low - priced items , products primarily sold over the internet or by nonconventional retailers , products made by a large number of manufacturers , or products primarily manufactured overseas . for instance , cigarette lighters manufactured overseas and sold at low prices in the united states have been found to be noncompliant with voluntary standards . consumer product safety experts we spoke to generally said that industry prefers voluntary to mandatory standards . they noted the voluntary standard development process is faster than mandatory rulemaking , and allows the industry a greater level of input . sixty - eight standards is a small fraction of standards developed for consumer products . for instance , astm international has developed more than 12,000 standards while ul maintained more than 1,400 as of 2011 . these standards cover many types of products , not exclusively consumer products . cpsc's relationship with sdos is outlined in cpsc regulations.policy sets criteria for deciding on cpsc's involvement in voluntary standards activities . the criteria include: the likelihood the voluntary standard will eliminate or adequately reduce the risk of injury addressed , the likelihood that there will be substantial and timely compliance with the voluntary standard , the likelihood that the voluntary standard will be developed within a reasonable period of time , openness to all interested parties , establishment of procedures to provide for meaningful participation in the development of standards by representatives of a variety of interested parties , and due process procedures . cpsc's regulation guides the extent and form of cpsc staff involvement in voluntary standards organizations . staff may attend standards development meetings , take an active part in the discussions , and provide data and explanatory material , but cpsc's regulation prohibits staff from voting on the standards or from holding leadership positions in standards development committees . except in extraordinary circumstances and with the approval of the executive director , they cannot become involved in standards development meetings that are not open to the public ( including members of the media ) for attendance and observation . this may include technical subcommittees largely comprised of industry representatives . the regulation also states that active involvement in standards development activity must not be done in a manner that might present an appearance of preferential treatment for one organization or group or put cpsc's impartiality at risk . cpsc has authority to revise its regulations pertaining to voluntary standards activities .