planning . planning . planning . ( please check one box in each row. ) 1 ) consolidate voa , the ibb , and the surrogates into one broadcasting entity headed by the board of governors . 2 ) appoint a single individual as ceo for u.s. international broadcasting , and give that individual direct reporting responsibilities to the board . 3 ) significantly reduce the overall number of language services in order to reprogram funds to higher priority services . 4 ) use language service audience goals tailored to local circumstances ( eg , 5 percent audience share in one market versus a 10 percent share in another market ) . 5 ) set language service audience goals by target audience ( eg , mass versus elites , under 30 versus over 30 , men versus women , etc. ) 6 ) eliminate voa editorials . 7 ) revamp / re - invent voa editorials . 8 ) defederalize voa ( eg , give voa grantee status ) . 9 ) defederalize ibb ( eg , give ibb grantee status ) . 10 ) establish closer strategic coordination between the bbg and the state dept . 11 ) establish closer strategic coordination between the bbg and the white house . 12 ) establish closer cooperation with other international broadcasters . 13 ) establish a national strategic guidance to all agencies involved in public diplomacy . comments , if any . q.21 ) which organization do you work for ? q.22 ) which of the following categories ( please check one box. ) most closely matches your level within your organization ? ( voa , ibb , rfa , etc. ) q.23 ) please briefly describe the language services for which you are responsible: q.24 ) other comments ( please continue on additional sheets , if necessary . also , please feel free to attach any relevant documents you wish. ) contact information: if you would like us to contact you directly about an issue related to this survey , please provide your name and telephone number below . any contacts we have with you will be strictly confidential . thanks for your assistance ! diana glod ( 202 ) 512-8945 . in addition to the person named above , michael ten kate , melissa pickworth , and janey cohen made key contributions to this report . martin de alteriis and ernie jackson also provided technical assistance . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products .