( see fig . in addition , 15 programs reported that they can provide or fund many of the same prevention and treatment services provided to the offender population , that is , those individuals involved in the criminal justice system . specifically , these programs reported that they can provide or fund many of the same treatment services in order to support similar program goals of identifying and meeting the treatment needs of offenders and providing services to reduce recidivism and facilitate reentry . supply reduction missions . while these seven agencies are not representative of all drug control agencies , they are responsible for implementing a majority of activities in the strategy and provided a range of perspectives about its implementation and progress . we also analyzed ondcp documents on the implementation status of strategy action items and implementation plans and reports from selected federal drug control agencies . in addition , we analyzed agency budget justifications and strategic plans . we also reviewed information provided by ondcp and publicly available data sources , such as the national survey on drug use and health , to determine progress toward strategy goals . on the basis of such factors as the number of strategy action items for which agencies are responsible , the size of agency drug control budgets , and inclusion of a balance of drug prevention , treatment , and supply reduction missions , we selected the following seven agencies to focus on in our review: within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the substance abuse and mental health services administration , national institutes of health — specifically , the national institute on drug abuse and the national institute on alcohol abuse and alcoholism — and centers for disease control and prevention ; within the department of justice ( doj ) , the office of justice programs ( ojp ) — specifically , the bureau of justice assistance , bureau of justice statistics , national institute of justice , and office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention — and drug enforcement administration ; within the department of homeland security , u.s. customs and border protection ; and the department of education ( education ) . while these seven agencies are not representative of all federal drug control agencies , they are responsible for implementing a majority of activities in the strategy and provide a range of perspectives about strategy implementation and progress . specifically , our selected agencies and ondcp have lead implementation responsibilities for approximately 70 percent of the 112 action items in the strategy . we also interviewed officials from ondcp and these agencies to obtain information about progress on the strategy's goals , the performance reporting system , how ondcp monitors progress on strategy objectives and action items , the implementation status of these action items , and the effect of the strategy on agencies' drug control activities . we compared the information we obtained from documents and agency officials about the strategy and ondcp's monitoring mechanisms with criteria for performance management identified in our prior work . we also reviewed ondcp's categorizations for a nonprobability sample of 24 out of 82 action items led by ondcp and our seven selected agencies to validate ondcp's characterization of their implementation statuses .