nara has partially implemented three other recommendations . first , in response to our recommendation that nara ensure that its investment review process has adequate executive - level oversight by maintaining documentation of the results of reviews , nara documented meetings that its senior management attended where the era program was discussed , but the agency did not document approval of important changes to a recent increment through its review process . second , in response to our recommendation that nara provide additional information in the fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan on what was spent and delivered for deployed increments , nara added information on delivered functionality and additional capabilities planned for fiscal year 2011 . we concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . in addition , we reviewed nara budget documents , as well as its consolidated financial statement results for the fiscal year 2010 performance and accountability report . we did not , however , assess the reliability of the information in these documents . we conducted this performance audit from october 2010 to march 2011 at nara's college park , maryland , location in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . on december 21 , 2010 , we transmitted the results of our review to the staffs of the senate subcommittee on financial services and general government , committee on appropriations , and the house subcommittee on financial services and general government , committee on appropriations . this report transmits the briefing materials we provided , the matter we suggest congress consider , and the recommendations that we made to the archivist of the united states . the full briefing materials , including details on our scope and methodology , are reprinted as appendix i . in summary , we made the following major points: nara's fiscal year 2010 expenditure plan satisfies four of the six legislative conditions . specifically , nara's plan complies with the agency's enterprise architecture , conforms to the agency's enterprise life - cycle methodology , reflects certain system acquisition best practices , and was reviewed by gao . the expenditure plan partially satisfies the other two conditions: nara partially satisfies the condition that it develop capital planning and investment control review processes designed to help ensure that projects are being implemented at an acceptable cost and within expected time frames and that they are contributing to observable improvements in mission performance . while nara has conducted regular meetings with senior - level agency management to review era progress , these groups did not document approval of important schedule and scope changes to a recent era increment . further , nara has not conducted post - implementation reviews of deployed era capabilities , such as the recently deployed congressional records component , to validate estimated benefits and costs .