congress did not enact these proposals . in march 2004 , dod resubmitted many of the same proposals to congress for consideration as part of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 . dod's fiscal year 2005 legislative proposals are aimed at eliminating or amending statutory provisions that the department believes restrict its flexibility in managing general and flag officers . one group of the fiscal year 2005 legislative proposals would make changes affecting general and flag officer career length as well as retirement compensation . a proposal to increase the maximum retirement age from 62 to 68 . a proposal to eliminate existing restrictions on the number of terms of the chairman and vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff . currently , the chairman and vice chairman are appointed by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate . they serve at the pleasure of the president for a 2-year term and may be reappointed in the same manner for two additional terms , for a total of 6 years . in time of war , there is no limit on the number of reappointments . an officer may not serve as chairman and vice chairman if the combined service exceeds 6 years , except that the president may extend this period to 8 years if he determines such action is in the national interest . this limitation also does not apply in the time of war . under dod's proposal , the president may reappoint the chairman and vice chairman for additional 2-year terms as he determines necessary , without congressional involvement . the provision limiting total combined service as chairman and vice chairman would be eliminated under dod's proposal . a proposal to eliminate existing restrictions on the length of terms of the two assistants to the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff for national guard and reserve matters . each assistant serves at the pleasure of the chairman for a 2-year term and may be continued in that assignment in the same manner for 1 additional term . in time of war there is no limit on the number of terms . under dod's proposal , no terms would be specified for these two positions . a proposal to permit the president or the secretary of defense to laterally reassign general and flag officers in grades o - 9 and o - 10 to positions at the same grade without congressional approval . currently , the president may designate positions of importance to carry the grade of o - 9 or o - 10 . an officer assigned to any such position has the grade specified for that position if he is appointed to that grade by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate . if the officer is subsequently reassigned to a position at the same grade , that new assignment must be confirmed by the senate . under dod's proposal , the president or the secretary of defense may reassign such an officer to another position at the same grade without the advice and consent of the senate .