individuals . ii. ) according to interviews with agency officials and financial professionals and information from agency websites , wind project developers have used various combinations of these initiatives to help finance specific wind projects . for instance , in many cases , developers combined the support of more than one treasury initiative and , in some cases , they received additional support from smaller doe or usda grant or loan guarantee programs . among treasury initiatives , although the ptc , energy investment credit ( also known as the energy investment tax credit , or itc ) , and section 1603 program cannot be combined for a specific project , they all support wind projects for which developers also typically claim accelerated depreciation recovery periods for specific energy property ( accelerated depreciation ) , according to financial professionals and a treasury official . in addition , doe's section 1705 program has provided loan guarantees for four utility - scale wind generation projects , all of which have received grants under treasury's section 1603 program , and all of which are eligible to claim accelerated depreciation . similarly , usda's grant and loan programs have supported projects that also received support under other initiatives . for example , usda's direct and guaranteed electric loan program provided a loan guarantee for a $204 million loan for a wind project that was also awarded an $88 million grant under the section 1603 program . in addition , usda's rural energy for america program ( reap ) provides grants and loan guarantees for renewable energy projects . a 2006 report by doe's lawrence berkeley national laboratory ( lbnl ) found that nearly all wind projects with a capacity of over 100 kilowatts that received reap grants from 2003 through 2005 also intended to claim tax credits under the ptc . third , because of the relatively large number of and variety in the initiatives that supported deployment , we further focused our analysis on those deployment initiatives that provided financial support for construction or operation of wind facilities . although these initiatives have , in some cases , provided duplicative support , their support may address different needs of wind project developers or the communities they serve , according to agency officials and financial professionals with whom we spoke , and analyses by doe's national laboratories . for example , unlike the ptc and itc , the section 1603 program allows wind project developers to directly claim a cash grant regardless of their tax liability , thus avoiding the potential need to partner with financial institutions or other investors who provide tax equity . the section 1603 program was created in part to address a perceived lack of tax equity following the recent financial crisis , according to treasury guidance and financial professionals . furthermore , by providing a cash grant , the program allows developers to receive the full amount of the government subsidy rather than sharing this subsidy with tax equity investors . doe's section 1705 program , meanwhile , provided financing in many cases for innovative projects that were seen as too risky to obtain affordable financing from private lenders , according to doe officials who administered the program .