and these are only the reported attacks . the director , cert centers , stated that he estimates that as much as 80 percent of actual security incidents goes unreported , in most cases because ( 1 ) the organization was unable to recognize that its systems had been penetrated or there were no indications of penetration or attack , or ( 2 ) the organization was reluctant to report . figure 1 shows the number of incidents reported to the cert coordination center from 1995 through 2002 . according to the national security agency , foreign governments already have or are developing computer attack capabilities , and potential adversaries are developing a body of knowledge about u.s. systems and methods to attack these systems . the benefits have been enormous . vast amounts of information are now literally at our fingertips , facilitating research on virtually every topic imaginable ; financial and other business transactions can be executed almost instantaneously , often 24 hours a day ; and electronic mail , internet web sites , and computer bulletin boards allow us to communicate quickly and easily with a virtually unlimited number of individuals and groups . however , this widespread interconnectivity also poses enormous risks to our computer systems and , more important , to the critical operations and infrastructures they support , such as telecommunications , power distribution , national defense , law enforcement , and critical government services . further , private - sector entities control over 80 percent of our nation's critical infrastructures . because potential adversaries — be they nation - states , cyberterrorist groups , criminal organizations , or disgruntled insiders — can develop cyberattack capabilities to attempt to exploit these risks , it is essential that our critical infrastructures be adequately protected . in response to these concerns , in may 1998 the president issued presidential decision directive 63 ( pdd 63 ) , which called for a range of actions intended to improve federal agency security programs , establish a partnership between the government and the private sector , and improve the nation's ability to detect and respond to serious computer - based or physical attacks . such critical infrastructure protection ( cip ) activities are intended to enhance the security of cyber and physical public and private infrastructures that are essential to national security , national economic security , or national public health and safety . pdd 63 encouraged nonfederal participation , including voluntary creation of information sharing and analysis centers ( isacs ) to serve as mechanisms for gathering , analyzing , and appropriately sanitizing and disseminating information to and from infrastructure sectors and the federal government . the directive also appointed lead federal agencies to work with specific industry sectors , and it established several federal cip entities , such as the critical infrastructure assurance office ( ciao ) within the department of commerce , which was intended to , among other things , develop a national plan for cip , and the national infrastructure protection center ( nipc ) , an organization within the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) that was expanded to address national - level threat assessment , warning , vulnerability , and law enforcement investigation and response .