va concurred with both of these recommendations . va has made some progress in implementing these recommendations as of may 2015 by expanding the topics covered during field assistance visits and updating their standard operating procedures . however , we believe that va needs to undertake additional actions to sufficiently address them . specifically , va needs to ensure field assistance visits include a review of a sample of processed claims in order to determine whether staff are complying with claims processing requirements . our recent work has also found that va has no systematic process for auditing claims to ensure that they were appropriately approved or denied . va officials stated that they recommend , but do not require , that managers of va facility - based non - va medical care claims processing units audit samples of processed claims — including both approved and denied claims — to determine whether staff processed claims appropriately . however , in march 2014 we found that va did not know how many va facilities conducted such audits and none of the four va facilities we visited reported conducting them . therefore , in march 2014 , we recommended that va institute systematic audits of the appropriateness of claims processing decisions . va concurred with this recommendation and has made some progress implementing it as of may 2015 by instituting audits of some paid claims . however , we believe that to fully implement this recommendation , va needs to undertake additional action . ( see fig . both acquisition and clinical staff at va work together to plan , execute , and monitor clinical contracts at va. on the acquisition side , contracting officers ( co ) are responsible for planning , awarding , and administering contracts on behalf of the federal government . each co is authorized to obligate federal funds up to a specified limit and a co must formally approve all clinical contracts at va. common tasks of a co include developing acquisition planning documents used to begin a clinical contract , conducting market research to determine pricing and availability for a clinical contract , and completing the formal competitive or non - competitive solicitation process for contracts . each co works within a network contracting office and is overseen by managers within that office who report directly to va central office . there are 21 network contracting offices throughout va's health care system that manage all the contracting activities of a single visn . for each va clinical contract , the co responsible for the contract designates a contracting officers' representative ( cor ) at the va facility to help develop the clinical contract and monitor the contract provider's performance once the provider begins work . common tasks delegated to the cor include providing input on the performance requirements for the clinical contract , determining how the contract provider's performance will be measured and monitoring performance once work has begun , validating the contract provider's invoices to ensure their accuracy , managing contract modifications , and assisting the co in resolving any issues that may arise with the contract provider .