trash . disposal of unused opioids in the trash often introduces opioids into landfills . studies in scientific literature show that pharmaceutical ingredients have been observed in the water that passes through landfills , called leachate . similar to opioids that are flushed , opioids in landfill leachate can end up in wastewater streams and other water sources , according to epa officials . if an opioid is not on the fda flush list and a take - back option is not feasible , the agencies direct patients to take a series of steps to dispose of their opioids in household trash by: ( 1 ) mixing the drugs in an unpalatable substance such as dirt , cat litter , or used coffee grounds , ( 2 ) placing the mixture in a sealed container or plastic bag , and ( 3 ) throwing the container in the trash . an epa official said that mixing the drugs with an unpalatable substance is meant to deter misusers from searching through the trash to retrieve the drugs . disposal of opioids in the trash — either with an unpalatable substance or in - home disposal product — removes them from the home , but this option may not be permanent and the drugs still may be available for misuse . drugs that are disposed in the trash ultimately are introduced to landfills , where they can escape landfill containment and enter wastewater streams or ground water sources . fda's website notes the availability of commercial products for disposing of unused opioids and other drugs in the home . fda officials stated that , as of may 2019 , the agency had not evaluated the effectiveness of these products or made any recommendations related to their use , but they are aware that patients may opt to use these products . these products , known as in - home disposal products , are proprietary substances that patients can mix with their unused drugs , including opioids , before disposing of them in the trash . in - home disposal product vendors told us they sell or donate their products to pharmacies , local law enforcement , and community groups , which then distribute them to patients . a representative from a group that distributes these products , the amerisourcebergen foundation , noted that in - home disposal products may be a convenient option for patients for whom take - back options are not feasible , and marketing materials from a product vendor instruct patients to use their product if a take - back option is not available . vendors indicate that their products can prevent misuse of opioids by rendering drugs non - retrievable at home and by motivating patients to dispose of unused opioids . according to dea officials , rendering opioids non - retrievable by using an in - home disposal product is challenging , because the drugs have a variety of chemical and physical properties and potencies . furthermore , according to dea officials , a lethal dose of fentanyl can be as low as 250 micrograms in adults — and lower in children — underscoring the importance of effective disposal . some vendors have presented evaluations of their commercial products .