( see fig . additionally , 10 states reported in our survey that they provided additional points to applicants serving schools identified as the lowest performing or with the largest gaps in student achievement based on comparisons by race or socio - economic levels . we also assessed the extent to which each study was relevant to assessing what is known about the effectiveness of 21st century programs . three studies had major research design limitations resulting from the lack of a rigorously formed comparison group . as such , these studies were not able to demonstrate whether the programs were responsible for the effects being measured or whether other factors may have contributed . next , two analysts reviewed those studies a second time , retaining 13 studies that had a sample size above 100 students in the intervention group and evaluated more than one program or intervention site . the analysts further narrowed this sample to six studies , which we selected because they were focused on 21st century programs . in addition to reviewing education's 2014 meta - analysis , in our initial search of 104 papers , the analysts also identified two additional meta - analyses focused on afterschool programs , which we included in our sample because they were of appropriate quality and scope to assess afterschool program effects . we then conducted detailed reviews of the studies . these reviews entailed an evaluation of each study's research methodology , including its research design , sampling frame , selection of measures , data quality , limitations , and analytic techniques , as well as a summary of its major findings . after eliminating the three studies with major research design limitations , six studies remained in our review . for all four objectives , we reviewed agency documents and interviewed agency officials and researchers who had conducted work on the 21st century program . to examine how states and other entities have used 21st century funds , we reviewed education's 2014 annual characteristic report for the 21st century program . the reports provide summaries and analyses over time , based on program data collected from states in school years 2001-2002 through 2012-2013 using data from the profile and performance information collection system . in order to assess the reliability of the data underlying the reports , we reviewed agency documents regarding this data system , spoke with agency officials , and conducted electronic tests of data from the system for select data elements . we determined that the underlying data summarized and analyzed in education's 2014 annual characteristic report was sufficiently reliable for our purpose of reporting on program characteristics . to examine education's management of program data , we also reviewed education documents including budget justifications and documents on the 21st century data systems such as user guides , technical assistance documents for states , data dictionaries , and a 2013 education office of inspector general report on federal and state oversight for the 21st century program . to examine education's technical assistance , we reviewed education's program guidance to states , monitoring protocols and tools , and annual grantee satisfaction survey results which generally includes education's largest grant programs including the 21st century program .