dod concurred with this recommendation . according to a memorandum from the joint service committee on military justice , in september 2019 the committee proposed an action item as part of its annual review . specifically , the committee was considering an amendment to the ucmj's annual military justice reporting requirements to require the military services to include demographic information , including race and ethnicity , for all types of courts - martial . however , in december 2019 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2020 included a provision directing the secretary of defense to include data on race , ethnicity , and gender in the annual military justice reports . we believe that this statutory change meets the intent of our recommendation . by requiring the military services to report this information , servicemembers and the public will have greater visibility into potential disparities , which will help build confidence that dod is committed to a military justice system that is fair and just . dod has not issued guidance that establishes criteria to specify when any data indicating possible racial or ethnic disparities in the investigations , trials , or outcomes of cases in the military justice system should be further reviewed , and to describe what steps should be taken to conduct such a review if it were needed . while equal employment opportunity enforcement is a very different context than the military justice system , other federal agencies have developed such criteria in the equal employment opportunity context that can indicate when disparities should be examined further . for example , the department of justice , the department of labor , the equal employment opportunity commission , and the office of personnel management use a “four - fifths” test to determine when differences between subgroups in the selection rates for hiring , promotion , or other employment decisions are significant . these criteria , though inexact , provide an example of the type of criteria that dod could consider using as a basis for determining when disparities among racial groups in the military justice process could require further review or analysis . when separating general and special court - martial cases into those that either were or were not preceded by an investigation recorded in an mcio database , we found fewer statistically significant racial disparities in most of the military services in general and special courts - martial that were preceded by a recorded investigation . however , as shown in figure 3 below , statistically significant racial disparities were also present in general and special courts - martial that did not follow a recorded investigation in all military services included in this analysis , which would include cases where the investigation was performed by the servicemember's command . specifically , as shown in figure 3 above , we found that: general and special courts - martial following a recorded investigation . black , hispanic , and servicemembers in the other race category in the army , and hispanic servicemembers in the marine corps were more likely than white servicemembers to be tried in general and special courts - martial following a recorded investigation , after controlling for other attributes .