ref . ref . ref . industry classification ( naics ) . in addition to the contact named above , individuals making key contributions to this report include david lehrer , assistant director ; edward bodine , analyst - in - charge ; curtis agor ; kun - fang lee ; and david reed . what challenges do small employers face in establishing and maintaining a retirement plan for their employees ? and what options exist to address these challenges and attract more small employer plan sponsors ? to answer these research questions , we combined and analyzed retirement plan data from labor and irs data on 5.3 million small employers . we performed regression analyses to identify characteristics of small employers that are most likely to sponsor plans . we conducted literature reviews and interviewed retirement experts , organizations representing small employers , agency officials , and others on challenges faced by small employers in establishing and maintaining plans , and options for addressing those challenges . in addition , we conducted structured interviews with groups of small employers that did and did not sponsor plans . these interviews were conducted in five cities , which were judgmentally selected for geographic diversity . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . additional details regarding our methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from october 2010 to march 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . to encourage employers to establish and maintain retirement plans for their employees , the federal government provides preferential tax treatment under the internal revenue code ( irc ) for plans that meet certain requirements . in addition , the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , as amended , sets forth certain protections for participants in private - sector retirement plans and establishes standards of conduct for those that manage the plans and their assets , generally called fiduciaries . to the extent they qualify as fiduciaries under the law , plan sponsors assume certain responsibilities and potential liability under erisa . for example , a fiduciary must act prudently and solely in the interest of plan participants and their beneficiaries , which may require documenting decisions relating to the plan , including hiring outside professionals or service providers that advise and help administer plans . small employers may choose a plan for their employees from one of three categories: employer - sponsored ira plans ; defined contribution ( dc ) plans ; and defined benefit ( db ) plans appendix ii presents ( often referred to as traditional pension plans ) .information provided by labor and irs about some of the various types of retirement savings plans available to small employers . employer - sponsored ira plans: employer - sponsored ira plans allow employers and , in some cases , employees to make contributions for deposit in separate ira accounts for each participating employee . these plans generally have fewer administration and reporting requirements than other types of plans . participating employees bear the full investment risk of their account assets .