( see app . i for specifics on our scope and methodology. ) the original title i legislation was passed in 1965 , but the 1994 reauthorization of esea mandated fundamental changes to the title i program . one of the key changes involved the development of state systems of standards and assessments to ensure that students served by title i were held to the same standards of achievement as all other children . prior to 1994 , some states had already implemented assessment systems , but these tended to be norm - referenced — students' performance was judged in relation to the performance of other students . the 1994 legislation required assessments that were criterion - based — students' performance was to be judged against an objective standard . every state applying for title i funds since 1994 agreed to implement the changes described in the 1994 law and to bring its assessment systems into compliance . states are also required to develop a definition of adequate yearly progress based on the assessments to hold schools accountable for educational progress . to help states that could not meet the proposed 2001 timeline , education had authority to grant timeline waivers and compliance agreements to states under certain conditions . in its 2001 esea reauthorization , congress increased testing requirements for states as well as the consequences for not improving test scores in schools and did not eliminate any of the requirements of the 1994 legislation . as shown in table 1 , the 1994 and 2001 legislative requirements for assessment and accountability concern developing standards for content and performance ; measuring improvement ; implementing and administering assessments , including assessing students with limited english proficiency ; reporting assessment data ; and applying consequences for not meeting performance goals . the state then negotiates the terms of the agreement with education . education's written findings and the terms of the compliance agreement are published in the federal register . a state that enters into a compliance agreement to address requirements of the 1994 title i law and subsequently fails to meet the requirements of the agreement can be subject to loss of some state title i administrative funds . education is presently working on five compliance agreements ( alabama , idaho , montana , west virginia , and the district of columbia ) and has held public hearings for each . the 2001 reauthorization of esea was signed into law on january 8 , 2002 . the act provides states not in compliance with the 1994 title i requirements at the time of the signing of the 2001 legislation with a 90-day period that started on january 8 , 2002 to negotiate changes in the dates by which they must be in compliance with the 1994 requirements . after the conclusion of this 90-day period , the legislation prohibits further extensions for compliance with the 1994 requirements . states failing to meet these negotiated timelines will be subject to loss of some of their title i administrative funds . according to senior education officials , this loss could be significant to states , as many use federal program administrative funds to pay the salaries of state department of education staff .