under the proposed u.s . dairy proteins incentive program , the ccc would make subsidy payments , on a bid basis , to entities that produce and market dairy proteins from skim milk . the proposed legislation would provide , among other things , that receipt of a payment is contingent upon the end use of the dairy proteins produced ; that no applicant receives a payment if the contract submitted for review would undercut domestic prices for milk , nonfat dry milk , or dairy proteins ; and that the sale of the dairy proteins represents a new use of domestically produced dairy proteins . this program's potential impact on domestic dairy protein production depends on the relative profitability of these proteins , which , in turn depends on production costs and demand . the international trade commission's may 2004 study on milk protein products found that , given disincentives inherent in the price support program and constraints on u.s. demand for dairy proteins other than nonfat dry milk , the profitability of domestic protein production could be limited . for example , the study reported that the price support program creates a disincentive for u.s. processors to produce dairy proteins other than nonfat dry milk because by purchasing nonfat dry milk the price support program reduces the financial risk of manufacturing that product . processors of other proteins would need to invest in production facilities and then market their product without the benefit of a standing government offer of support . the study found that only under the most favorable conditions ( high skim milk protein yield and low variable costs ) would it be beneficial for u.s. processors to begin producing milk protein concentrate instead of nonfat dry milk . even then , positive returns were only for milk protein concentrates with protein concentrations above 70 or 80 percent . the classified pricing system could create an impediment to the development of a domestic protein industry depending upon how milk protein concentrate is classified . based on analysis presented in the international trade commission's report , classification under a higher - valued class would require producers of milk protein concentrate to pay more for their raw milk supplies , thus reducing their profits . in addition , the report noted that since may 2002 , the ccc has had a program to provide incentives to convert nonfat dry milk held in its stocks to casein . under this program , the ccc accepts competitive bids for ccc - owned nonfat dry milk stocks for the manufacture of casein . however , while usda has accepted some bids , in many cases processors' bids have been so low that usda has rejected them . finally , the international trade commission's report found that while milk protein concentrate is considered a useful additive to standardize protein content , the limitation on its use inherent in the food and drug administration's standards of identity further restrict domestic milk protein concentrate production . this limitation keeps the market for milk protein concentrates relatively small in comparison to the market for other dairy proteins . given these restrictions , the international trade commission estimated that the total u.s. market for milk protein concentrate is 40,000 to 50,000 metric tons per year .