against data in the fact tracker . we and diplomatic security , through the use of the fact tracker , were able to account for all 65 names . as 100 percent of our sample received fact or other appropriate training , we believe that state has established an effective system of internal controls over its training . according to dod guidance , the office of the secretary of defense for personnel and readiness is to develop policies , plans , and programs for the training of dod personnel , including civilians . in november 2010 , the office of the secretary of defense established counterinsurgency standards and required training of individuals and units , including dod civilians deploying to afghanistan , on such things as language and cultural awareness . dod guidance also requires u.s. central command to coordinate and approve training necessary to carry out missions assigned to the command and u.s. central command - established theater - training requirements that apply to dod civilians deployed to the command's area of responsibility.training requirements include general requirements such as anti - terrorism awareness training ; chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear personnel protective measures and survival skills ; mine and unexploded ordnance awareness ; and requirements specific to the country of deployment — for afghanistan , the requirements include , for example , language and cultural awareness training , implementation of the secretary of defense - approved counterinsurgency qualification standards , and high mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicle ( hmmwv ) and mine resistant ambush protected ( mrap ) egress training . finally , dod's 2010 strategic plan calls for the establishment of a requirements u.s. central command theater - process that includes front - end analysis and synchronizing service training programs with combatant commander requirements . as shown in table 6 , several dod organizations deploying civilians to afghanistan provide predeployment training to address office of the secretary of defense , u.s. central command , and their own specific requirements . to address these requirements , each of dod's components independently developed its own training courses ; however , we identified some gaps and duplication in this training . for example , air force civilians deploying to afghanistan through the cew were required to attend both air force and cew predeployment training . ( see app . i for a more complete description of our scope and methodology. ) the united states and its international partners from over 40 nations have been engaged in efforts to secure , stabilize , and rebuild afghanistan since 2001 . u.s. civilians have been a vital part of the u.s. strategy . to implement the u.s. strategy , the u.s. mission afghanistan committed in april 2009 to expand its civilian personnel both in kabul and in the field . u.s. government civilians in afghanistan generally fall under either the authority of the chief of mission ( i.e. ambassador ) or under dod's combatant commander authority . the chief of mission has authority over almost every u.s. executive branch employee there , except those under the command of a u.s. military commander or those on the staff of an international organization .