both departments concurred with our recommendations . in conclusion , va and dod are continuing to pursue their nearly 2 decades - long effort to establish interoperability between their electronic health records systems . yet while the departments' various initiatives over the years have increased the amount of patient health data exchanged by the departments and made accessible to providers , these efforts have been beset by persistent management challenges and uncertainty about the extent to which fully interoperable capabilities will be achieved and when . the 2013 decision to pursue separate modernizations , rather than a single , joint system , indicates that achieving interoperability will be an ongoing concern for years to come . moreover , it has once again highlighted the criticality of these departments needing to define what they aim to accomplish through these efforts , and identify meaningful outcome - oriented goals and metrics that indicate not only the extent to which progress is being made toward achieving full interoperability , but also the measures to which they will be held accountable . as we stressed in our report , establishing measurable goals for improving the care that va and dod provide to the millions of service members , veterans , and their beneficiaries is essential to more effectively position the departments to do so . chairmen hurd and coffman , ranking members kelly and kuster , and members of the subcommittees , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . if you or your staffs have any questions about this statement , please contact valerie c. melvin at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov . additional staff who made key contributions to this statement include mark t. bird ( assistant director ) , lee mccracken , jacqueline mai , scott pettis , and jennifer stavros - turner . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the report on which this testimony is based includes a more detailed discussion of the scope and methodology for our review . the work on which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . historically , patient health information has been scattered across paper records kept by different caregivers in many different locations . thus , the move toward collecting , storing , retrieving , and transferring these records electronically can significantly improve the quality and efficiency of care . this is especially true in the case of military personnel and veterans , because they tend to be highly mobile and may have health records at multiple facilities both within and outside the united states . interoperability allows patients' electronic health information to be available from provider to provider , regardless of where it originated .