( see app . i for more information on the 34 countries of the free trade area of the americas. ) also , countries in the region have concluded numerous bilateral free trade and investment agreements with others in the region and worldwide . in addition , chile and the european union have recently started trade negotiations , while similar european union and mercosur negotiations are already under way . in december 1994 , the heads of state of the 34 democratic countries in the western hemisphere agreed at the first summit of the americas in miami , florida , to conclude negotiations on a free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) no later than 2005 . the ftaa would cover a combined population of about 800 million people , more than $11 trillion in production , and $3.4 trillion in world trade . it would involve a diverse set of countries , from some of the wealthiest ( the united states and canada ) to some of the poorest ( haiti ) and from some of the largest ( brazil ) to some of the smallest in the world ( saint kitts and nevis ) . proponents of the ftaa contend that a successful negotiation could produce important economic benefits for the united states . the ftaa region is already important economically for the united states , purchasing about 36 percent of u.s. exports of goods and services in 1999 and receiving over 23 percent of u.s. foreign direct investment . business groups point out that if relatively high tariffs and other market access barriers are removed , u.s. trade with the region could expand further . u.s. exports to many ftaa countries face overall average tariffs above 10 percent , whereas all 33 other countries participating in ftaa negotiations already have preferential access to the u.s. market on certain products through unilateral programs or nafta . in addition , some u.s. industry representatives assert that they have lost sales and market share to competitors that have preferential access into other western hemisphere markets through bilateral free trade agreements that exclude the united states . for example , the u.s. trade representative testified before the house committee on ways and means in march 2001 that because of the canada - chile trade agreement , canadian products will enter chile duty free , while u.s. products face an 8 percent duty . the ftaa would help remedy this disadvantage by providing u.s. exporters with access equivalent to that provided to u.s. competitors . supporters also assert that the ftaa would benefit the united states by stimulating increased trade and investment and enabling more efficient production by allowing businesses to produce and purchase throughout an integrated hemisphere . a large number of issues remain to be resolved between now and the conclusion of the april meetings . when vice - ministers met in january 2001 to prepare for the april meetings , their discussions focused on solving controversies associated with the bracketed text . they spent less time discussing other decisions required in april , or resolving issues , such as whether more business facilitation measures are practical .