streamline the verification process . permit the sharing of client information among agencies to streamline eligibility determination processes and reduce duplication of related activities . in 1995 , the institute for educational leadership , based on its examination of the executive and legislative structures that federal means - tested programs are built upon , urged the administration to create a family council . one of the stated goals of such a council was to have been proposing changes to eligibility requirements , definitions , financing and administrative requirements , data collection and reporting requirements , and performance standards that were inconsistent , incoherent , and confusing . moreover , in a 1995 report to the congress , we concluded , in part , that the inefficient welfare system is increasingly cumbersome for program administrators to manage and difficult for eligible clients to access . just as the need for simplification of financial eligibility rules has been acknowledged , there has also been a general recognition that achieving substantial improvements in this area is exceptionally difficult . for example , implementing systematic changes to the federal rules for human service programs can be challenging because jurisdiction for these programs is spread among numerous congressional committees and federal agencies . substantial variations exist in the financial eligibility rules across selected means - tested federal programs . the primary sources of these variations are generally at the federal level , although for several programs such as tanf and medicaid states and localities have some flexibility in setting financial eligibility rules . variations exist among the programs in the financial rules regarding the types and amounts of income limits . differences also exist among these programs with regard to whose income is counted , what income is counted or excluded , and whether certain expenses — such as child care costs — are deducted in calculating income . in addition to income tests , programs impose different limits on the assets that an individual or family may hold in order to receive benefits . asset tests are further complicated because of the differences in how the equity in vehicles is treated when determining assets . the first and most basic difference among programs is the variation in type of income limits used for determining program eligibility . income limits for most of the 11 programs reviewed used a percentage of the federal poverty guideline or an area's median income . for example , the school meals program uses a percentage of the poverty guideline to set benefit eligibility while the housing programs use percentage of area median income to determine eligibility . the programs not only differed in the type of income limit but also in the actual level of income . for example , the maximum allowable gross monthly income for food stamps for a family of three is $1,585 nationwide , whereas , the maximum allowable gross monthly income for subsidized child care — which is based on state median income — is $4,494 in the state of connecticut ( the state with the highest median income ) . for all 11 programs except tanf , federal laws and regulations have set some income limit .