administrative activity . nqf did not meet the expected time frames for completing one of the required projects under the administrative activity — finalizing its annual work plan . specifically , the nqf contract requires nqf to develop an annual work plan and to receive final approval from hhs within the first 4 weeks of each contract year ; however , nqf did not meet this requirement in 2010 or 2011 . for example , the final 2011 mippa annual work plan was not developed by nqf and approved by hhs until april 1 , 2011 . according to nqf and hhs officials , the 2011 mippa work plan was not developed and approved on time due to extended discussions on the scope and cost estimates of nqf's ehr activities . hhs officials told us that the primary reason for the extended discussions was that they expected the costs to reflect all the work needed to complete the measure authoring tool ( mat ) by the end of the second contract year . however , they said that nqf only submitted a beta version of the tool by the end of the second contract year , which was not the version expected by hhs . nqf officials told us that the version was never intended to be final but rather a beta version , consistent with their understanding of hhs's expectations . as a result , hhs and nqf officials needed to evaluate the scope of work and cost estimates for this and other projects . further , nqf officials told us the delay in completing the 2011 mippa annual work plan resulted in the interruption of nqf's ongoing work related to the mat under the ehr contract activity . the delay also delayed its receipt of funding for some new or ongoing work under the contract . in some instances , nqf chose to start new or continue ongoing work with its own funding . for example , nqf officials stated that nqf began work related to the map using its own funds until hhs authorized the work . in addition , the delay in completing the 2011 mippa work plan resulted in the need to set the start date for fall 2011 rather than earlier in the contract year for some of the projects under the maintenance activity . nqf also exceeded its cost estimates for projects under three of the contract activities . hhs officials told us they approved the changes to the cost estimates and in some cases modified nqf's scope of work to help ensure that nqf's costs did not exceed the amount hhs had obligated for the contract activities . nqf officials stated that in certain cases , not meeting expected time frames contributed to nqf exceeding these cost estimates . for example , the delays in projects related to the ehr contract activity , including expanding the scope of the retooling project , contributed to nqf exceeding its cost estimate of about $3.8 million for the entire ehr contract activity by about $560,000 in the second contract year .