several factors account for this difference . for one , federal and nonfederal retirees receiving civil service or private - sector retirement pension or annuity payments have the option to waive tax withholdings . this treatment contrasts with that for active employees , both federal and nonfederal , who cannot claim an exemption from withholding unless they meet certain conditions . the treatment of civil service and private - sector retirees also differs from that of u.s. armed forces annuitants , since periodic pension or annuity payments for the latter ( as well as certain other types of payments ) are defined as wages and thus are subject to income tax withholding . if annuitants elect not to have amounts withheld and do not make the appropriate financial adjustments , they increase the risk of finding themselves without the means to pay their tax obligations . discussions with irs officials at several field offices we visited , and many of the cases we reviewed in our statistical sample , indicate that one underlying cause of tax delinquencies by federal annuitants is the lack of withholding of amounts from pension payments throughout the year to ensure that the individual is not faced with a substantial tax liability at the end of the year . in 14 ( 19 percent ) of the 73 unpaid tax cases we reviewed involving federal retirees , the lack of adequate tax withholdings or the absence of any withholdings contributed to substantial tax liabilities at the end of the year . another factor contributing to the difference is that without automatic tax withholdings from pension payments and without the means to pay amounts due , annuitants' accounts are often older than those of active federal workers . about 4 percent of the accounts and 15 percent of the outstanding balance owed by active federal workers as of october 1999 dated back to before 1990 . in contrast , 9 percent of the accounts and 30 percent of the outstanding balance owed by federal annuitants predated 1990 . because penalties and interest continue to accrue on outstanding unpaid taxes , the longer an account remains outstanding , the greater the extent to which the original taxes are increased by the added penalties and interest . over time , the penalties and interest can grow to the point where they significantly exceed the original balance due . irs records show that penalties and interest charges , both accrued and assessed , accounted for 59 percent of federal annuitants' average account balance as of october 1999 , compared with 50 percent of federal workers' average account balance . irs views compliance by its employees as critical to its mission as the nation's tax collector . in its rules of ethical conduct , irs expands on the ethical guidelines contained in executive order 12674 related to financial obligations . irs' rules of conduct specifically stress the requirement that its employees promptly and properly file all tax returns , and that properly filing tax returns includes providing the appropriate payments as reflected on the return . however , there was no other evidence in the case file to determine the source of these payments or the prospects for their continuation .