we stated that legal merit ( i.e. , the strength of evidence in a case ) was the predominant reason in the sections' decisions to pursue allegations of discrimination as cases . we also reported that the reasons generally given for closing a matter were , among others , insufficient evidence to support allegations and corrective action was taken by the jurisdiction investigated . the voting section has the discretion to initiate a matter or pursue a case under its statutes , with the exception of the review of changes in voting practices or procedures , which it is statutorily required to conduct under section 5 of the voting rights act ( vra ) . according to section officials , the section had as its priority the enforcement of all the statutes for which it was responsible throughout the period covered by our review . however , section and division officials identified shifts in the section's priorities beginning in 2002 . for example , the assistant attorney general in place from november 2005 through august 2007 stated that since 2002 , the section had increased its enforcement of the minority language provisions of the vra and instituted the most vigorous outreach efforts to jurisdictions covered by the minority language provisions of the act . during the 7-year period , the section initiated nearly 70 percent of vra matters ( 246 of 367 ) on behalf of language minority groups , primarily spanish speakers ( 203 of 246 ) . the section also initiated 162 matters under section 2 of the vra . the section initiated about half of these matters on behalf of language minority groups ( 80 ) , primarily spanish speakers ( 71 ) , and about half on behalf of racial minorities ( 88 of 162 ) , primarily african american voters ( 71 of 88 ) . during the 7-year period , the voting section filed 56 cases , primarily under the vra ( 39 ) . the majority of the cases the section filed in court under the vra were on behalf of language minority groups ( 30 of 39 ) , primarily spanish speakers ( 27 ) . the acting assistant attorney general reported in september 2008 that the division had brought more cases under the vra's minority language provisions during the past 7 years — a stated priority — than in all other years combined since 1975 . while cases involving language minority groups were filed under various vra provisions , the largest number of cases ( 24 of 30 ) involved claims under section 203 alleging that the covered jurisdiction had failed to provide voting - related materials or information relating to the electoral process in the language of the applicable minority group . the section filed 13 cases involving a claim under section 2 of the vra – – 5 on behalf of language minority groups and 10 on behalf of racial minority groups ( 6 on behalf of hispanics , 3 on behalf of african americans , and 1 on behalf of whites ) .