dod concurred with our findings and recommendations . it also offered additional technical comments and suggestions to clarify our draft report , which we incorporated as appropriate . dod's comments appear in appendix i . to identify dod's efforts to strengthen its ability to protect and defend its space assets and the challenges facing dod in making those space control efforts successful , we reviewed the dod instruction for space control , u.s. space command's draft space control strategy , u.s. space command's long range plan , military service space master plans , dod's 1999 space policy , the report of the commission to assess united states national security space management and organization , and the 2001 quadrennial defense review . we also reviewed national and dod space policies and dod's future years defense program from fiscal year 2002 through 2007 . to understand dod's efforts and challenges , we reviewed the draft space control strategy and held discussions with officials at the u.s. space command , colorado springs , colorado . to gain a better understanding of how the services regarded the draft space control strategy and development of a corresponding investment plan , we held discussions with and obtained documentation from officials at the air force space command , peterson air force base , colorado springs , colorado ; air force headquarters , washington , d.c. ; the army space and missile defense command , arlington , virginia ; the naval space command detachment , peterson air force base , colorado springs , colorado ; the office of the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications and intelligence ; the joint staff ; under secretary of defense comptroller / chief financial officer and director , program , analysis and evaluation ; the office of the national security space architect , fairfax , virginia ; and the rand's national security and research division , washington , d.c. to identify the acquisition challenges , we reviewed prior gao reports on practices characterizing successful acquisition program and held discussions with dod officials . specifically , we held discussions with and obtained documentation from representatives of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and officials with the air force / national reconnaissance office integration planning group . we performed our work from july 2001 through july 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; the director of the office of management and budget ; and interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others on request . the head of a federal agency is required under 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform no later than 60 days after the date of the report and to the senate and house committee on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report . in addition , the report will be available at no charge at the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .