we are now at a critical juncture . in less than a decade , the profound demographic shift that is a certainty will have begun . despite a common awareness of medicare's current and future fiscal plight , pressure has been building to address recognized gaps in medicare coverage , especially the lack of a prescription drug benefit and protection against financially devastating medical costs . filling these gaps could add massive expenses to an already fiscally overburdened program . under the trustees 2003 intermediate assumptions , the present value of hi's actuarial deficit is $6.2 trillion . this difficult situation argues for tackling the greatest needs first and for making any benefit additions part of a larger structural reform effort . the medicare benefit package , largely designed in 1965 , provides virtually no outpatient drug coverage . beneficiaries may fill this coverage gap in various ways . all beneficiaries have the option to purchase supplemental policies — medigap — when they first become eligible for medicare at age 65 . those policies that include drug coverage tend to be expensive and provide only limited benefits . some beneficiaries have access to coverage through employer - sponsored policies or private health plans that contract to serve medicare beneficiaries . in recent years , coverage through these sources has become more expensive and less widely available . beneficiaries whose income falls below certain thresholds may qualify for medicaid or other public programs . according to one survey , in the fall of 1999 , more than one - third of beneficiaries reported that they lacked drug coverage altogether . medicare also does not limit beneficiaries' cost - sharing liability . the average beneficiary who obtained services had a total liability for medicare - covered services of $1,700 , consisting of $1,154 in medicare copayments and deductibles in addition to the $546 in annual part b premiums in 1999 , the most recent year for which data are available on the distribution of these costs . the burden can , however , be much higher for beneficiaries with extensive health care needs . in 1999 , about 1 million beneficiaries were liable for more than $5,000 , and about 260,000 were liable for more than $10,000 for covered services . in contrast , employer - sponsored health plans for active workers typically limited maximum annual out - of - pocket costs for covered services to less than $2,000 per year for single coverage . modernizing medicare's benefit package will require balancing competing concerns about program sustainability , federal obligations , and the hardship faced by some beneficiaries . in particular , the addition of a benefit that has the potential to be extremely expensive — such as prescription drug coverage — should be focused on meeting the needs deemed to be of the highest priority . this would entail targeting financial help to beneficiaries most in need — those with catastrophic drug costs or low incomes — and , to the extent possible , avoiding the substitution of public for private insurance coverage .