oregon . the oregon polst coalition used its relationship with stakeholder groups in the state — a large health system , and the state health authority — to educate individuals about polst forms . living will . a living will is a written expression of how an individual wants to be treated in certain medical circumstances . depending on state law , a living will may permit an individual to express whether they wish to be given life - sustaining treatment in the event they are terminally ill or injured , to decide in advance whether they wish to be provided food and water via intravenous devices ( known as tube feeding ) , and to give other medical directions that affect their health care , including at the end of life . a living will applies to situations in which the decision to use life - sustaining treatments may prolong an individual's life for a limited period of time and not obtaining such treatment would result in death . having a living will does not mean that medical providers would deny medications and other treatments that would relieve pain or otherwise help an individual be more comfortable . health care power of attorney . a health care power of attorney is a document that identifies a health care agent — also called a health care proxy — as the decision maker for the patient . under state law , the health care power of attorney typically becomes operative when an individual is medically determined as unable to make decisions . most commonly , this situation occurs either because the individual is unconscious or because the individual's mental state is such that they do not have the legal capacity to make decisions . as with living wills , the process for validly executing a health care power of attorney depends on the state of residence . the health care power of attorney may be designated by using a model form in state statute or it may be drafted specifically for an individual by a lawyer . similar to the living will , medical providers will make the initial determination as to whether an individual has the capacity to make their own medical treatment decisions . most adults in the united states do not have an advance directive . according to a 2017 study , about 37 percent of adults had an advance directive . however , the proportion of individuals with an advance directive can vary by demographic group . see appendix i for more information related to the prevalence of advance directives . polst forms differ from advance directives in that they are medical orders used to communicate an individual's treatment wishes , and are appropriate for individuals with a serious illness or advanced frailty near the end - of - life . for these individuals , their current health status indicates the need for medical orders . in the event of a medical emergency , the polst form serves as an immediately available and recognizable medical order in a standardized format to aid emergency personnel . following the polst form orders , emergency personnel can honor the individual's treatment wishes as communicated to and documented by the individual's health care provider .