( see fig . we identified over 4,600 federal contractors that had unpaid taxes at the time they received a contract award in 2015 and 2016 . the department of defense , hhs , va , and doe noted that they plan to review the contract awards identified in our review . in addition , several agencies described steps they will be taking to address our recommendations . for example , the department of defense noted that it plans to take corrective actions or add controls as necessary . hhs noted that it will assess internal controls and take appropriate action . va noted that it will provide an action plan . doe noted that it will design or modify controls for regulatory compliance , if necessary . gsa noted that it will work with the procurement community through established governance channels to identify potential approaches for drawing contracting officers' attention to qualifying federal tax - debt information reported in sam . the irs noted its commitment to obtaining accurate information on potential levy sources and , accordingly , indicated it will review the benefits of expanding the information included on its form 8596 , along with other alternatives , to determine their feasibility , effectiveness , and relative burden . the irs further noted that it will review the potential benefits and costs that would result from changing the current reporting threshold for contract payments , and submit its findings to the office of irs chief counsel to consider this addition to the irs priority guidance plan . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , the secretary of veterans affairs , the secretary of defense , the secretary of the navy , the secretary of the army , the secretary of energy , the administrator of gsa , the commissioner of internal revenue , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or shear@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix viii . this report first examines the extent to which , in calendar years 2015 and 2016 , ( 1 ) selected federal agencies had control activities that ensured contractors' reported federal tax debts were considered before contract award . the remainder of the report assesses the same period ; however , it focuses on all executive - branch agencies and examines the extent to which ( 2 ) federal contracts were awarded to contractors with federal tax debt , including the characteristics of those contracts and contractors , and ( 3 ) the internal revenue service ( irs ) identified selected federal contractors' payments for levy .