the proposal retains the aip and re&d accounts . see table 2 for a comparison of the current and proposed faa budget structure . in january 2007 , faa released a new cost allocation study . this report sets forth a methodology for assigning air traffic costs to user groups on the basis of aircraft type . the two principal user groups are the high - performance group , which includes all fixed - wing turbine engine aircraft operations , and the piston aircraft group , which includes piston engine fixed - wing aircraft operations and helicopters . according to faa , this cost allocation methodology is based on the assumption that high - performance users generally compete for the same air traffic control resources and their operations are more time - sensitive than piston aircraft operations , requiring more complex air traffic equipment and procedures . piston aircraft operations , on the other hand , tend to be less time - sensitive and typically rely on less complex equipment . differences in the speed and cruising altitudes of the two aircraft types also affect their en route costs . the current funding structure , with some modifications to the excise taxes and tax rates and changes in the levels of general fund contributions , has successfully funded a growing faa budget . trust fund revenues are projected to increase substantially at current excise tax rates . if , to fund the additional costs of nextgen or for other reasons , congress chooses to increase spending on aviation beyond what can be paid for at current excise tax rates , it can obtain additional revenue through the current funding structure by increasing excise tax rates , the general fund contribution , or both , although the nation's fiscal imbalance could make such an increase difficult . nonetheless , because some factors that drive tax revenues , such as ticket prices , are not well linked to faa's workload and costs , faa has been concerned about the long - run revenue adequacy , equity , and efficiency of its funding . some of the administration's proposed changes for funding faa , such as establishing direct user charges for commercial aviation and substantially increasing fuel taxes for general aviation are intended to link faa's revenues more closely with its costs . for other elements of faa's budget , however , it is not possible to establish a direct link between revenues and costs . for example , because aip expenditures are not the direct result of costs imposed by users of the nas , the proposal to fund aip through equal fuel taxes on all aircraft operators can best be evaluated on equity grounds . these two new accounts would replace the operations and f&e accounts . in addition , such a system could show the costs attributable to each line of business , thereby supporting the agency's internal financial management . however , some faa activities may not be clearly divisible into discrete categories . for example , one new account — the safety and operations account — includes safety - related activities .