state . state's fam includes requirements related to the collection of e - 2 visa application information for all e - 2 principals ( i.e . investors , managers , and essential employees ) . principal investors provide their information when they complete their application online , which is automatically uploaded to state's consular database system . state has resources to help combat nonimmigrant visa fraud , including for e - 2 visas . state officials said that the resources available and the steps they take if e - 2 fraud is suspected are similar for all types of visa fraud . if a consular officer reviewing an e - 2 visa application suspects fraud — either during prescreening or after the interview — the officer is to make a fraud referral to the post's fraud prevention manager or to diplomatic security officials . according to state officials , not every case with potential fraud concerns will be referred for additional investigation . other requirements . consular officers told us that some of the other e - 2 eligibility requirements are not particularly challenging . for example , consular officers at all 14 posts told us that it is relatively straightforward to determine if the applicant has a clear intent to depart the united states upon termination of e - 2 status because applicants typically provide an affidavit attesting to their nonimmigrant intent . further , consular officers stated that it is easy to determine if the applicant is an eligible dependent because consular officers are familiar with local identity information ( eg , birth and marriage certificates ) and there are no nationality requirements for dependents . in addition to potential challenges with respect to the analysis of the eligibility requirements , consular officers at 4 of 14 posts also identified challenges in understanding business and financial documents that are provided in support of an e - 2 application . for example , at one post we visited , a consular officer explained the challenges he faced in understanding u.s. tax documentation and the differences between various types of corporations . further , consular managers at two posts stated that officers without prior knowledge in basic business concepts can find e - 2 visa adjudication challenging when they first arrive at post . a manager from a third post stated that the complexity of some e - 2 visa cases requires knowledge of business and finance acquired through substantial experience or education . more than marginal business requirement: the investment must be made in a business that has the capacity to generate more than enough income to provide a minimal living for the treaty investor or employee and family , or has the present or future capacity ( generally within five years ) to make a significant economic contribution . although les do not adjudicate visas , les at 6 of 14 posts also indicated that they had encountered challenges with respect to the analysis of the e - 2 eligibility requirements . for example , les at one post indicated that it can be challenging to determine whether a company is more than marginal ( see sidebar ) because the size , type or investment sector of each e - 2 company presents unique facts and circumstances .