gao - 06-578t . washington , d.c.: march 28 , 2006 . medicaid fraud and abuse: cms's commitment to helping states safeguard program dollars is limited . how has cms used funds provided through the hcfac program that were specifically for medicaid ? to identify the extent to which cms has improved its oversight , including its ability to identify and address emerging issues that put federal medicaid dollars at risk , we performed work at cms headquarters and two regional offices . we reviewed and assessed aspects of cms's financial oversight processes , which include identifying high - risk areas in order to develop an annual regional office financial management workplan and conducting focused financial reviews of high - risk areas . we reviewed our prior reports , and reports by hhs's office of inspector general ( oig ) and others . we also interviewed officials and staff at the cms central office in baltimore , maryland , and two regional offices — new york and chicago . to determine how cms used funds from the hcfac account for fiscal years 2003 through 2005 , we obtained from cms a list of medicaid projects that were funded from the hcfac account during those 3 years . we obtained and examined documentation from cms such as invoices ; grant awards ; interagency agreements ; and accounting , budget , and payroll records that support the information provided by cms on how it used hcfac funds for that time frame . see appendix i for more details about our scope and methodology . we requested written comments on a draft of this report from the administrator of cms or his designee . his written comments are reprinted in appendix iii . we conducted our review from february 2005 to may 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . medicaid is the third largest social program in the federal budget and one of the largest components of state budgets . states and cms share responsibility for instituting financial practices for the medicaid program that are in compliance with applicable rules , laws , and regulations . in general , the federal government matches state medicaid spending for medical assistance according to a formula based on each state's per capita income . the federal contribution ranged from 50 to 77 cents of every state dollar spent on medical assistance in fiscal year 2004 . for most state medicaid administrative costs , the federal match rate is 50 percent . for skilled professional medical personnel , 75 percent federal matching is available . states are responsible for providing the state share of medicaid funding and submitting plans , budgets , and expenditure reports to cms that accurately report on the administration of their medicaid programs and how they expend medicaid funds . cms is responsible for reviewing the states' plans , budgets , expenditures , and operations to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and regulations . each state develops its own administrative structure and establishes its own eligibility standards , scope of covered services , and payment rates in accordance with medicaid statute and within broad federal guidelines .