investigations . the army collects and maintains information on investigations conducted by the army criminal investigation command in the army law enforcement reporting and tracking system database . according to army officials , the office of the provost marshal general and the army criminal investigation command developed this database to replace a 2003 system , the army criminal investigation and intelligence system , and a significant part of the military police's 2002 system , the centralized operations police suite . the officials said that the army law enforcement reporting and tracking system has been operational since 2015 , and has become the primary case management system for all army law enforcement professionals . however , army officials said that cases involving commander - led investigations are unlikely to be recorded in this database . courts - martial and nonjudicial punishments . we also checked to see that the values for variables were internally consistent and that results were not affected unduly by outlier values that might suggest miscoded values . for the purposes of our analysis , we found the variables we ultimately reported on to be sufficiently reliable . furthermore , due to the sensitivity of the information analyzed in this report , we did not include information in instances where the number of servicemembers subjected to a particular military justice action was fewer than 20 , to protect privacy . literature review . to assess the extent to which disparities in the military justice system and the civilian justice system had been previously assessed , we conducted a literature review . to identify relevant publications about disparities in the military justice system and the civilian justice system , we performed a literature search of a number of bibliographic databases , including proquest academic , proquest dialog , scopus , ebsco , and heinonline . we also searched two think tank search engines: policy file and the think tank search ( from the harvard kennedy school ) . we received the following types of publications: scholarly / peer reviewed material , dissertations , and association / think tank / nonprofit publications . to identify publications by dod and the services related to the military justice system , we reviewed prior gao reports and asked officials at the dod office of diversity , equity and inclusion , and in the services' respective diversity and inclusion offices to identify relevant publications . as shown in figure 15 below , our analysis of data contained in the military services' military criminal investigations databases found that black servicemembers were subjects of recorded investigations at a higher rate compared to their proportion of the overall service population in all of the military services . hispanic servicemembers were the subjects of recorded investigations at a higher rate compared to their proportion of the overall service population in the navy and the air force , at a lower rate in the marine corps , and at the same rate in the army . additionally , we found that males were the subjects of recorded investigations at higher rates than their share of the general service population in all of the military services .