improved logistics and resupply capabilities . researchers at the natick soldier research development and engineering center said that they are exploring new technologies and systems that could provide improved logistics support for squads in the form of precise and on - demand resupply . army officials noted that personnel loads are affected by confidence levels in resupply and logistics support . for example , squads that are more confident in resupply may be more willing to carry less ammunition , water , food , and other supplies , thus reducing the total weight carried by personnel . therefore , developing new aerial delivery systems capable of providing small - and medium - sized payloads with precision could enable soldiers and marines to carry not more than the necessary equipment and supplies . the marine corps has implemented one of these systems , the joint precision airdrop system , which was developed by the army's aerial delivery directorate at the natick soldier research development & engineering center . this system is designed to accurately deliver ( within 150 meters ) up to 700 pounds of supplies to personnel operating in inaccessible environments . a marine corps program official stated that the system would likely alter planning and allow personnel to forgo packing excess food , water , ammunition , and other supplies . they also stated that the procurement and sustainment costs for all units of this system totaled approximately $850,000 for fiscal years 2013 through 2016 . load transfer technologies: the army and marine corps are evaluating both manned and unmanned load transfer technologies capable of travelling with units or squads ( see figure 4 ) . these technologies may allow soldiers and marines to offload some items such as food , water , or ammunition . for example , the marine corps is currently employing 144 mrzr all - terrain vehicles capable of traveling with squads and transporting up to 1500 pounds of personnel , equipment , and supplies . marine corps officials stated that the total acquisition and sustainment costs for all the vehicles are projected to be approximately $15 million between fiscal years 2016 and 2018 . similarly , the army is in the process of developing an unmanned or optionally - manned squad support vehicle capable of traveling with dismounted personnel and carrying up to 1000 pounds of equipment . the prototypes include both tracked and wheeled variants . army officials stated that they plan to pursue this as an official program and field the vehicles in fiscal years 2020 and 2021 . in addition , the defense advanced research project agency supported similar research and development efforts by designing and testing the legged squad support system , which researchers stated had the intended capability to carry up to 1,000 pounds of equipment and travel semi - autonomously with squads and fire teams . while the army and marine corps are not currently pursuing this specific system , they plan to test additional unmanned ground systems with similar load transferring and mobility capabilities . lighter ammunition: army and marine corps program managers are developing lightweight technologies and monitoring third - party research related to the development of polymer - case ammunition for commonly used .50 caliber , 7.62 mm , and 5.56 mm rounds .