in some countries , more than one entity broadcasts in the same language . for example , services can be “merged” by having one service subsume another ( as was the case with radio farda ) . a second approach is to run alternating services , as is the case with the afghanistan radio network , which runs voa and rfe / rl programming on a single broadcast stream . another approach is to simply terminate one or both overlapping services . all of the board's overlapping services were assessed with these different approaches in mind . as a result of this analysis , the board identified an estimated $4.9 million in fiscal year 2004 and 2005 savings from overlap services that could be redirected to higher - priority broadcasting needs , such as expanded persian language television for iran and expanded urdu language radio for pakistan . mr. chairman , the board has revised its strategic planning and performance management system to respond to the recommendations in our july 2003 report aimed at improving the measurement of its results . in that report , we recommended that the board's new strategic plan include a goal designed to gauge progress toward reaching significant audiences in markets of strategic interest to the united states . currently , 42 of the board's 74 language services ( or 57 percent ) target the same audiences in the same languages . other program effectiveness measures include program quality , the number of broadcast affiliates , signal strength , internet usage , and cost per listener . in response to our recommendation for a measure of broadcaster credibility to identify whether target audiences believe what they hear , the board added such a measure to its performance management system . reaching a large listening or viewing audience is of little use if audiences largely discount the news and information portions of broadcasts . our survey of senior program managers and discussions with board staff and outside groups all suggest the possibility that u.s. broadcasters ( voa in particular ) suffer from a credibility problem with foreign audiences , who may view voa and other broadcasters as biased sources of information . intermedia , the board's audience research contractor , told us that it was working on a credibility index for another customer that could be adapted to meet the board's needs and , when segmented by language service , would reveal whether there are significant perception problems among key target audiences . however , to develop a similar measure , intermedia told us that the board would need to add several questions to its national survey instruments . in response to our finding that the board lacked a measure of audience awareness , the board has added such a measure to its performance management system . we determined this measure would help the board answer a key question of effectiveness: whether target audiences are even aware of u.s. international broadcasting programming available in their area . board officials have stated that this measure would help the board understand a key factor in audience share rates and what could be done to address audience share deficiencies .