gao - 10-404 . reasons cited for this were differing interpretations of fema's mission and authorities and varying interpretations of ltcr's mission by federal coordinating officers . a senior fema official told us that , based on his experience , federal coordinating officers generally believe that fema's long - term recovery mission is primarily to work with the states immediately after a disaster to develop a long - term recovery plan . under this view , assisting states and local communities with coordinating federal assistance to implement their recovery plans is not the responsibility of staff working under esf - 14 , but rather that of regional staff or other fema recovery officials who remain in the disaster area . however , fema regional staff sometimes did not take on this role . as a result , in some cases , such as in texas after hurricane ike , state and local officials found that they were left without federal coordination and planning assistance during a critical period in the recovery process . an effective way to avoid conflicts and misunderstandings regarding the roles and responsibilities of the many entities involved in the disaster recovery process is to clearly delineate them ahead of time through planning . on the state and local level , we found several examples of jurisdictions that used predisaster recovery plans to do this . for example , in 1987 , several years before the northridge earthquake hit in 1994 , the city of los angeles created a recovery and reconstruction plan that clearly identified the roles and responsibilities of key officials involved in recovery . specifically , the plan identified which city departments have responsibility for implementing predetermined activities before and after a disaster in several functional categories , including residential , commercial , industrial rehabilitation , and economic recovery . to be most helpful , such a plan must be more than simply paper instructions , rather it is a dynamic and inclusive process that is brought to life by periodic exercises . long - term recovery planning exercises held by the city of los angeles brought police and fire officials together to engage in role - playing exercises in which they assumed the responsibilities of recovery officials . for example , a public safety officer played the role of a building inspector responsible for issuing building permits after an earthquake . a city official at the time of the earthquake told us that such exercises were an important part of developing relationships among stakeholders and ensuring city staff understood their postdisaster roles and responsibilities . according to a federally - funded evaluation of this plan , the contacts established during the planning process facilitated recovery after the northridge earthquake . communities in other areas including san francisco , california , and palm beach , florida , have taken action to develop recovery plans prior to a disaster that identify roles and responsibilities for recovery . fema has taken steps to more - clearly define the roles and responsibilities of federal , state , and nongovernmental partners in the ndrf that was finalized in september 2011 .