ii. ) as shown in figure 2 , facilities did not uniformly comply with the two screening requirements va implemented to address our recommendations . we found that for health care practitioners hired since october 1 , 2004 , only two facilities were querying hipdb as required , and none of the seven facilities consistently completed the required employment checklist to document the completion of screening requirements for applicants va intends to hire . while two facilities performed hipdb queries on applicants , one of these facilities completed the queries immediately prior to our visit . during our site visits , we also found that two facilities had created their own employment checklists . while facilities are permitted to modify the format of the checklist as long as the modification includes all of the screening requirements contained in the original checklist issued in september 2004 , we found that the checklists used by these two facilities did not include all of the screening requirements . two of the seven facilities we visited were also included in our march 2004 report . since our last site visit , these two facilities improved their performance in conducting background investigations for salaried health care practitioners to compliance rates of 75 and 72 percent , as shown in figure 3 . however , both facilities were still well below our compliance rate of 90 percent . as part of our review , we also measured facilities' compliance with va's background investigation requirement for health care practitioners other than those salaried by va. we found that all seven of the facilities we visited did not meet va's background investigation requirements for fee basis and woc health care practitioners . for example , although one facility conducted background investigations on woc health care practitioners at a rate of 90 percent or better , no facility met the requirement for both groups of health care practitioners . furthermore , at four of the seven facilities we visited , facility human resource management staff could not produce a comprehensive list of all woc health care practitioners working at the facility because human resource management staff were not screening all woc health care practitioners prior to their beginning work at the va facility . figure 4 summarizes the seven facilities' rate of compliance with va's background investigation requirement as applied to fee basis and woc health care practitioners . ( for detailed information about each facility's compliance with this requirement , see app . ii. ) like their efforts conducting background investigations for fee basis and woc health care practitioners , the efforts of most va facilities we visited did not meet this requirement for health care practitioners obtained through contracts . specifically , we found that one of seven medical facilities was conducting and documenting background investigations for contract health care practitioners , as va requires . the other six facilities were not in compliance with this requirement . in march 2005 , a va headquarters official announced that facility officials should implement fingerprint - only background investigations for volunteers , as soon as the facilities' electronic fingerprint equipment was operational or no later than september 1 , 2005 .