direct hire authorities . these authorities provide lab directors with a streamlined and accelerated hiring process . congress has enacted four types of direct hire authorities since 2008 , which help labs compete with private industry and academia for high - quality scientific , engineering , and technical talent . specific types of direct hire authorities include hiring: ( 1 ) candidates with advanced degrees ; ( 2 ) candidates with bachelor's degrees ; ( 3 ) veterans ; and ( 4 ) students currently enrolled in graduate or undergraduate science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) programs. , laboratory enhancement pilot program . this authority provides methods for effective lab management operations . section 233 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 established a pilot program for lab directors to propose alternative and innovative methods that might lead to more effectively managing labs , and authorized lab directors to waive any regulation , restriction , requirement , guidance , policy , procedure , or departmental instruction that would affect implementation of these methods , unless such implementation would be prohibited by a provision of an existing statute or common law . micro - purchase authority . this authority facilitates the purchasing process for labs . the far states a preference for government agencies to purchase and pay for micro - purchases of supplies or services using the government - wide commercial purchase card up to and at the micro - purchase threshold , but micro - purchases may be conducted using any of the simplified acquisition methods . this facilitates the ability of lab officials to quickly and easily acquire needed items for their activities and reduce the administrative costs associated with such small purchases . while the far micro - purchase was generally $3,500 during our review , congress increased it to $10,000 for activities of the science and technology reinvention labs in section 217 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 . as we found in june 2018 , the federal government spends approximately $137 billion annually government - wide on research and development ( r&d ) to help further agencies' missions , including at federal labs . from fiscal years 2015 to 2017 , dod , energy , and nasa represented three of the top four federal agencies with the highest annual federal r&d spending , accounting for about 66 percent of total federal r&d spending on average , as shown in figure 3 . while the labs primarily support the agencies that directly fund them , dod , energy , and nasa research entities also collaborate extensively to support activities of shared interest . for example , dod and nasa research centers have collaborated to develop hypersonic vehicle capabilities . further , energy's national labs help provide critical national security capabilities for dod and support nasa's deep space mission radioisotope requirements . in 2017 , energy reported performing about $2.6 billion of work per year from fiscal years 2011 through 2015 for other federal agencies and other customers , including dod . most defense labs have used the selected authorities since 2008 , but their use has sometimes been limited for a variety of reasons .