we selected these offices because they adjudicated most of the naturalization applications . specifically , uscis data indicate that these 14 offices adjudicated nearly two - thirds of the approximately 715,000 naturalization applications adjudicated in fiscal year 2005 . to examine the extent to which uscis records how often naturalization applications are adjudicated without an a - file and why a - files might be missing , we obtained summary data from a uscis database containing information on whether an a - file was available when adjudicating a naturalization application . we also obtained summary data from nfts on a - files indicated as lost and , as having been in transit and yet to be recorded as received . we also interviewed officials from uscis headquarters and obtained instructions and guidance about using , locating , and requesting a - files . to determine the effect that missing a - files can have on the adjudication process , we interviewed uscis district office officials and staff . to determine if uscis has instituted additional procedures to help mitigate the risk of adjudicating a naturalization application without an a - file , we reviewed policies and procedures related to processing these applications , interviewed uscis officials , and reviewed relevant documents . in a prior review we determined how uscis ensures the quality and consistency of adjudicator decisions by examining uscis's two quality assurance programs and resulting outcomes , and reviewed the findings and recommendations of an independent study of uscis's quality assurance programs . to assess the reliability of uscis's system for managing naturalization applications and nfts data we ( 1 ) reviewed summary data and specific data elements for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness , ( 2 ) reviewed related documentation , and ( 3 ) interviewed uscis staff knowledgeable about uscis's system for managing naturalization applications and nfts . we found the data from its system for managing naturalization applications and its quality assurance database were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . uscis's long - range plans call for eventually converting paper a - files into electronic files , thus avoiding these transportation costs and making a - files available to multiple users simultaneously . in august 2006 , uscis awarded a 5-year $150 million contract to begin converting a - files . uscis adjudicates applications for immigration benefits through a network of field offices that include 4 service centers , 33 district offices , and 8 asylum offices . in fiscal year 2005 , uscis's budget was about $1.8 billion and uscis adjudicated about 7.5 million applications , of which over 715,000 were applications for naturalization . naturalization applications are adjudicated at uscis district offices and require the applicant to , among other things , undergo a security background check , be interviewed by an adjudicator and , demonstrate proficiency in english and a basic understanding of u.s. civics . this cooperation is important , especially because uscis has no authority to enforce compliance with file - tracking procedures among the other dhs components . as part of the adjudications process , adjudicators are to review the applicant's a - file to identify any information that may disqualify the applicant for naturalization , including information that may indicate potential fraud .