( app . iii provides a summary of other reviews of usaid's g2g assistance in afghanistan and pakistan. ) as a result of this process , we reviewed all 29 project appraisal or activity approval documents provided by 14 usaid missions: armenia , barbados , ghana , haiti , honduras , india , liberia , mozambique , nepal , peru , senegal , south africa , tanzania , and zambia . table 4 provides a list of the projects with g2g assistance activities for which we reviewed planning documents , by usaid mission . to conduct our review of these planning documents , we developed a data collection instrument to gather information on the required elements of pads , as described in usaid policies on g2g assistance , planning , and monitoring and evaluation ( m&e ) . table 5 provides information on the data fields in our data collection instrument . because usaid requirements differed for pads and aads ( the two types of planning documents we reviewed ) , we tracked which of these documents each mission used and took this into consideration as we conducted our analysis of the information gathered . to determine the extent to which these documents contained the required elements , we reviewed each planning document and recorded any relevant information we found for each of the elements in our data collection instrument . we then analyzed this information and determined whether the information provided met requirements outlined in the usaid policies described above . with regard to project - level m&e plans , while we recognized that usaid missions may refine project m&e plans after completing project design , our interest was in the degree to which missions had integrated m&e into planning for g2g assistance activities . accordingly , we reviewed the m&e information provided in the planning documents we collected and identified cases where these documents ( 1 ) included general m&e information and ( 2 ) specifically addressed sustainability , country ownership , or capacity . finally , we also reviewed assistance agreements and implementation letters associated with the g2g activities in our review for information we did not find in the planning documents , including the funding mechanism used to implement the g2g activity and partner - government compliance with risk mitigation measures . to identify examples of types of risks identified in usaid risk assessments , we selected illustrative examples from our case study countries for inclusion in this report . we selected these examples to demonstrate the type of information contained in these risk assessments , including risks identified , the risk level ( i.e. , low , medium , high , or critical ) , and the assessor's recommendation for mitigating each risk . to obtain insights into the use of financial audits as a key monitoring tool for g2g assistance , we requested the most recent completed financial audits from 22 missions with g2g assistance funds obligated in fiscal year 2012 . in response to this request , 5 usaid missions provided 18 financial audits: ethiopia ( 1 ) , india ( 2 ) , nepal ( 7 ) , peru ( 7 ) , and rwanda ( 1 ) .