cost . agencies would need to address cost implications , including the issue of who will pay for the medical and assistive technologies ( will beneficiaries be required to defray costs ? ) for example , would the cost of providing treatment and assistive technologies in the disability programs be higher than cash expenditures paid over the long - term ? would the definition of disability change ? to what extent would programs require some beneficiaries to accept assistance to enhance work capacities as a precondition for benefits versus relying upon work incentives , time - limited benefits , or other means to encourage individuals to maximize their capacity to work ? would persons whose work potential is significantly increased due to medical and technological assistance receive the same cash benefits that are currently provided ? would criteria need to be established to identify persons whose severity presumes a basis for permanent cash benefits ? would program recipients with earned income above a certain level still be eligible for no - cost assistance or do they begin to help pay for the support ? to change program design , what can be done through the regulatory process and what requires legislative action ? accessibility . agencies would need to address the accessibility of medical and technological advances for program beneficiaries . are new mechanisms needed to provide sufficient access to needed services ? in the case of di and ssi , what is the impact on the ties with the medicare and medicaid programs ? for va , accessibility issues may not be as critical because of existing links to health and vocational rehabilitation benefits provided by va . the cost to provide medical and technological treatment could be quite high for some program recipients , although much less for others . moreover , net costs would need to be considered , as some expenditures could be offset with cost savings by paying reduced benefits . integration with other program components . agencies would need to address how to integrate a new emphasis on medical and technological assistance when making disability determinations with the health care and vocational assistance already currently available to program beneficiaries . notably , va's program components of cash assistance , vocational rehabilitation , and medical care may uniquely position the agency to develop an integrated model and evaluate the results . during our work , va officials pointed out that vocational rehabilitation services are already available to veterans to help them return to work and that such services include incorporating the advances and changes addressed in this report . yet , the restorative benefits of medical , technological , or vocational interventions are not considered when va makes an initial assessment of the economic losses that result from a condition or injury . with a limited amount of program funding , integrating these program components may help va to equitably distribute program funds among veterans with disabilities . agencies' research efforts could help address these broader policy issues . in fact , ssa is beginning to conduct a number of studies that recognize that medical advances and social changes require the disability programs to evolve . ssa's 2002 annual performance plan contains a strategic objective to promote policy change based on research , evaluation , and analysis .