( pbgc ) . this report provides an overview of the characteristics and utilization of these plans . to this end we will answer the following questions: ( 1 ) what are the characteristics of private sector meps ? ( 2 ) what are the advantages and disadvantages of meps and how are the perceived advantages being used to market meps as a pension design option ? the major sponsor types include: certain large corporations , associations , professional employer organizations ( peo ) , and unaffiliated or “open” meps . we identified three sponsor types from a list of meps drawn from form 5500 data and we selected interviewees from among the largest sponsors of each type.sponsor type , though sponsors of these plans were often new and not we identified open meps as an emerging necessarily identified by form 5500 filings . we selected these open mep sponsors through internet searches and interviewed them as well . we also conducted a literature review , and interviewed agency officials , including officials at labor , irs , and pbgc , as well as pension professionals and experts . our selection of pension experts included actuarial experts representing their professional association , as well as various other pension experts , particularly those with administrative and legal expertise . we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , as well as agency guidance — most notably in the form of advisory opinions issued by labor . following the issuance of recent advisory opinions , we sought reactions from the mep sponsors and pension experts . we conducted our work from march 2011 to september 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . under title i of the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , employers are permitted to sponsor two broad categories of pension plans . they are ( 1 ) defined benefit plans — in which employers generally maintain a fund to provide a fixed level of monthly retirement income based on a formula specified in the plan — or ( 2 ) defined contribution plans — in which retirement income is based on employer and employee contributions and the performance of investments in individual employee accounts.contribution plan . we also analyzed 2001 form 5500 data to assess trends over time , as well as information on participating employers that existed at that time . we interviewed at least three plan - sponsor representatives from each of the four private sector mep sponsor types we identified via research and interviews . a mep may be a defined benefit plan or a defined there are three types of pension plans that share some features with meps but are not the focus of this report: ( 1 ) a single - employer plan is established and maintained by only one employer and for that employer's employees .