the servicemember does not expect this . example: one captain had a marine in his unit who signed a contract with a car dealer for a loan with 26 percent interest rate . the captain took the marine to the marine credit union and got him a new loan with 9.5 percent interest rate . predatory lender used – payday lenders ( n=10 ) example: a master sergeant got caught in the check - cashing cycle . how has deployment affected military families financially in your unit ? other reason deployment affects families financially ( n=13 ) example: financial problems stem from relationship problems . they keep the marine focused on the low monthly payments and not on the interest rate or the term of the loan . example: some marines feel that a business would not take advantage of them because they are in the military . this leads them to be more trusting of the local businesses than they should be , which in turn , leads the businesses to take advantage of them . predatory lender used – car dealers ( n=11 ) example: most of the participants stated that the car dealerships around the base were the worst predatory lenders because they charge high interest rates and often provide cars that are “lemons.” they said that most of the sales people at the dealerships are former military who know how to talk to servicemembers to obtain the members' trust . he would write a check at one payday lender in order to cover a check written at another lender during a previous week . example: one participant told us that when he was a younger marine he got caught up with a payday lender . the problem did not resolve itself until he deployed and was not able to go to the lender anymore . reason for using predatory lender – get fast cash and no hassle ( n=10 ) example: people use payday lenders because they are quick and easy . all the soldiers have to do is to provide their leave and earnings statement and they get the money . example: most of the participants say they know people who have used a payday lender , and those soldiers use them because they have bad credit and can get quick cash . predatory lender targeting – close proximity and clustering around bases ( n=9 ) example: it is almost impossible to be unaware of lenders and dealerships because many are clustered in close proximity to the installation . they also distribute flyers and use pervasive advertising in local and installation papers . example: the stores and car lots near the installation use signs that say “e1 and up approved” or “all military approved” to get the attention of the military servicemembers . command role when contacted by creditors ( n=8 ) example: the non - commissioned officers offer to go with the junior enlisted to places like car dealers ; but the young soldiers do not take them up on these offers . example: one participant said that debt collectors do call his house and the command . he noted that one lender called him nine times in one day and his chief petty officer eventually asked the lender to stop harassing his sailor .