increasing plutonium storage capacity . lanl also reported in march 2019 that it planned to implement several mitigation measures that would allow the storage of more plutonium oxide and other materials in the pf - 4 vault . in addition , doe and nnsa have “swapped” 1 mt of the declared surplus plutonium at srs with 1 mt of plutonium residues and other primarily non - pit plutonium already stored in lanl's pf - 4 vault . nnsa officials said that the plutonium residues and other primarily non - pit plutonium at lanl would be considered surplus plutonium and would be converted to plutonium oxide , requiring less storage space . nnsa manages over half of this surplus plutonium . according to nnsa , all three offices share the responsibility for final disposition of surplus plutonium . figure 1 shows the amounts of surplus plutonium managed by the offices . figure 2 shows the various forms of this surplus plutonium , including pits , non - pit metal , non - pit oxide , and spent nuclear fuel or other reactor fuels in the inventory , by doe office . nnsa officials explained that aries did not produce larger amounts of plutonium oxide because the agency was still evaluating alternatives for expanding plutonium oxide , but they estimated that aries could produce 300 kilograms to 400 kilograms in a full year of operations . in addition , lanl shut down the pf - 4 facility , including aries , from june 2013 through september 2016 to correct safety and operational issues . during this time , plutonium oxide production using aries in pf - 4 was suspended . plutonium oxide is the preferred form for long - term storage of plutonium because it is relatively stable compared to other forms . plutonium oxide is also the form of plutonium that is most suited for dilution . aries consists of glove boxes , furnaces , and other equipment to dismantle a pit and extract the plutonium ; convert the plutonium into an oxide form ; mill and blend the plutonium oxide ; conduct physical and chemical analyses of the plutonium oxide ; and package and store the plutonium oxide for eventual disposition . nnsa's 2018 conceptual plan to dilute and dispose of surplus plutonium calls for plutonium metal to be converted to plutonium oxide using aries at pf - 4 and then for the plutonium oxide to be diluted at srs for eventual disposal at wipp . figure 4 shows the dilute and dispose strategy as described in nnsa's 2018 conceptual plan . doe could convert 43.8 mt , or about 77 percent , of surplus plutonium in its inventory of 57.2 mt to plutonium oxide for dilution and disposal because this plutonium is in a metal form suitable to oxidation , based on our review of doe's inventory of surplus plutonium . most of this surplus plutonium metal — 33.3 mt — is in the form of pits and is managed by nnsa . em manages 6.5 mt of surplus plutonium metal and ne manages the remaining 4 mt of surplus plutonium metal reactor fuel at idaho national laboratory . separately , em also manages 6.4 mt of surplus plutonium that is already in oxide form .