gao . identity theft: additional actions could help irs combat the large , evolving threat of refund fraud . met . irs provided complete evidence that satisfies the entire best practice . ” or “which of the following is your previous address ? ” irs uses authentication questions to confirm the identities of taxpayers whose returns are flagged by irs's idt and other fraud filters . only a limited number of returns — about 1 percent — are currently subject to this more intensive authentication process . irs also uses authentication questions to confirm the identities of taxpayers who request an ip pin . because irs did not advertise the ip pin pilot , the participation rate for the pilot was low . according to irs officials , as of july 31 , 2014 , irs had received about 21,000 requests out of about 13.9 million eligible taxpayers ( or about 0.15 percent of eligible taxpayers ) , in 2014 . idt thieves can also obtain and use credit bureau information to answer the authentication questions , according to irs officials . irs officials and several third parties , including software providers and paid preparers , suggested irs could enhance its taxpayer authentication approach by expanding some current tools and by exploring additional options . according to our review of irs and third - party information , each of these options has strengths and weaknesses . unlike the device identification tool , these options could require substantial changes to tax administration and may burden taxpayers by requiring individuals to track additional information or to take additional steps when filing a tax return . similar to pre - refund w - 2 matching , improved authentication tools could provide substantial benefits but require major investments in irs systems and changes to work processes . one advantage of authentication is that it could be applicable to more tax returns than pre - refund w - 2 matching , since w - 2 matching only works for tax returns reporting wage income . authentication options include: expanding the use of current authentication questions to a wider set of taxpayers . irs could use authentication questions for the entire individual taxpayer population or in conjunction with other tools . irs is continually analyzing the effectiveness of its authentication questions , which may be a benefit if the program was expanded . however , irs analysis of single filers whose returns were flagged by fraud filters and who answered authentication questions has shown limitations: some likely identity thieves were able to correctly answer authentication questions while some legitimate taxpayers were not . expanding the availability of the ip pin pilot to additional taxpayers . currently , ip pin distribution is limited to individuals who are idt refund fraud victims or who participated in the ip pin pilot . however , irs is considering an expansion of the ip pin to include more taxpayers . in responding to an open - ended question , 3 of the 18 associations we interviewed also suggested expanding the ip pin pilot to all taxpayers as an optional effort.additional layer of security for taxpayers , according to irs . however , the effectiveness of the ip pin relies on the strength of authentication questions , which have the limitations described above .