( see fig . twenty - five of these 38 operators reported finding pipelines in good condition and free of major defects , requiring only minor repairs or recoating . seven of these operators found two or fewer problems per 100 miles that require immediate repairs . finally , six operators found five or more immediate repairs per 100 miles assessed . operators nonetheless found these assessments valuable in determining the condition of their pipelines and finding damage . the large proportion of these operators reporting that they found no or few problems requiring immediate repair is encouraging if they represent assessments of their segments facing the greatest risk , as required by the 2002 act . of the 38 operators that have begun assessment activities , 22 have calculated reassessment intervals . these operators indicated that based on the conditions that they identified during baseline assessments ; they could reassess their pipelines at intervals of 10 , 15 , or 20 years — as allowed by industry consensus standards — if the 7-year reassessment requirement were not in place . in some cases , operators chose to reassess their pipelines at intervals shorter than the industry standards based on their own discretion . these baseline assessment findings suggest that overall — at least for the operators we contacted — the 7-year requirement is conservative . the 7-year reassessment interval represents an approximate midpoint between the 5- and 10-year industry reassessment requirements for pipelines operating under higher - stress . ( the industry standard requires that pipelines be reassessed at least every 5 years if all repairs are not made . phmsa's regulations require that repairs be made as necessary. ) higher - stress transmission pipelines are typically those that transport natural gas across the country from a gathering area to a local distribution company . phmsa's recently developed strategy is aimed at reducing pipeline incidents and damage through both direct enforcement and prevention . the strategy entails , among other things , ( 1 ) using risk - based enforcement that clearly reflects potential risk and seriousness and dealing severely with operators' significant noncompliance and repeat offenses ; ( 2 ) increasing knowledge of and accountability for results by clearly communicating expectations for operators' compliance ; ( 3 ) developing comprehensive guidance tools , along with training inspectors on their use ; and ( 4 ) effectively using state inspection capabilities . because the program is in its early phase of implementation , phmsa is learning how to oversee the program , and operators are learning how to meet its requirements . similarly , operators are in the early stages of assessing their pipelines for safety problems . this means that the integrity management program will be going through this shakedown period for another year or two as phmsa and operators continue to gain experience . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or the other members of the subcommittee might have . for further information on this testimony , please contact katherine siggerud at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or siggerudk@gao.gov .