these goals are to be released by may 2005 . irs contacted all taxpayers selected for tcmp studies . irs did not implement any tcmp studies after 1988 because of concerns about costs and burdens on taxpayers . how would such a change affect savings and work incentives ? how would reforms address such issues as the impact on state and local tax systems and the distribution of burden across the nation's taxpayers ? regarding compliance with our tax laws , the success of our tax system hinges greatly on the public's perception of its fairness and understandability . compliance is influenced not only by the effectiveness of irs's enforcement efforts but also by americans' attitudes about the tax system and their government . a recent survey indicated that about 12 percent of respondents say it is acceptable to cheat on their taxes . furthermore , the complexity of , and frequent revisions to , the tax system make it more difficult and costly for taxpayers who want to comply to do so and for irs to explain and enforce tax laws . complexity also creates a fertile ground for those intentionally seeking to evade taxes and often trips others into unintentional noncompliance . the lack of transparency also fuels disrespect for the tax system and the government . thus , a crucial challenge for reexamination will be to determine how we can best strengthen enforcement of existing laws to give taxpayers confidence that their friends , neighbors , and business competitors are paying their fair share . we have long been concerned about tax noncompliance and irs efforts to address it . collection of unpaid taxes was included in our first high - risk series report in 1990 , with a focus on the backlog of uncollected debts owed by taxpayers . in 1995 , we added filing fraud as a separate high - risk area , narrowing the focus of that high - risk area in 2001 to earned income credit noncompliance because of the particularly high incidence of fraud and other forms of noncompliance in that program . we expanded our concern about the collection of unpaid taxes in our 2001 high - risk report to include not only unpaid taxes ( including tax evasion and unintentional noncompliance ) known to irs , but also the broader enforcement issue of unpaid taxes that irs has not detected . in our high - risk update that we issued in january , we consolidated these areas into a single high - risk area — enforcement of the tax laws — because we believe the focus of concern on the enforcement of tax laws is not confined to any one segment of the taxpaying population or any single tax provision . tax law enforcement is a high - risk area in part because past declines in irs's enforcement activities threatened to erode taxpayer compliance . in recent years , the resources irs has been able to dedicate to enforcing the tax laws have declined . for example , the number of revenue agents ( those who examine complex returns ) , revenue officers ( those who perform field collection work ) , and special agents ( those who perform criminal investigations ) decreased over 21 percent from 1998 through 2003 .