this resulted in the reclassification of convictions in usao cases . the new policy introduced changes to eousa's classification system . according to eousa officials , under the previous system cases were classified based on the lead charge for which a defendant was indicted or convicted . for example , if the lead conviction charge was money laundering , the primary classification of the case would have been classified as money laundering , even if terrorism - related purposes were also evident during the investigation . under the new system , a case of this nature would result in the case being classified as a terrorism - related conviction . the new case classification system accounts for evidence that the crime was committed for terrorism - related purposes , as does the fbi's classification system . 1203 relating to hostage taking ) . for a domestic terrorism classification , the case must involve force or violence or the threat of force or violence undertaken by an individual or group seeking to further political or social goals . eousa's classification had no bearing on the fbi's classification of a conviction resulting from a terrorism - related investigation , according to an fbi official . occasionally , the fbi may reclassify a case when new facts become available that were not known at the time of the original classification . the fbi's number of reported terrorism - related convictions will differ from eousa's because ( 1 ) the fbi and eousa had been using different criteria to classify terrorism - related cases and resulting convictions and ( 2 ) the fbi numbers include federal , state , local , or international court convictions resulting from its investigative efforts while eousa's numbers include only federal court convictions . as shown in figure 1 , the fbi has reported a different number of terrorism - related convictions than eousa over the past 6 fiscal years . in its fiscal year 2000 performance report provided to the congress , doj used the fbi's number of terrorism - related investigations and convictions . this report highlighted doj's terrorism - related investigation and prosecution accomplishments . as noted earlier , doj used the fbi's statistics because they track doj's accomplishments beginning at the investigative stage through the prosecutive stage . in response to concerns raised by the philadelphia inquirer article and to avoid any misinterpretation of doj's statistics , beginning with the fiscal year 2001 performance report , doj switched from using the fbi's statistics to using the statistics reported by eousa , according to doj officials . eousa's statistics are intended to be representative of the cases prosecuted in federal courts that result in terrorism - related convictions and are less likely to be misinterpreted , according to doj officials . these statistics do not include cases for which the fbi had conducted a terrorism - related investigation that resulted in ( 1 ) a conviction in a state , local , or international court or ( 2 ) a federal conviction that was investigated by the fbi as terrorism - related but not classified by eousa as terrorism - related .