( see app . the regulators have taken steps to address our recommendation . out of the approximately 5,900 banks that had a cre loan portfolio as of the end of june 2017 , a total of 504 banks exceeded either 100 percent in cld loans as a percentage of total risk - based capital , or 300 percent in cre loans as a percentage of total - risk based capital and had seen 50 percent cre portfolio growth during the previous 36 months . of these 504 banks , a total of 69 banks exceeded both the cld criteria and the total cre criteria ( including the growth component ) . in december 2015 , federal banking regulators issued a joint statement to remind banks of the 2006 regulatory guidance on prudent risk management practices for cre lending activity through economic cycles . the regulators noted , among other trends , that many banks' cre concentration levels had been rising . according to the statement , regulators would continue to pay special attention to potential risks associated with cre lending during 2016 . specifically , the regulators stated that when conducting examinations that include a review of cre lending activities , they would focus on banks' implementation of the prudent principles in the 2006 cre guidance and other applicable guidance relative to identifying , measuring , monitoring , and managing concentration risk in cre lending activities . according to officials from fdic , the federal reserve , and occ , their agencies use a variety of formal and informal processes to monitor the condition of banks and identify risks , including cre concentration risk . for example , the federal reserve has a national risk council and fdic and occ have national risk committees that meet routinely to identify and evaluate risks facing banks and are supported by a number of other committees or other groups . fdic officials told us that analysis done by fdic's regional risk committees identified growth in cre concentrations in 2015 and brought the issue to the national risk committee's attention . occ began actively monitoring cre loan growth in the middle of 2014 and began focusing on cre concentration risk management during bank examinations in 2015 . occ officials also stated that cre concentration risk has been a key risk issue for the agency's national risk committee since early 2016 . federal reserve officials told us that the agency , including the federal reserve banks , began to monitor bank cre concentrations more closely around mid - 2013 after identifying an increase in cre concentrations . according to fdic , federal reserve , and occ officials , they met together in early 2015 to discuss cre lending growth and the rise in bank cre loan concentrations and held subsequent meetings throughout the year , in part to discuss policy options for helping to ensure that banks were appropriately managing their cre concentration risks . one of the outcomes of such interagency coordination was the december 2015 joint statement on cre concentrations . although the cre sector has recovered since the 2007 – 2009 financial crisis , our trend and econometric analyses generally indicate that credit and other risks related to bank cre lending have increased over the past several years .