ahr does not have an investment board . instead , ahr's senior management is responsible for selecting , controlling , and evaluating all it investments by using established agency acquisition policies and procedures to conduct investment management decisions . business needs and specific users for each project are identified within the project plan and are aligned with the ahr strategic plan , the faa flight plan , and the aio plan . ahr is also aligning its business needs to the iteb plans . business needs are re - evaluated on a quarterly basis to ensure that a project is aligned with faa's strategic goals and objectives . ahr senior management uses its prioritization process to evaluate and select investments for funding . the office and center directors determine their requirements and then a budget request is submitted for proposal funding . ahr receives an allowance amount from the budget office . the first priority is to handle personnel payments . the remaining balance is then redistributed to the business divisions . the “building blocks” process starts at this point . this is when base funding is reviewed to decide if a current investment needs continued funding by asking questions about the importance of continuing the funding of a particular project by looking at the project activity and what the impact will be if this project is no longer funded . each division will submit a list of prioritized projects with costs to the directorate . this list may exceed the budget level . the directorate will reprioritize the original list . ahr has a human resource management automation plan that contains procedures for approving it projects , and describes the policies and procedures that ahr uses for project management . despite having project management policies and procedures , not all projects within ahr have a formal project plan . the size and scope of the project are two factors that help determine whether a project has a formal project plan . ahr division managers ensure that projects are on time by performing quarterly reviews that assess a project's cost and schedule . ahr uses a color scheme ( red , green , and yellow ) to indicate the schedule status of major milestones . ahr uses the itips as its inventory for making investment management decisions . business needs are identified through entries made in itips , along with documentation from exhibit 300s and exhibit 53s . arc does not have its selection criteria documented . to evaluate and select it investments , the arc it configuration management board considers such things as benefits to arc across the regions , expected return on investment , technical feasibility , and risk . the arc business plan and the flight plan are the documents that address these priorities . according to avr , its it investment process guide is still under development and will be completed at the end of fiscal year 2004 . each line of business within avr identifies and documents its business needs including project requirements and specific users . once the business needs have been identified , the it management and resources section prioritizes them for funding . programs in avr are reviewed quarterly .