b . have all applicable costs been estimated , including life cycle costs ? c. is the scope of the estimate defined and documented ? step two: develop the estimating plan did the team develop a written study plan that: a . determined the estimating team's composition and whether the team is from a centralized office ; b . identified which subject matter experts the team will rely on for c. outlined the estimating approach ( see step four ) ; d. identified a master schedule for completing the estimate that provided adequate time to do the work . step three: define the program characteristics is there a documented technical baseline description that is contained in a single document ? if yes , does it include the following: a . what the program is supposed to do — requirements ; b . how the program will fulfill its mission — purpose ; c. what it will look like — technical characteristics ; d. where and how the program will be built — development plan ; e. how the program will be acquired — acquisition strategy ; f. how the program will operate — operational plan ; g. which characteristics affect cost the most — risk . f. did the documentation include access to an electronic copy of the cost model and are both the documentation and the cost model stored so that authorized personnel can easily find and use them for other cost estimates ? step eleven: present the estimate to management for approval was there a briefing to management that included a clear explanation of the cost estimate so as to convey its level of competence ? did the briefing illustrate the largest cost drivers by presenting them logically with backup charts for responding to more probing questions ? b . did the briefing include an overview of the program's technical foundation and objectives , the life cycle cost estimate in time - phased constant year dollars , a discussion of ground rules and assumptions , the method and process for each wbs cost element estimate including data sources , the results of sensitivity and risk / uncertainty analysis along with a confidence interval , the comparison of the point estimate to an independent cost estimate with a discussion of any differences and whether the point estimate is reasonable , an affordability analysis based on funding and contingency reserves , a discussion of any concerns or challenges , conclusions , and recommendations for approval ? c. was any feedback from the briefing including management's acceptance of the estimate acted on and recorded in the cost estimate documentation ? step twelve: update the estimate to reflect actual costs and changes is there a process for the estimating team to update the estimate with actual costs as it becomes available ? was the estimate updated to reflect changes in technical or program assumptions and was there a discussion how these changes affected the cost estimate ? b . did the cost estimates get replaced with actual costs ? were the actual costs from an evm system ? c. did the estimate discuss lessons learned for elements whose actual costs or schedules differed from the estimate ?