untrained staff . a common theme of many of the cases we examined is that staff misinterpreted legitimate medical emergencies . rather than recognizing the signs of dehydration , heat stroke , or illness , staff assumed that a dying teen was in fact attempting to use trickery to get out of the program . the victim's mother and stepfather hired the service because they were afraid their daughter would run away when told that she was being enrolled in the program . according to the victim's mother , two people came to the family home at 4 a.m. to take her daughter to the program's location in the utah desert , where a group hike was already under way . three days into the program , the victim collapsed and died while hiking . according to the program brochure , the first 5 days of the program are “days and nights of physical and mental stress with forced march , night hikes , and limited food and water . youth are stripped mentally and physically of material facades and all manipulatory tools.” after the victim collapsed , one of the counselors on the hike administered cpr until an emergency helicopter and nurse arrived to take the victim to a hospital , where she was pronounced dead . according to the victim's mother , her daughter died of “exertional heatstroke.” the program had not made any accommodation or allowed for any adjustment for the fact that her daughter had traveled from a coastal , sea - level residence in florida to the high desert wilderness of utah . the mother of the victim also said that program staff did not have salt tablets or other supplies that are commonly used to offset the affects of heat . shortly after the victim died , the 9-week wilderness program closed . a state hearing brought to light complaints of child abuse in the program and the owner of the program was charged with negligent homicide . he was acquitted of criminal charges . however , the state child protective services agency concluded that child abuse had occurred and placed the owner on utah's registry of child abusers , preventing him from working in the state at a licensed child treatment facility . two other program staff agreed to cooperate with the prosecution to avoid standing trial ; these staff were given probation and prohibited from being involved with similar programs for up to 5 years . in 1994 , the divorced parents of the victim split a $260,000 settlement resulting from a civil suit against the owner . after this program closed , its owner opened and operated a number of domestic and foreign residential treatment programs over the next several years . although he was listed on the utah registry of suspected child abusers , the program owner opened and operated these programs elsewhere — many of which were ultimately shut down by state officials and foreign governments because of alleged and proven child abuse . at least one of these programs is still operating abroad and is marketed on the internet , along with 10 other programs considered to be part of the same network .