as a result , some reevaluations may not be conducted . staff can also cancel disability reevaluations and vba does not track or review cancelled reevaluations . for example , during a review at the little rock , arkansas regional office , the va ig found that staff failed to enter required dates for 10 of 41 cases sampled at that office . rvsrs base this decision on a number of factors . the disability reevaluation may be mandated by the schedule for rating disabilities . for example , a veteran with a 100 percent disability rating due to a heart valve replacement is required to be reevaluated 6 months after discharge from the hospital . however , once the centralized data processing center prints out these notifications , the diary dates are erased from the centralized computer system . in addition , vba does not track which disability cases were identified for reevaluation . since the notices are single pieces of paper , they could be lost or misplaced . if this occurs , these disability reevaluations would likely be delayed or not performed at all . vba is planning on improving its ability to track reevaluations . in november 2006 , vba agreed to develop a one - time analysis of reevaluations completed in 2006 . alternatively , the rvsr may determine that the severity of the disability may change . for instance , medical evidence may suggest that a veteran with limited range of motion will be continuing physical rehabilitation and is expected to improve . to ensure that the disability is reviewed in the future , the rvsr enters a diary date into vba's claims processing system , which later generates a reminder that the disability needs to be reviewed . when this reminder is generated , the veteran's file is retrieved and an rvsr performs a preliminary assessment of whether a reevaluation should be conducted . if the rvsr determines that a reevaluation is no longer needed , the reevaluation is cancelled . for example , staff may cancel a reevaluation when a veteran dies or if the file is already being reviewed by vba following the veteran's claim that his disability has worsened . if the rvsr determines that a reevaluation of the disability should be conducted , the rvsr can simply review the information in the file or , if needed , collect supplemental medical information which can include the results of a physical examination . once all of the information has been analyzed , an rvsr can make a decision to increase , decrease , or continue the current rating . figure 1 summarizes the disability reevaluation process . vba maintains a quality assurance review program known as the systematic technical accuracy review ( star ) program . vba selects random samples of each regional office's disability compensation decisions and assesses the regional office's accuracy in processing and deciding such cases .