organizations . training and developing new and current staff to fill new roles and work in different ways will play a crucial part in building the capacity of the organizations . organizations presenting at our symposium considered the following strategies in designing and managing their pay systems . focus on a set of values and objectives to guide the pay system . moving forward , it is possible to enact broad - based reforms that would enable agencies to move to market - based and more performance - oriented pay systems . however , before implementing reform , each executive branch agency should demonstrate and the office of personnel management should certify that the agency has the institutional infrastructure in place to help ensure that the pay reform is effectively and equally implemented . at a minimum , this infrastructure includes a modern , effective , credible , and validated performance management system in place that provides a clear linkage between institutional , unit , and individual performance - oriented outcomes ; results in meaningful distinctions in ratings ; and incorporates adequate safeguards . critical to the success of the federal government's transformation are its people — human capital . yet the government has not transformed , in many cases , how it classifies , compensates , develops , and motivates its employees to achieve maximum results within available resources and existing authorities . one of the questions being addressed as the federal government transforms is how to update its compensation system to be more market based and performance oriented . while implementing market - based and more performance - oriented pay systems is both doable and desirable , organizations' experiences show that the shift to market - based and more performance - oriented pay must be part of a broader strategy of change management and performance improvement initiatives . gao identified the following key themes that highlight the leadership and management strategies these organizations collectively considered in designing and managing market - based and more performance - oriented pay systems . focus on a set of values and objectives to guide the pay system . values represent an organization's beliefs and boundaries and objectives articulate the strategy to implement the system . examine the value of employees' total compensation to remain competitive in the market . organizations consider a mix of base pay plus other monetary incentives , benefits , and deferred compensation , such as retirement pay , as part of a competitive compensation system . to further the discussion of federal pay reform , gao , the u.s. office of personnel management , the u.s . merit systems protection board , the national academy of public administration , and the partnership for public service convened a symposium on march 9 , 2005 , to discuss organizations' experiences with market - based and more performance - oriented pay systems . representatives from public , private , and nonprofit organizations made presentations on the successes and challenges they experienced in designing and managing their market - based and more performance - oriented pay systems . a cross section of human capital stakeholders was invited to further explore these successes and challenges and engage in open discussion .