gao - 15-268t . washington , d.c.: december 3 , 2014 . ( see app . i for a detailed list of selected services covered by the plans we reviewed. ) with respect to certain enabling services , which may be particularly important for low income children , care coordination or case management was offered by all selected chip plans , but by only one selected qhp . similarly , routine transportation to and from medical appointments was covered by two chip plans but by none of the selected qhps . with respect to pediatric dental services , the qhp in new york was the only selected qhp that covered them ; the selected qhps in the other four states did not integrate pediatric dental services within the medical coverage they offered . to obtain coverage for pediatric dental services , consumers who purchased the selected qhp in these states would also need to purchase an sadp . for consumers who purchased the selected qhp in new york or the selected sadp in the other four states , we determined that pediatric dental coverage available was generally comparable to what was available in their state's selected chip plan , with the exception of utah , where the selected chip plan was more generous than the selected sadp . however , the extent to which consumers obtained coverage that included pediatric dental services is not clear . available federal data with information on qhp enrollment suggest that many children in the united states with exchange coverage in 2014 may have been without comprehensive dental coverage . according to our analysis of enrollment data for 2014 provided by aspe , 16 percent of children younger than 18 years of age in the 36 states with federally facilitated exchanges were enrolled in a qhp that included comprehensive dental services that covered check - ups , basic , and major dental services . children were enrolled in qhps that either had less than comprehensive or no dental coverage . some of these families are likely to have purchased an sadp for their children , however . according to an aspe report issued in may 2014 , 18 percent of children younger than 18 years of age in the 36 states with federally facilitated exchanges who enrolled in a qhp also enrolled in an sadp , and these were likely among the families that had no comprehensive dental coverage included in their according to our analysis of enrollment data for 2014 provided by qhp.aspe , virtually no children younger than 18 years of age in the 36 states with federally facilitated exchanges were enrolled in a qhp that included comprehensive dental services and an sadp . according to cms , a qhp must offer check - ups , basic , and major dental services to be considered a qhp with embedded dental coverage . according to our analysis of enrollment data for 2014 provided by aspe , less than half of the qhps in a given state offered any type of dental coverage — checkups , basic , or major dental services — in two thirds of states with federally facilitated exchanges . did impose limits on outpatient therapies , pediatric vision , and pediatric hearing .