seismic hazard . washington state is vulnerable to a variety of earthquakes because of its location near the collision boundary of two major tectonic plates , according to the washington state hazard mitigation plan . according to u.s . fish and wildlife service officials , the cost to complete a rapid visual screening is about $300 to $625 per building . dod officials and gsa officials we interviewed support the creation of a uniform definition of exceptionally high risk , but one official noted that agencies might prefer flexibility in the definition and how it is applied . what actions have select city governments taken to assess and mitigate seismic risks that could affect buildings in their jurisdictions ? what is the distribution of federal buildings with regard to seismic hazard areas , and to what extent have select federal agencies identified and mitigated seismic risks to their buildings ? what are the potential benefits of shakealert , and to what extent are usgs and stakeholders addressing technical and implementation challenges , if any , to implementing the system ? to address the first objective , we conducted site visits to four u.s. cities — seattle , washington ; memphis , tennessee ; san francisco , california ; and los angeles , california — selected from among those with the highest earthquake loss estimates to buildings and seismic hazard level ( probabilities of ground shaking ) , as identified by fema , and to reflect geographic diversity . for each of these cities , we met with officials from fema regional offices , state and local government , and regional nonprofit consortia with familiarity of the four cities to discuss mitigation activities that had been undertaken or are planned . we also toured new and existing buildings in san francisco and los angeles selected by local officials to observe examples of the physical mitigation measures implemented to avoid or reduce damage to structures and related injuries resulting from earthquake disasters . in addition , for each of the four cities , we reviewed the relevant state and local policies , hazard mitigation plans , practices , and other process activities used to reduce risk . additionally , we reviewed fema's guidelines about seismic building practices , efforts to support earthquake mitigation implementation activities at the state and local level , and education and outreach and promotion of earthquake preparedness , and prior gao reports . the findings , while providing important perspectives that could be beneficial to federal , state , and local government efforts to mitigate earthquake risks to buildings , are not generalizable to all u.s. cities . to address the second objective , we performed a geographic analysis of the number of leased and owned federal buildings in use or which will be needed in the future , total building square footage of both leased and owned federal buildings in use or which will be needed in the future , and the number of federal employees assigned to work in each area of earthquake shaking intensity based on the modified mercalli intensity ( mmi ) scale .