we did not review the actual contracts . in reviewing contract costs , we relied on cost data provided by installation officials . we also discussed with installation officials any consequences associated with increased contracting out of o&m work . additionally , we examined dod's response to recent legislation requiring dod to consider performing more work by government employees , reviewed steps recently taken by the military services to control support services contract costs , and summarized our recent reports concerning dod's acquisition of services . we conducted our review from august 2006 through march 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . dod's adjustment factors . dod officials noted several factors that have contributed to dod's increased use of contractor support . first , the gwot and other contingencies have significantly increased o&m requirements and dod has met these requirements without an increase in active duty and civilian personnel . to do this , dod relied not only on reserve personnel activations , but also on increased use of contractor support . under the a - 76 process , otherwise known as competitive sourcing , the military services and other defense components conduct a public / private competition for a commercial activity currently performed by government personnel to determine whether it would be cost - effective to contract with the private sector for that activity's performance . on the other hand , a public / private competition is not required for private sector performance of a new requirement , private sector performance of a segregable expansion of an existing commercial activity performed by government personnel , or continued private sector performance of a commercial activity . however , before government personnel may perform a new requirement , an expansion to an existing commercial activity , or an activity performed by the private sector , a public / private competition is required to determine whether government personnel should perform the commercial activity . the dod commercial activities management information system is dod's database of record established to meet reporting requirements on the conduct of a - 76 competitions and the results from implementing a - 76 decisions , whether the decisions are to continue using government employees to perform the work or to outsource the work . for contracts awarded to the private sector , the database includes the estimated cost to perform the work using government employees , the contract award amount , the actual contract cost for each contract performance period , and brief reasons for any cost growth over the performance periods . a contract performance period is normally for 12 months , although the first performance period may cover a shorter transition period when the work is initially conveyed to the contractor . contract information is to be maintained through the end of the last performance period included in the competition . installation officials are responsible for reporting information on the a - 76 program for input into the dod database . driven primarily by increased operations associated with gwot and other contingencies , dod's o&m costs increased substantially between fiscal years 1995 and 2005 , with the most growth occurring since fiscal year 2001 .