leveraging technology . information sharing and coordination . performance measurement and testing . strategic management of human capital . we did not consider the sixth key practice , aligning assets to mission , which focuses on realigning the federal real property inventory to better reflect agencies' missions . jefferson national memorial , and the lincoln national memorial — becaus the ig examined their security in 2008 . we selected: two icons — the statue of liberty national monument ( statue of liberty ) in new york city and the jefferson national expansion memorial in st. louis . three parks — the african burial ground national monument in new york city , gettysburg national military park in pennsylvania , and grand canyon ( grand canyon ) national park in arizona . collectively , the sites we selected illustrate a range of park protection practices applied by the park service . at each site , we interviewed p service officials with primary responsibility for security implementation , operation , and management . we also interviewed u.s. park police ( park police ) officials from the statue of liberty . we toured each site and observed the physical environment and the principal security elemen gain firsthand knowledge of the protection practices used at all the s except the grand canyon where we used videoconferencing to interview park service officials . we reviewed and analyzed documents , when available , that contained site - specific information on security pla ns , policies , procedures , budgets , and staffing . because we observed the park service's efforts to protect icons and parks at a limited number of sites , our observations of security issues at individual sites cannot be generalized to all the icons and parks that the park service is responsible for securing . to supplement these site visits , we interviewed park service regional chief rangers and other security officials from the three regio where we had selected icons and parks — the northeast , midwest , and intermountain regions . we also interviewed the regional chief ranger fro the pacific west region because the park service once identified the golden gate bridge as an icon and we wanted that region's perspec icon and park protection . at the national level , we interviewed offici als from the ig , office of law enforcement and security , park service , and park police . furthermore , we collected supporting documentation including law enforcement and secur enforcement , security , and icon protection ; icon risk assessments and compliance reviews ; and security plans , policies , procedures , budgets , an staffing information when available . ity manuals ; ig reports on law d we conducted this performance audit from january 2008 to june 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective .