education agreed with our recommendation . consolidation loans differ from other loans in the ffelp and fdlp programs in that they enable borrowers who have multiple loans — possibly from different lenders , different guarantors , and even from different loan programs — to combine their loans into a single loan and make one monthly payment . by obtaining a consolidation loan , borrowers can lower their monthly payments by extending the repayment period longer than the maximum 10 years generally available on the underlying loans . maximum repayment periods allowed vary by the amount of the consolidation loan ( see table 1 ) . consolidation loans also provide borrowers with the opportunity to lock in a fixed interest rate on their student loans , based on the weighted average of the interest rates in effect on the loans being consolidated rounded up to the nearest one - eighth of 1 percent , capped at 8.25 percent . borrowers can qualify for consolidation loans regardless of financial need . loans eligible for inclusion in a consolidation loan must be comprised of at least one eligible ffelp or fdlp loan , including subsidized and unsubsidized stafford loans , plus loans , and , in some instances , consolidation loans . both subsidized and unsubsidized stafford loans , and plus loans are variable rate loans . other types of federal student loans made outside of ffelp and fdlp , which may carry a variable or fixed borrower interest rate , are also eligible for inclusion in a consolidation loan , including perkins loans , health professions student loans , nursing student loans , and health education assistance loans ( heal ) . estimated subsidy costs for ffelp consolidation loans rose from $0.651 billion for loans made in fiscal year 2002 to $2.135 billion for loans made in fiscal year 2003 . the increase is largely due to the higher interest subsidies the government is expected to pay to lenders to ensure they receive a guaranteed rate of return on student loans and the result of greater loan volume . the interest subsidy , which is called a special allowance payment ( sap ) , is based on a formula specified in law and paid by education to lenders on a quarterly basis when the “guaranteed lender yield” exceeds the borrower rate . this guaranteed lender yield is currently based on the average 3-month commercial paper interest rate plus an additional 2.64 percent . when this guaranteed yield is higher than the amount of interest being paid by borrowers , education makes up the difference . if the borrower's interest rate exceeds the guaranteed lender yield , education does not pay a sap , and the lender receives the borrower rate . education's estimate of $2.135 billion in subsidy costs for ffelp consolidation loans made in fiscal year 2003 is based on the assumption that the guaranteed lender yield will rise over the next several years , reflecting education's assumption that market interest rates are likely to rise from the historically low levels experienced in fiscal year 2003 .