rand corporation . organizational improvement and accountability: lessons for education from other sectors . 1st ed . if so , how will such information be gathered and reported ? is it possible to collect data at the project level ? will the contribution of federal funds be distinguishable from state , local , and private funds ? if the answer to several of these questions is no , is additional information needed for program oversight ? the answers to questions such as these provide the basis for setting grantee reporting requirements . congress has a number of opportunities to conduct oversight , such as when it establishes or reauthorizes a new program , during the annual appropriations process , and during hearings focused on program and agency operations . providing for — or at a minimum , not prohibiting — performance accountability mechanisms can provide timely , targeted performance information and help policymakers ensure that federal grants focus on their goals , providing another basis for congressional oversight . national program evaluations have the potential to answer questions about both overall program performance as well as the effectiveness of performance accountability mechanisms , in terms of their implementation , outcomes , impacts , and cost - effectiveness . however , national programwide evaluations are expensive in terms of dollars and time and frequently require capacities and resources beyond those provided for program management . also , while evaluations of multiple sites provide valuable information , programwide evaluation data are typically periodic and often cover too few sites to support national estimates of performance . in these cases , research and demonstration projects often can provide better information on the effectiveness of various service delivery methods and approaches . knowledge to support effective practice is well established in some subject areas and can be incorporated into program provisions ( such as service standards ) or in companion technical assistance or knowledge dissemination programs . as we discussed earlier , performance accountability provisions rely on a supply of credible , reliable , and valid data and high - quality performance measures . we found organizations that recognizing the importance of data quality , tied incentives to increasing the supply of this type of information . unfortunately , as our work on part and gpra implementation shows , the credibility of performance data has been a long - standing weakness . omb , through its development and use of part , has provided agencies with a powerful incentive for improving data quality and availability . however , improving the supply of performance information is in and of itself insufficient to sustain performance management and achieve real improvements in management and program results . rather , it needs to be accompanied by a demand for and use of that information by decision makers and managers alike . key stakeholder outreach and involvement is critical to building demand and , therefore , success . lack of consensus by a community of interested parties on goals and measures and the way that they are presented can detract from the credibility of performance information and , subsequently , its use .