doj did not provide comments . the pamphlet was under review through june of 2008 . imbra also requires that uscis consult with nongovernmental entities with expertise in areas such as the legal rights of immigrant victims of battery and extreme cruelty in developing the pamphlet . on july 14 , uscis signed the federal register notice seeking public comments on the pamphlet . to what extent have uscis and dos collected and maintained data for gao reporting as required by imbra ? to determine the extent to which uscis , dos , and doj implemented the requirements of imbra , we reviewed the act , its legislative history , relevant provisions of the ina , and related legislation , the adam walsh child protection and safety act of 2006 which contains provisions that may affect a petitioner's ability to have beneficiaries immigrate . for purposes of this review , we summarized and grouped imbra's requirements into seven key areas and identified the actions taken and the actions remaining in each of the key areas . to determine what actions had and had not been taken , we obtained and analyzed pertinent documentation , such as uscis's and dos's imbra implementation guidance for its adjudicators and consular officers , respectively . we also interviewed cognizant officials at uscis headquarters and at its california and vermont service centers — the two service centers responsible for processing petitions for alien fiancé ( e ) s ; at dos , and at doj . we interviewed three dos consular affairs unit chiefs by telephone and received written responses to our questions from four other unit chiefs all of whom were responsible for processing immigrant visa applications , including fiancé ( e ) visas . these unit chiefs were at seven consular posts located in bangkok , thailand ; bogotá , colombia ; ciudad juarez , mexico ; guangzhou , china ; ho chi minh city , vietnam ; manila , philippines ; and moscow , russia . we chose these posts because they issued about two - thirds of alien fiancé ( e ) visas in fiscal year 2007 . while information we obtained at these locations may not be generalized across all consular posts , because we selected the posts based on the volume of activity , we believe the posts provided us with a general overview and perspective on the implementation of imbra at the selected posts . to determine whether uscis and dos have collected and maintained data for our report as required by imbra , we obtained and analyzed available data for fiscal years 2006 and 2007 on fiancé ( e ) petitions filed from uscis's application management system , and on visas issued to fiancé ( e ) s from dos's visa database . to determine the reliability of data in uscis's and dos's database , we observed how petitioner data are entered into uscis's data system , reviewed pertinent uscis and dos documents , and interviewed relevant uscis and dos officials . we determined that the data we used from uscis and dos databases were sufficiently reliable for purposes of this report .