use of advance contracts . pkemra requires fema to establish advance contracts , which are typically needed to quickly provide life - sustaining goods and services , such as tarps and meals , in the immediate aftermath of disasters . while not required under pkemra , usace also establishes advance contracts for supplies and services ( eg , generators for its temporary power mission ) using its independent statutory authorities for emergency management , such as section 5 of the flood control act of 1941 . in addition , dla has an interagency agreement with fema to provide disaster commodities and services , including fuel . as such , dla also has some advance contracts in place . in december 2018 , we found that fema and usace were the primary users of advance contracts . as of june 30 , 2018 , federal agencies obligated at least $5 billion through post - disaster contracts to support disaster response and recovery efforts after hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria and the 2017 california wildfires . usace and fema awarded over three quarters of the reported obligations on post - disaster contracts . however , data on post - disaster contracting are not comprehensive due to changes in the criteria for establishing and closing a nia code and dhs's inconsistent implementation of the criteria for closing codes . specifically , we found dhs closed the codes for hurricanes harvey and irma less than a year after the storms hit , compared to prior hurricanes when the nia codes remained open for at least 5 years . as of june 30 , 2018 , federal agencies obligated at least $5 billion through post - disaster contracts in response to the three 2017 hurricanes and the california wildfires . data on obligations for the california wildfires are limited to those contracts identified by two selected agencies in our review — fema and usace — because no nia code was established in fpds - ng to track contracts specifically for the wildfire events at a government - wide level . officials at gsa — the agency responsible for operating and maintaining fpds - ng — stated there is little to no cost or administrative burden associated with establishing or maintaining a nia code . based on a memorandum of agreement ( the agreement ) , gsa , dhs , and dod are jointly responsible for determining when a nia code should be established and closed . dhs delegated its role , on behalf of civilian agencies for disaster or emergency events , to its office of the chief procurement officer ( dhs ocpo ) , and dod , on behalf of military departments and defense agencies for contingency operations , delegated its role to the defense contract and pricing office . the agreement outlines criteria dhs and dod should consider in making determinations to establish and close a nia code . we identified changes in the criteria for establishing and closing a nia code between a june 2012 agreement and a june 2018 update that superseded and replaced it .