see 15 u.s.c . ยง 645 ( g ) ( 2 ) . contractors exceed the subcontracting limitations or notifies key individuals when those situations occur . contractors currently report subcontracting data for federal contract awards into two systems: ( 1 ) the electronic subcontracting reporting system ( esrs ) and ( 2 ) the federal funding accountability and transparency act subcontracting reporting system ( fsrs ) . the small business act did not specify which system to modify . in february 2014 , sba notified the general services administration that fsrs would need to be modified to address the act's requirement . sba officials told us the agency would draft a separate proposed rule to implement the requirement in its regulations , which would also be implemented in the far , but noted that this process would take years to complete . general services administration officials told us that they had not determined which system , esrs or fsrs , would be modified , but that any system changes would not occur until after the public rulemaking process is complete and any necessary changes are made to the far . both esrs and fsrs would require changes to fully address the requirement to modify an existing federal subcontracting reporting system . esrs , for example , is used to monitor large businesses' progress in meeting small business subcontracting goals . small businesses , however , are not required to report subcontracting information into esrs . fsrs , on the other hand , provides the public with transparency into the extent of subcontracting performed under federal awards . both large and small businesses report certain subcontract award information into the system , including the subcontractor's name and total dollar value of sub - award . fsrs , however , does not capture all subcontract awards or the level of detail needed to identify instances when subcontracting limitations are exceeded . for example , the system includes subcontracting data only on prime contract and subcontract awards that are at least $25,000 ; and includes only the total value of the subcontract awards and does not break out the costs for labor and materials needed to identify violations under the current and revised subcontracting limitations . when contracting officers do not take steps to ensure 8 ( a ) contractors can and do comply with subcontracting limitations , there is an increased risk that an improper amount of the work may be completed by subcontractors rather than the 8 ( a ) firm awarded the contract . we previously reported on this issue in 2006 , and to date , little has improved . our prior recommendations that ofpp and sba clarify how contracting officers are to monitor and document compliance with subcontracting limitations still need to be fully addressed . in general , contracting officers are unaware of their responsibilities in the 8 ( a ) partnership agreements and are not taking appropriate steps to ensure that 8 ( a ) contractors are in compliance . these findings are even more troubling when there are situations with an increased risk that a contractor may not be able to complete the required amount of work , such as when the prior contractor becomes a major subcontractor for the same requirement .