pub . 105-20 , 111 stat . 224 , codified at 21 u.s.c . § 1521 et seq . in addition , ondcp officials reported different outcomes for its separate screening process for initial and renewal grant applicants . for the initial grant applicants , ondcp officials reported that all of the approximately 180 that were funded met the statutory eligibility requirements . however , ondcp officials acknowledged that most or about 515 of the approximately 600 ( about 86 percent ) renewal grant applicants were funded in fiscal year 2005 without ondcp or samhsa ensuring that these grantees satisfied the statutory eligibility criteria . the results of ondcp's review are shown in figure 4 . screened for statutory eligibility criteria and eligible for grants ( 180 ) satified tory eligiility criteria and were rded grnt ( 180 ) about 55 grant applicants were screened for statutory eligibility criteria and were not eligible for grants and about 30 satisfied statutory eligibility criteria and were awarded grants ( 85 ) were not screened for statutory eligibility criteria , but were awarded grants ( 515 ) for the fiscal year 2006 screening process , ondcp officials said they applied the direct services criterion differently than in fiscal year 2005 . the direct services criterion was also described explicitly as an additional eligibility criterion to be applied ( that is , eligibility criterion apart from the statutory eligibility criteria ) in the 2006 funding announcement . for fiscal year 2006 , for initial grant applicants only , the 20 percent direct services threshold was explicitly described in both the inter - agency agreement and in the fiscal year 2006 funding announcement . the inter - agency agreement between ondcp and samhsa stated that “ondcp shall review applications for compliance with the 20 percent direct services policy.” the funding announcement provided to initial grant applicants stated that “no more than 20 percent of grant funds may be used for direct services.” the funding announcement also stated that if initial grant applicants did not meet this eligibility requirement , their applications would not be forwarded for peer review . while ondcp clarified the funding announcement for grant applicants in fiscal year 2006 , ondcp did not screen renewal grant applicants for the statutory eligibility criteria in fiscal year 2006 because , according to ondcp officials , these applicants were already considered to be statutorily eligible for grant funds . ondcp officials told us that they believed that the initial eligibility screening conducted in a previous year was sufficient for the 4 remaining fiscal years . however , the drug - free communities support program's statutory framework requires that all coalitions meet each of the statutory eligibility requirements each fiscal year to be eligible to receive an initial grant or a renewal grant . as a result of ondcp's policy in fiscal year 2006 , all of the renewal grant applicants that received renewal grants did so without ondcp determining whether these applicants satisfied the statutory eligibility criteria for that fiscal year . ondcp and samhsa experienced collaboration challenges , which contributed to the irregularities we identified for fiscal years 2005 and 2006 .