to achieve programmatic goals . a key principle for strategic workforce planning includes systematically identifying gaps in competencies in staff with the goal of minimizing or eliminating these gaps . our prior work has shown that organizations can use methods such as training , contracting , staff development , and hiring to help align skills in order to eliminate gaps in competencies needed for mission success . by conducting a workforce planning process that includes an analysis of skills and training needed , such as what the bureau describes for its scheduling staff in the future , and the identification of gaps to be addressed , the bureau can better ensure that staff who manage the schedules understand the leading practices and the importance of adhering to them . thus , the bureau can better ensure it has the capacity to develop schedules able to support key management decisions . several divisions are involved in efforts to build the 2020 maf , making collaboration critical to ensuring that participating divisions work together to achieve the bureau's goals . in our past work , we identified leading practices to foster collaborative relationships across organizational boundaries . we determined that four of these practices were directly relevant to the bureau's internal efforts to build its maf . table 2 identifies and describes these four practices and shows our assessment of the extent to which bureau documentation demonstrates the bureau engaged in these leading practices . the bureau has documented its goals for building a more cost - effective maf as part of its strategic plans . the bureau's 2020 census strategic plan set forth bureau - wide goals for the maf and the 2020 census . these goals provide a common rationale for bureau teams to work across organizational boundaries . specifically , the bureau has documented its intention to improve the coverage and accuracy of the address list ; continuously update the address list through the decade ; and improve the cost - effectiveness of the address list . the geography division and the 2020 research and planning office have incorporated these common outcomes as part of their individual efforts . officials in these units indicated an understanding of these goals and communicated them to us . each also documented these goals in their planning documents . for example , the geography division's governance document for gss - i connects its purpose to working towards building the 2020 maf . moreover , in the 2020 research and planning office's research and testing management plan , the bureau sets goals for the division's research associated with improving the accuracy and cost - effectiveness of the maf . the bureau , through its strategic plan , has set goals for the 2020 maf , communicating these to organizational units in a way that will help focus the work in support of upcoming design decisions . similar to its goals , the bureau has established and documented joint strategies as part of its strategic plans . these strategies help outline how the bureau will achieve the goals of an accurate , continuously updated and cost - effective maf .