pt . 1046 , physical protection of security interests ) . doe issued the current protective force program manual in june 2000 . although protective forces are expected to comply with the duties and requirements established in doe policies , deviations from these policies are allowed as long as certain approval and notification criteria are met . following are the three types of deviations: variances: variances are approved conditions that technically vary from doe security requirements but afford equivalent levels of protection . waivers: waivers are approved nonstandard conditions that deviate from doe security requirements that , if uncompensated , would create a potential security vulnerability . as such , waivers require implementation of what doe calls compensatory measures . compensatory measures could include deploying additional protective forces or curtailing operations until the asset can be better protected . exceptions: exceptions are approved deviations from doe security requirements that create a safeguards and security vulnerability . exceptions are approved only when correction of the condition is not feasible , and compensatory measures are inadequate . in addition to complying with these security requirements , doe protective systems , including protective forces , also must meet performance standards . for example , doe sites are required to demonstrate that their protective systems are capable of defending special nuclear material against terrorist forces identified in the dbt . the performance of protective systems is formally and regularly examined through vulnerability assessments . a vulnerability assessment is a systematic evaluation process in which qualitative and quantitative techniques are applied to detect vulnerabilities and arrive at effective protection of specific assets , such as special nuclear material . to conduct such assessments , doe uses , among other things , subject matter experts , such as u.s. special forces ; computer modeling to simulate attacks ; and force - on - force exercises , in which the site's protective forces undergo simulated attacks by a group of mock terrorists . in addition to their use in evaluating the effectiveness of physical protection strategies , doe believes force - on - force exercises are the most realistic representation of adversary attacks that can be used to train protective forces . through a variety of complementary measures , doe ensures that its contractors are complying with doe's safeguards and security policies , including protective force duties and requirements , and that its systems are performing as intended . contractors perform regular self - assessments and are encouraged to uncover any problems themselves . in addition to routine oversight , doe orders require field offices to comprehensively survey contractors' operations for safeguards and security every year . doe's office of independent oversight and performance assurance provides yet another check through its comprehensive inspection program . this office performs comprehensive inspections roughly every 18 months at each doe site that has specified quantities of category i special nuclear material . all deficiencies ( findings ) identified during surveys and inspections require the contractors to take corrective action . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , doe security policies have been under almost constant reexamination and have undergone considerable change . for example , the department's security polices have been undergoing a streamlining process for nearly 2 years .