facility maintenance . about $18.8 million — or 2 percent of the total $752 million — went towards the costs of general facility maintenance . according to orp officials , facility maintenance includes activities such as maintaining building access controls , maintaining installed components , cleaning up waste from birds , removing snow and trash , and conducting periodic walks of the facility to determine the condition of materials in the building , among other things . award fees are an amount of money added to a contract , which a contractor may earn in whole or in part by meeting or exceeding subjective criteria stated in an award fee plan typically related to areas within quality , technical ingenuity , cost - effective management , program management , and other unquantifiable areas . award fees in the context of this report refer to money earned by bni based on its performance in carrying out work on the pretreatment facility . in this report , contract modification fees refer to money negotiated between bni and em based on a change in the contract agreed to by both parties . because of design changes . according to orp officials , em did not pay a termination fee for procurements that were terminated because of the vendor going out of business ; however , for other terminated procurements , em might have to pay additional costs if the vendor submits a claim for compensation to bni , for which bni in turn seeks reimbursement from em . in either case , there may be additional costs related , for example , to picking up and transporting items . $153 million — the facility's highest costs from fiscal year 2013 through fiscal year 2018 . ( see fig . contributing to the fiscal year 2017 costs was a one - time $60 million contract modification fee for both the pretreatment facility and the high - level waste facility that was negotiated between bni and em . according to em officials , em and bni negotiated this fee for work completed by bni in previous years for which it had not been paid a fee . this work included developing facility designs , resolving technical issues , and conducting reviews and research studies . design and construction of the pretreatment facility have been on hold since 2012 . at the time construction was halted , bni estimated that construction of the facility was about 40 percent complete . in july 2018 , the u.s. army corps of engineers reported that construction of the facility was still about 40 percent complete . in a tour of the facility in may 2019 , we observed that construction remains on hold and that em is instead using the space inside the partially constructed building to conduct worker training exercises . additionally , doe's budget request for fiscal year 2020 states that em plans to continue “limited activities” — such as maintaining the existing facility , storing uninstalled equipment , and maintaining records for quality assurance — on the pretreatment facility to keep the facility in a preservation and maintenance mode .