see pub . 110-329 , div . e , tit . ii , 122 stat . the backlog of fca - identified deficiencies.medical facilities appropriations in the reserve that are not used for non - nrm purposes are available for nrm . the under secretary for health determines whether funds in the reserve are available and recommends allocations of those funds to the secretary of veterans affairs , who approves the allocations . va officials explained that the allocation of funds from the reserve for nrm were typically based on sustainment costs as well as the cost of addressing fca - identified deficiencies and other va nrm priorities , such as va's energy investment “green” initiatives . these allocations are also subject to the networks' ability to award the projects and obligate the additional funds prior to their expiration . in anticipation of the availability of such resources , networks typically identify in advance projects that can be implemented if additional funds become available , according to va officials . officials explained further that the networks do this to better address the nrm backlog . va relied on its networks to prioritize all nrm spending until centralizing this process for more costly projects in fiscal year 2012 . nrm projects va funded were generally consistent with va priorities . for fiscal years 2006 through 2011 , va relied on its networks to prioritize projects for nrm spending . each fiscal year , networks provided va headquarters with a list of prioritized nrm projects , known as nrm operating plans . according to officials from headquarters and the two selected networks , nrm operating plans represented all of the nrm projects that a network plans to fund and carry out in a given year . va officials told us that to prioritize nrm projects during this period , the networks used oral guidance communicated to the networks during management meetings with va headquarters that encouraged the networks to prioritize projects addressing critical fca - identified deficiencies and sustainment . beginning in fiscal year 2012 , va changed its process for prioritizing more costly nrm projects . specifically , va headquarters assumed responsibility for prioritizing these nrm projects as part of va's newly established strategic capital investment planning process , known as scip . through scip , va headquarters evaluates these more costly nrm projects and other types of capital investment projects using a set of weighted criteria in order to develop a list of prioritized projects to guide the agency's capital planning decisions.threshold for including nrm projects in this centralized prioritization process was $1 million . va used this process to identify 190 projects as the agency's highest nrm priorities for fiscal year 2012 .