ii. ) on that basis , these igs could be considered for conversion to appointment by the president with senate confirmation . each area has the potential for dramatic improvement and concrete results . the areas also reflect many of the concerns raised by both gao's high - risk report and the igs' top management challenge lists . so far , however , progress on pma has been uneven . to achieve consistent progress , sustained attention from congress , the administration , and the agencies is needed . i believe that gao and the igs can make important contributions , using our combined experience , to help monitor the implementation of this important initiative . key policymakers increasingly need to think beyond quick fixes and carefully consider what the proper role of the federal government should be in the 21st century . members of congress and agency heads can start by undertaking a top - to - bottom review of federal programs and policies to determine which should remain priorities , which should be overhauled , and which have outlived their usefulness or are just no longer affordable given more pressing demands . everything that forms the government's base must be on the table , including tax , spending , and regulatory policies . policymakers will need to distinguish “wants,” which are optional , from “needs,” which can be urgent . they need to make hard choices that take into account what the american people will support and what the federal government can afford and sustain over time . to make informed decisions , congress and agency heads will require hard facts and professional analyses that are objective , fact based , timely , accurate , nonpartisan , fair , and balanced . gao and the igs are important sources of such objective information and analyses . with our respective areas of expertise in long - term challenges and agency - specific issues , gao and the igs can provide useful insights and constructive recommendations on programs that may warrant additional resources , consolidation , revision , or even elimination . closer periodic strategic planning and ongoing engagement coordination between gao and the igs would help to ensure continued effective oversight of these key issues facing government . gao and the igs are already partners in one of the most far - reaching financial management initiatives in government — the yearly audits of the federal government's consolidated financial statements . under the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 as expanded by the government management reform act of 1994 , the igs at the 24 agencies named in the cfo act are responsible for the audits of their agencies' financial statements . in meeting these responsibilities , most igs have contracted with ipas to conduct the audits either entirely or in part . gao is responsible for the u.s. government's consolidated financial statements audit , which by necessity is based largely on the results of the igs' agency - level audits .