workers with low earnings . low earners are less likely than middle and high earners to be offered a pension plan and participate when a plan is offered . as figure 3 shows , pension participation varies by earnings levels ranging from over 70 percent participation for the top earning group to about 30 percent for the lowest earners . for those who are participants , some plans that are integrated with social security permit a reduction in pension benefits for the lowest earners to offset their proportionally higher social security benefits . workers who frequently change jobs over the course of a career . even “covered” workers who frequently change jobs can fail to accrue pension wealth for a significant fraction of their working lives owing to eligibility rules or to vesting rules and the resulting forfeiture of nonvested contributions or accruals . in addition , under defined benefit plans , the annual benefit accrual may be small relative to that for longer - service workers because of the age - and service - weighted features used in these plans . finally , many plans provide for lump sum cash - outs of accounts or accruals , which often are not rolled into other retirement savings vehicles . workers who place little value on saving . some workers , either by preference or from lack of knowledge , may not be predisposed to saving or to committing to saving over the long term for retirement . the determinants of saving behavior are not completely understood , but it appears that inadequate retirement saving occurs at all income levels ( see app . concerns remain about the ability of workers with these characteristics to earn pension income and receive it in retirement . the federal government has several policy tools to provide incentives for expanding pension coverage , and various reforms to pension rules have been enacted with the aim of protecting and improving pension benefits for workers . efforts to further improve coverage and benefits generally involve incremental reforms within the existing framework of the voluntary pension system . traditional reforms to the voluntary , single - employer - based pension system may have limited potential to significantly expand pension coverage and improve benefits for workers who traditionally lack pensions . reforms aimed at encouraging plan sponsorship have focused on improving tax incentives and reducing the burden of pension regulation on small employers , but the effect of reforms aimed at increasing pension sponsorship and coverage may be offset by other policy actions . also , numerous proposals attempt to directly affect pension coverage and benefits by revising the framework of rules governing pensions . past reforms to these rules , such as improved vesting , and trends in plan design , such as the enhanced portability and accrual patterns associated with defined contribution plans , suggest that more workers and their spouses could receive pension income in the future . but the responses of employers and workers to further rule revisions may offset some of the revisions' intended effect . some analysts question whether additional reforms to the voluntary , employer - based pension system can significantly expand pension sponsorship and increase coverage for workers traditionally lacking pensions and improve benefits for workers with pensions .