who will fix it ? where will be fixed ? how will it be fixed ? and how often will it need to be fixed ? the lrr for the nsc did not review the detailed maintenance procedures needed to support the hull , mechanical , electrical , and communications systems because coast guard officials told the navy that the procedures in place at the time of the lrr did not contain the information needed . the review identified the inadequacy of maintenance procedures as a significant gap . the coast guard has addressed some of the gaps identified by the logistics readiness review . the navy categorized the gaps it identified in the lrr and developed recommendations to address those gaps . the navy ranked the gaps it identified in the lrr as priority 1 , 2 , or 3 . priority 1 gaps are defined as those that introduce significant risk to near - term supportability , and workarounds either do not exist or introduce additional risk . priority 2 gaps do not introduce significant risk to near - term supportability , and workarounds are likely to increase the cost or reduce the efficiency of maintenance or operations . priority 3 gaps do not introduce significant risk to near - term supportability , and workarounds exist that do not introduce additional risk . of the 34 gaps , the navy identified 18 as priority 1 , 8 as priority 2 , and 8 as priority 3 . as of may 2009 , coast guard officials stated that the coast guard had addressed 7 recommendations ( 3 of which pertain to priority 1 gaps ) , was in the process of addressing 21 ( 13 of which pertain to priority 1 gaps ) , had not started 3 ( 2 of which pertain to priority 1 gaps ) , and had decided not to address 3 gaps ( none of which pertain to priority 1 gaps ) . table 8 provides a list of the 34 gaps the lrr identified and the progress the coast guard has made in addressing these gaps . in addition to the contact named above , christopher conrad , assistant director , and ellen wolfe , analyst - in - charge , managed this review . christoph hoashi - erhardt and paul hobart made significant contributions to the work . geoffrey hamilton provided legal and regulatory support ; adam vogt provided assistance in report preparation ; michele fejfar assisted with design , methodology , and data analysis ; and karen burke helped develop the report's graphics . coast guard: as deepwater systems integrator , coast guard is reassessing costs and capabilities but lags in applying its disciplined acquisition approach . gao - 09-682 . washington , d.c.: july 14 , 2009 . coast guard: observations on the fiscal year 2010 budget and related performance and management challenges . gao - 09-810t . washington , d.c.: july 7 , 24 , 2009 . coast guard: observations on the genesis and progress of the service's modernization program . gao - 09-530r . washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2009 . coast guard: update on deepwater program management , cost , and acquisition workforce . gao - 09-620t . washington , d.c.: april 22 , 2009 .