( fig . 4 illustrates the alterations in the drawdown schedule for the troops and police. ) according to u.n. , u.s. , and australian officials , this end date is a political compromise developed in consultation with the united states and key council members . senior military officers in the peacekeeping mission said that the failure to meet objectives , such as having a judicial system in place by mid - 2003 , will not change the withdrawal date . although objectives and measures of progress provide information to help manage the withdrawal of peacekeepers , other factors influence council decisions . according to u.n. officials , u.s. officials , and members of the council , the following factors are involved in these decisions: peacekeeping missions are intended to provide a limited window for countries to resolve internal differences and take advantage of the opportunity to rebuild their country with broad international support . the united nations must set deadlines to maintain pressure on the country's leaders and political factions to take responsibility for their country and fulfill their commitments . each peacekeeping mission must compete for the attention of the security council , which often must respond to new crises and emergencies as it devotes resources to ongoing operations . the cost and resources needed for peacekeeping operations are high . security council members face domestic pressures to limit their support , particularly if an operation is not a priority national interest . the united nations confronts significant challenges to implementing each element of the transition strategy . first , achieving the conditions for sustainable peace establishing the conditions necessary for sustainable peace is a challenge . maintaining security is difficult because the rival factions in a country may oppose the peacekeepers or continue their internal disputes , regardless of the peacekeepers' presence . further , establishing rule of law and democratic governance is problematic in countries with little or no tradition of accountable government and democratic principles . in this regard , peacekeeping transitions have taken longer and have been more costly than initially expected . second , the united nations has not been able to coordinate its efforts and priorities with those of other independent international organizations and donor states to the extent necessary to meet transition objectives . third , developing clear objectives and meaningful results - oriented measures of progress is difficult . dpko acknowledges that it needs better measures by which to assess the progress that peacekeeping operations are making in attaining sustainable peace . however , the department has not made developing or using these measures a priority . establishing security in war - torn countries is difficult because of uncertain and volatile environments . for example , despite peace agreements among opposing factions in sierra leone , peacekeepers were initially threatened by one of the rival groups in the country , which restricted their movements , took more than 400 peacekeepers hostage , and continued to commit human rights atrocities . the armed intervention of 4,500 british troops was needed to help establish security . through june 2003 , 49 peacekeepers had died through accidents or hostile acts .