cir. , 1923 ) , the secretary of commerce was denied authority to use his discretion to refuse a radio license on the grounds that he “had been unable to ascertain a wave length for use by plaintiff , which would not interfere with government and private stations.” the court pointed out that the radio act of 1912 necessarily contemplated interference between stations , that the secretary had no discretion to refuse the license , and that the issuance of licenses was a ministerial act . the court held in u.s. v. zenith radio corporation , 12 f.2d 614 ( n.d.ill. , 1926 ) , that the secretary of commerce had no power to make regulations additional to those found in the radio act and that it was , at best , ambiguous on whether the secretary could impose a limitation on the hours of operation of a radio licensee . in carmichael v. anderson , 14 f.2d 166 ( w.d.mo . 1926 ) , the court held that while the secretary of commerce had the right to grant licenses with restrictions agreed upon by multiple applicants — such as time sharing by two radio operators using the same frequency — the secretary may have no right to impose restrictions other than those contained in the radio act of 1912 . in the case tribune co. v. oak leaves broadcasting station , inc. , ( cir . ct. , cook county , ill. 1926 ) reprinted in 68 cong . for example , would the office of management and budget control when and how much an agency received in reimbursement or would the congress maintain control by requiring an agency to obtain an appropriation ? several u.s. spectrum experts said that one means of improving the spectrum allocation process is to develop coordinated , national spectrum planning and policies that better anticipate future needs and put more predictability into spectrum decision - making . in the court's view , the “priority of time” — obtaining a license first — created a superior right . in 1926 , the acting attorney general issued an opinion stating that a broadcasting station could not operate under the act without a license , but the secretary had no discretion to refuse a license upon a proper application . moreover , the secretary had no power to designate the frequency within the broadcast band at which a broadcasting station might operate , nor to prescribe the hours of operation , to limit the power of stations , or to issue licenses of limited duration . radio act of 1927 — the radio act of 1912 proved to be totally inadequate in coping with the spectrum of the rapidly growing radio broadcasting industry . further , congress had become concerned with other issues related to spectrum use , such as vested rights in the spectrum , the basis or criteria for granting licenses , and the potential monopoly in radio equipment manufacturing . five years in the making , the radio act of 1927 was enacted with two key provisions: the creation of a new government commission to manage nongovernment spectrum use , and the adoption of the “public interest , convenience , and necessity” standard for licensing .