penalties and incentives . fns has long focused its attention on states' accountability for error rates through its qc system by assessing financial penalties and providing financial incentives . however , since 2000 , usda leadership has more explicitly established payment accuracy as a program priority . high level usda officials visited states with particularly high error rates , and fns has collected a higher percentage of penalties from states compared with prior years . for example , from fiscal year 1992 to 2000 , fns collected about $800,000 in penalties from states . in the next 5 years , fns collected more than $20 million from states . in fiscal year 2009 , 3 states ( maine , west virginia , and new mexico ) were notified that they had incurred a financial liability for having a poor payment error rate for at least two consecutive years . an additional 9 states and territories ( connecticut , maryland , indiana , wisconsin , louisiana , texas , iowa , alaska , and guam ) were found to be in jeopardy of being penalized if their error rates do not improve . ten states and territories received bonus payments for the best and most improved payment error rates in fiscal year 2009 ( delaware , florida , georgia , guam , maine , nebraska , ohio , south dakota , washington , wisconsin ) . information sharing . fns also provides and facilitates the exchange of information gleaned from monitoring by training state qc staff , presenting at conferences , publishing best practice guides , supporting the adoption of program simplification options , and providing states policy interpretation and guidance . at the time of our 2005 study , states we reviewed adopted a combination of practices to prevent , minimize , and address payment accuracy problems , such as: increasing the awareness of , and the accountability for , payment error . for example , some states set error rate targets for their local offices and hold staff accountable for payment accuracy . analyzing quality control data to identify causes of common payment errors and developing corrective actions . making automated system changes to prompt workers to obtain complete documentation from clients . developing specialized change units that focus on acting upon reported case changes . verifying the accuracy of benefit payments calculated by state snap workers through supervisory and other types of case file reviews . despite this progress , the amount of snap benefits paid in error is substantial , totaling about $2.2 billion in 2009 . however , in 1996 congress gave fns the authority to charge retailers with trafficking in cases using evidence obtained through an ebt transaction report , called “paper cases.” a major advantage of paper cases is that they can be prepared relatively quickly and without multiple store visits . these ebt cases now account for more than half of the permanent disqualifications by fns . although the number of trafficking disqualifications based on undercover investigations has declined , these investigations continue to play a key role in combating trafficking .