state did not provide formal comments . usaid and state also provided technical comments , which we incorporated throughout the report , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the u.s. agency for international development , the department of state , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii . the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 ( the act ) , included a provision for us to conduct oversight of the u.s. agency for international development's ( usaid ) and the department of state's ( state ) activities to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the 2014 ebola outbreak and reimbursements made . we examined ( 1 ) usaid's and state's obligations and disbursements for ebola activities and ( 2 ) the extent to which usaid made reimbursements in accordance with the requirements of the fiscal year 2015 appropriations act . to examine usaid's and state's obligations and disbursements for ebola activities , we analyzed each agency's allocation , obligation , and disbursement data for ebola response and preparedness activities reported in usaid's and state's reports to the senate and house committees on appropriations mandated by the act . we analyzed usaid's and state's reported data on allocations , obligations , and disbursements that usaid and state reported from february 3 , 2015 , to july 1 , 2016 . we obtained and analyzed the data from usaid for the international disaster assistance ; global health programs ; economic support fund ; usaid operating expenses ; nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs ; and usaid office of inspector general appropriation accounts . we obtained and analyzed the data for the diplomatic & consular programs account from state , which state reported separately . we reviewed each agency's reports to congressional committees to determine the activities funded and reasons for any changes in the agencies' cost estimates and use of the funds . we interviewed usaid and state officials in washington , d.c. , from each bureau and office that administers funding from accounts of the fiscal year 2015 appropriation to discuss the status of the agencies' obligations and disbursements for activities to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak in west africa , methods for reporting the funding data , and plans for obligating and disbursing the funds . we also interviewed officials from each of usaid's and state's offices that report on the funds to obtain information about their budgeting process and terms to determine the best method for analyzing the data across accounts . we then reviewed the data and information reported and consulted with usaid and state officials on the accuracy and completeness of the data and information .