cost . industry stakeholders told us that , among other things , it is costly to integrate plan record keeper systems with those of an insurer , especially for complex and non - standardized annuity products like gmwbs , which require daily transmittal of information between systems . in contrast , stakeholders indicated that fixed immediate annuities may be the least costly annuity option that plan sponsors can adopt because they are simple and straightforward for record keepers to implement . stakeholders also told us that some record keepers may offer an open record keeping platform that either already supports competing annuity products or can be customized at the sponsor's request to do so . however , a number of record keepers told us that even for providers that offer an open platform , the process of integrating the systems for annuity products like gmwbs can be costly absent strong demand for them from plan sponsors . what defaults exist for participants who do not choose a lifetime income option ? to better understand the adoption of lifetime income options in 401 ( k ) plans , we administered a questionnaire to 11 401 ( k ) plan record keepers that together accounted for approximately 42 percent of the 401 ( k ) plan market as measured by plan assets , 46 percent as measured by participants , and 26 percent as measured by the number of plans , as of december 2014 . to examine what barriers , if any , deter plan sponsors from offering lifetime income options , we conducted a non - generalizable online survey of plan sponsors through industry organizations such as plansponsor , the plan sponsor council of america , the national association of plan administrators and benefitslink . to assess the challenges participants may face in learning to make informed decisions about lifetime income options , we reviewed a non - generalizable sample of the written information some 401 ( k ) plan sponsors provide to participants when they leave an employer , referred to as separation packets . we obtained separation packets from participants and industry stakeholders we interviewed , as well as from publicly available sources such as plan websites . we also obtained and reviewed examples of information , such as lifetime income illustrations , that some service providers make available for plan sponsors to include in benefit statements or on plan websites to help participants plan for retirement . to examine what defaults exist for participants who do not select a lifetime income option , we coordinated with boston research technologies , a research firm . to review the survey methodologies we interviewed individuals knowledgeable about the methodology and compared selected survey responses against data from other large samples of 401 ( k ) participants . we found the survey responses to be reflective of the broader population of 401 ( k ) plan participants and as a result , we generalize the survey responses to that population . to answer all these questions , we reviewed relevant research ; industry publications ; and federal laws , regulations , and guidance on lifetime income options in 401 ( k ) plans .