gao - 13-106 . washington , d.c.: february 8 , 2013 . elder justice: national strategy needed to effectively combat elder financial exploitation . gao - 13-110 . washington , d.c.: november 15 , 2012 . certain individuals are not eligible to serve as representative payees . for example , in order to be eligible to serve as a representative payee , an individual cannot be a fugitive felon or have been convicted of certain felonies , including those related to social security fraud , misuse of ssa benefits , or concealing or failing to disclose knowledge of events affecting entitlement to or payment of social security benefits . ssa administers the representative payee program through a network of over 1,200 field offices located across the country . according to ssa and nrc officials , the process for administering the program consists of many time - consuming and often complicated steps , guided largely by requirements in statute and ssa regulations . these steps are primarily completed by field office claims representatives who are also responsible for other work processes , such as interviewing individuals to determine their eligibility for oasdi and ssi benefits . according to ssa's guidance,payee , ssa staff perform the following activities: once a beneficiary is determined to need a representative 1 . identify potential payees ssa claims representatives use a variety of approaches to identify prospective payees , including asking the beneficiary if there is an individual whom he or she trusts ; reviewing beneficiary claims files and any available medical records ; and consulting with local government , social service , and other providers who can often provide payee contacts . if no payee is readily available , the claims representative tries to find a payee by consulting the list of payee sources ( eg , local organizations with volunteers who can serve as payees ) that each field office is required to maintain . screen potential payees after identifying prospective payees , claims representatives interview them to assess their suitability , considering factors such as the nature of their relationship to the beneficiary and whether they are knowledgeable about the beneficiary's needs . in addition , claims representatives receive automated messages during the screening process that show whether a prospective payee is a fugitive felon or otherwise prohibited by law from serving as a representative payee . appoint a payee ssa's guidance includes preference lists to assist claims representatives in selecting a payee when more than one candidate is available .