coverage . as shown earlier in table 1 , irs grouped recovery act provisions into the following categories: individual tax credits , tax incentives for business , renewable energy , various bond incentives , health coverage improvement , and cobra . we chose coverage as a fourth criterion in order to ensure that we considered at least one provision from most of the irs categories . we did not select provisions from the renewable energy group because none of them was being implemented in 2009 . we selected the bab and nol carryback provisions in spite of their relatively small dollar estimates to achieve wider coverage of irs categories . table 5 summarizes how the five provisions we selected for further study addressed these criteria and also shows how the hctc relates to the criteria . for the second objective , dealing with irs's collection of data on the recovery act provisions , we analyzed irs planning documents for collecting data for the 54 provisions . for the 5 selected provisions and the hctc , we analyzed whether irs would be able to identify provision users and the extent of use . to see how these data could relate to estimating irs's recovery act provisions' effect on the overall economy , we consulted with gao economics experts , including the chief economist's office , and studied council of economic advisers ( cea ) and congressional budget office ( cbo ) reports . to meet the third objective , relating to the potential abuse of provisions , we determined what risk assessments and risk - mitigation plans irs had done or planned for the future and discussed them with irs and department of the treasury officials . we also assessed irs's risk - management efforts against gao and other published criteria on mitigating abusive noncompliance . for the five selected provisions , we examined the potential for abuse by reviewing irs documentation and risk assessments and interviewing treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) and irs officials . we used the results of our work and tigta's to answer our fourth objective — discussing possible lessons learned for future tax administration . we interviewed responsible irs officials to obtain their views on these observations . we found the irs data we used reliable for the purposes of this report . we determined this after interviewing irs and , where appropriate , tigta officials , and reviewing various tigta reports . we conducted this performance audit from june 2009 through february 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . table 6 details information about the 54 american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) provisions that the internal revenue service ( irs ) has a role in administering .