iv ) . on may 17 , 2005 , we held an all - day meeting with the eight panelists at our office in washington , d.c. before the meeting , we provided each panel member with a set of eight general discussion questions . at the end of each discussion , we asked the panelists to respond , using an anonymous ballot , to a set of questions that were based on the general discussion topics . we recorded and transcribed the meeting to ensure that we accurately captured the panel members' statements . to obtain information on the funding provided for the restoration effort , we developed a data collection instrument that we distributed to key federal agencies ; the states of maryland , pennsylvania , and virginia ; and the district of columbia . key federal agencies were identified as those that participated in high - level chesapeake bay program committees or that provided more than $250,000 annually , on average , in direct funding . for the purposes of this report , we defined direct funds as those that were provided exclusively for bay restoration ( eg , increasing the oyster population ) or those that would no longer be made available in the absence of the restoration effort . to make the comparison more meaningful , we present funding data in constant 2004 dollars . unless otherwise noted , all figures are obligation amounts and include administrative costs . we reviewed the data from the federal agencies and states for consistency and reliability and , when possible , compared the data with data from other sources , such as data collected by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the chesapeake bay commission . after reviewing the data and comparing it with other sources , we sent the data back to the federal agencies and states for verification and updates as needed . in addition , we asked for explanations of any inconsistencies that we identified . after receiving the verified / updated data , we once again reviewed the data for consistency and reliability . finally , we contacted the agencies and states with any outstanding questions concerning the data and conducted additional data reliability checks . to determine how effectively the restoration effort is being coordinated and managed , we obtained documentation on the organizational structure of the program , the roles and responsibilities of the committees and subcommittees , and planning documents developed to address the commitments . we analyzed the planning documents for consistency and thoroughness . in addition , we obtained information on the status of keystone and other commitments . to obtain epa's insights on all four objectives , we met with officials from the chesapeake bay program office to discuss its monitoring and assessment , reporting , funding , and coordination and management responsibilities . through these discussions , we obtained an array of documents and perspectives related to all four objectives . to obtain insights from the other signatories of the chesapeake bay agreements , we met with officials from the chesapeake bay commission , the district of columbia , and the states of maryland , pennsylvania , and virginia . through these efforts , we obtained documents and information related to all four objectives .