what is important ( that is , what are our priorities ) ? how can these actors be held accountable and by whom ? what costs should be borne by federal , state , and local governments or the private sector in preparing for , responding to , and recovery from disasters large and small — whether the acts of nature or the deliberate or accidental acts of man ? to what extent and how should the federal government encourage and foster a role for regional or multistate entities in emergency planning and response ? these issues are enormously complex and represent a major challenge for all levels of government . but the experience of hurricane katrina illustrated why it is important to tackle these difficult issues . katrina was a catastrophe of historic proportions in both its geographic scope — about 90,000 square miles — and its destruction . its impact on individuals and communities was horrific . katrina highlighted the limitations of our current capacity to respond effectively to catastrophic events — those of unusual severity that almost immediately overwhelm state and local response capacities . katrina gives us an opportunity to learn from what went well and what did not go so well and improve our ability to respond to future catastrophic disasters . it is generally accepted that emergency preparedness and response should be characterized by measurable goals and effective efforts to identify key gaps between those goals and current capabilities , with a clear plan for closing those gaps and , once achieved , sustaining desired levels of preparedness and response capabilities and performance . the basic goal of emergency preparedness for a major emergency is that first responders should be able to respond swiftly with well - planned , well - coordinated , and effective actions that save lives and property , mitigate the effects of the disaster , and set the stage for a quick , effective recovery . in a major event , coordinated , effective actions are required among responders from different local jurisdictions , levels of government , and nongovernmental entities , such as the red cross . essentially , all levels of government are still struggling to define and act on the answers to four basic , but hardly simple , questions with regard to emergency preparedness and response: 1 . how do we know what is important ( eg , risk assessments , performance standards ) ? how do we measure , attain , and sustain success ? on what basis do we make necessary trade - offs , given finite resources ? there are no simple , easy answers to these questions , and the data available for answering them are incomplete and imperfect . we have better information and a sense of what needs to be done for some types of major emergency events than others . for some natural disasters , such as regional wildfires and flooding , there is more experience and therefore a better basis on which to assess preparation and response efforts and identify gaps that need to be addressed . california has experience with earthquakes , and florida has experience with hurricanes .