jordan . although jordan has allocated $16 million of u.s. aid per year for sustainment and modernization since 2000 , it cannot fully use all of the defense articles it has received through drawdowns . for example , the jordanian air force cannot get all the necessary spare parts from dod's logistics system for its uh - 1h's helicopters ; as of may 2002 , only 20 of 36 helicopters were operational . in addition , jordan does not have funds to purchase additional munitions for some of the weapons it received from the drawdowns . as a result , the jordanian army and air force have never test fired the air - to - air missiles or the antitank missiles it received . furthermore , according to u.s. military officials in jordan , the shelf life of some of the other munitions and light weapons ammunition used for training purposes may be expiring , and jordan does not have the funds to replace them . drawdowns give the president the ability to provide defense articles , training , and services to foreign countries and international organizations without first seeking specific appropriations from the congress . in making this accommodation , the congress has required that the president regularly report on the use of these special authorities . however , dsca's system for collecting information on the status of drawdowns is outmoded and does not readily permit dsca to meet the reporting requirements to the congress . while dsca can respond to ad hoc inquiries about specific drawdowns , a way to systematically track and accurately report on the status of drawdowns does not currently exist . as a result , neither the congress nor the executive branch has complete and accurate information about the status of defense articles and services provided to foreign recipients through drawdowns . in light of the increased use of drawdowns since 1990 , the need for such information has increased accordingly . to help ensure that the congress has accurate and complete information on the use of drawdowns , we recommend that the secretary of defense , in consultation with the director of dsca and the secretaries of the military services , develop a system that will enable dsca to report to the congress on the cost , type , quantity , and delivery status of defense articles and services transferred to foreign recipients through drawdowns , as required . dod provided written comments on a draft of this report ( see app . bosnia . according to officials from the bosnian federation ministry of defense and dod , the bosnian federation army does not have enough of its own funds , and does not receive enough assistance from the united states , to maintain the vehicles and weapons it received in the 1996 drawdown . bosnia has received less than $6 million per year in financing since 1996 to support the defense articles . however , bosnian federation ministry of defense officials stated that they need approximately $10 million per year just for spare parts and fuel .