i would be happy to respond to any questions that you may have . reported transaction data did not match underlying documentation . a total of 34 pilot site reports were issued by the independent test agent . according to tsa , the pilot site reports were used as the basis for dhs's report to congress . we separately requested copies of the 34 pilot site reports from both tsa and the independent test agent . in comparing the reports provided , we found that 31 of the 34 pilot site reports provided to us by tsa did not contain the same information as those provided by the independent test agent . differences for 27 of the 31 pilot site reports pertained to how pilot site data were characterized , such as the baseline throughput time used to compare against throughput times observed during two phases of testing . however , at two pilot sites , brownsville and staten island ferry , transaction data reported by the independent test agent did not match the data included in tsa's reports . moreover , data in the pilot site reports did not always match data collected by the independent test agent during the pilot . pilot documentation did not contain complete twic reader and access control system characteristics . pilot documentation did not always identify which twic readers or which interface ( eg , contact or contactless interface ) the reader used to communicate with the twic card during data collection . for example , at one pilot site , two different readers were tested . tsa and the independent test agent tested the twic readers at each pilot site to ensure they worked before individuals began presenting their twic cards to the readers during the pilot . however , the pilot site report did not identify which data were collected using which reader . tsa and the independent test agent did not record clear baseline data for comparing operational performance at access points with twic readers . baseline data , which were to be collected prior to piloting the use of twic with readers , were to be a measure of throughput time , that is , the time required to inspect a twic card and complete access - related processes prior to granting entry . however , it is unclear from the documentation whether acquired data were sufficient to reliably identify throughput times at truck , other vehicle , and pedestrian access points , which may vary . tsa and the independent test agent did not collect complete data on malfunctioning twic cards . tsa officials observed malfunctioning twic cards during the pilot , largely because of broken antennas . tsa officials stated that they directed the independent test agent to change its collection and reporting approach because of tsa's inability to require or control data collection to the extent required to execute the plan . we identified eight areas where twic reader pilot data collection , supporting documentation , and recording weaknesses affected the completeness , accuracy , and reliability of the pilot data . installed twic readers and access control systems could not collect required data on twic reader use , and tsa and the independent test agent did not employ effective compensating data collection measures .