evaluating the results . evaluating the actions taken by irs to reduce the tax gap would help maximize irs's effectiveness . evaluations can be challenging because it is difficult to isolate the effects of irs's actions from other influences on taxpayers' compliance . our work has discussed how to address these challenges , for example by using research to link actions with the outputs and desired effects . when taxpayers do not pay all of their taxes , honest taxpayers carry a greater burden to fund government programs and the nation is less able to address its long - term fiscal challenges . thus , reducing the tax gap is important , even though closing the entire tax gap is neither feasible nor desirable because of costs and intrusiveness . all of the approaches i have discussed have the potential to reduce the tax gap alone or in combination , and no one approach is clearly and always superior to the others . as a result , irs needs a strategy to attack the tax gap on multiple fronts with multiple approaches . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my testimony . leveraging technology . better use of technology could help irs be more efficient in reducing the tax gap . irs is modernizing its technology , which has paid off in terms of telephone service , resource allocation , electronic filing , and data analysis capability . however , this ongoing modernization will need strong management and prudent investments to maximize potential efficiencies . considering the costs and burdens . any action to reduce the tax gap will create costs and burdens for irs ; taxpayers ; and third parties , such as those who file information returns . as discussed earlier , for example , withholding and information reporting requirements impose some costs and burdens on those that track and report information . these costs and burdens need to be reasonable in relation to the improvements expected to arise from new compliance strategies . optimizing resource allocation . as previously discussed , developing reliable measures of the return on investment for strategies to reduce the tax gap would help inform irs resource allocation decisions . irs has rough measures of return on investment based on the additional taxes it assesses . developing such measures is difficult because of incomplete data on the costs of enforcement and collected revenues . beyond direct revenues , irs's enforcement actions have indirect revenue effects , which are difficult to measure . however , indirect effects could far exceed direct revenue effects and would be important to consider in connection with continued development of return on investment measures . i would be happy to answer any question you may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact michael brostek on ( 202 ) 512-9110 or brostekm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include tom short , assistant director ; jeff arkin ; cheryl peterson ; and jeff procak . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .