we agree . we did not intend for the report to proscribe the methodologies that usps should use to evaluate these long - term effects . rather , the report concludes , though , that usps's methodologies should be made available for prc's evaluation prior to the implementation of promotions . this review would allow prc to better evaluate the extent to which the promotions satisfy requirements . usps also provided additional comments related to promotions: in usps's letter , usps stated that the draft report concluded that promotions should not be offered unless usps had “assurance” that promotions will achieve positive financial results . usps correctly notes that no business decision is ever accompanied by a guarantee of success , and we have revised the relevant statement in our conclusions . however , as usps agreed , sound analysis should accompany every business decision , including the implementation of promotions , particularly given usps's financial situation . in its letter and technical comments , usps stated that the report should more clearly delineate the differences between promotions and sales . in particular , usps noted that promotions are designed to help sustain mail volume and revenue over the long - term . sales , though , are designed to generate additional mail volumes , but only during the sale period itself . we have revised the relevant text throughout this report to better distinguish between the different goals of sales and promotions . in usps's letter , usps also notes that some of the costs for recent promotions have been recovered through the creation of additional price cap authority , mitigating the risk of financial losses from the most recent promotions . usps is to be commended for seeking ways to mitigate the financial risks of any postage rate discount , as it has done with early - out clauses in market dominant nsas . however , in a recent decision approving a promotion , prc did not accept the price cap treatment proposed by usps . in its letter , usps also requested that we characterize the data provided by usps to prc on some sales not as “corrupt” but “incomplete” or “insufficient.” the term “corrupt” is not meant to imply that usps intended to make data provided to prc unusable . however , according to prc , data provided to it by usps on an early sale was “corrupt” and hindered prc's ability to evaluate the financial results of that effort . we did not modify the report related to this issue . usps also disagreed with the statement in the report that many mailers are not likely to respond to price decreases , such as discounts in market dominant nsas , with additional mail volume . usps stated that market dominant nsas can provide promising opportunities to increase mail volumes and revenues in the future . our conclusion about market dominant nsas is based primarily on usps's estimates indicating that market dominant mail products have low elasticities . these estimates are a measure of the degree to which mailers respond to price changes and alter their demand for products and services . lorelei st. james , ( 202 ) 512-2834 or stjamesl@gao.gov .