pub . 112 – 95 § 221 , 126 stat . 11 , 54. programs to ensure improved oversight of nextgen implementation . additionally , the recently passed faa authorization act redesignated the director of the joint planning and development office to directly report to the faa administrator and created a new leadership position — the chief nextgen officer — that will also report to the administrator but has not yet been filled . while elimination of duplicative committees and a focus on accountability for nextgen implementation are positive steps , it remains to be seen whether this latest reorganization will produce the desired results without the necessary leadership positions filled . as we have previously reported , leadership is a critical element of success for large - scale systems integration efforts like nextgen . dot relies on more than 400 computerized information systems to carry out its financial and mission - related operations . effective information security controls are required to ensure that financial and sensitive information is adequately protected from inadvertent or deliberate misuse ; fraudulent use ; and improper disclosure , modification , or destruction . ineffective controls can also impair the accuracy , completeness , and timeliness of information used by management . the need for effective information security is further underscored by the evolving and growing cyber threats to federal systems and the dramatic increase in the number of security incidents reported by federal agencies , including dot . from fiscal years 2007 to 2011 , the number of incidents reported to the united states computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) increased by more than 140 percent . dot has been challenged to effectively protect its computer systems and networks . our analysis of agency and oig reports shows that the department has not consistently implemented effective controls , such as those intended to prevent , limit , and detect unauthorized access to its systems or manage the configuration of devices to prevent unauthorized access and ensure system integrity . we have reported on the need for federal agencies , including dot , to improve implementation of information security controls , such as those for configuring desktop computers and wireless communication devices . for example , we recommended that dot complete deployment of a national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) - validated security tool to monitor compliance with the u.s. government configuration baseline ( usgcb ) and ensure that language is included in contracts to ensure new acquisitions include usgcb settings and products of information technology providers operate effectively using them . dot agreed with our recommendations . until dot strengthens information security controls , it has limited assurance that financial and sensitive information is adequately protected from inadvertent or deliberate misuse , fraudulent use , and improper disclosure , modification , or destruction . in conclusion , we have ongoing work examining many of the topics discussed in this statement . for example , we are conducting work for this subcommittee on the viability of supplanting or replacing fuel taxes with a system of charging vehicle owners a user fee based on vehicle miles traveled .