we describe these as awarded reverse auctions . the dollar value of an awarded auction is based on the dollar amount of the bid selected for award ; however , the dollar amount of the bid selected for award is not necessarily equivalent to the amount ultimately obligated on the resulting contract . we present the dollar value of agencies' awarded auctions from 2013 through 2017 in constant fiscal year 2017 dollars using the congressional budget office's june 2017 gross domestic product price index projection — the most recent projection available at the time of our analysis . we generally collected data from reverse auction providers because information about reverse auction use is not available in the federal procurement data system - next generation , a government - wide source of contract data . in addition , the selected agencies we reviewed do not separately track use of reverse auctions . we collected data from the department of housing and urban development directly because the agency tracks its reverse auction use , including which auctions it awards . two of the providers we identified , procurex and the army chess it e - mart reverse auction platform , do not track the reverse auctions that agencies award to vendors . fedbid does this in two different scenarios . first , to correct for situations when using the agency target price results in abnormally high savings — generally defined by fedbid as savings more than 50 percent above the target price — instead fedbid uses a target price based on an average of bids received during the auction . fedbid representatives explained that these adjustments help avoid overstating savings caused by outlier target prices . second , to correct for situations when the agency target price was lower than the winning bid , and would result in a calculated savings of less than $0 , instead fedbid uses a target price equal to the winning bid , so that calculated savings equal $0 . in its written response , reproduced in appendix v , dhs concurred with two recommendations and did not concur with two recommendations . dhs concurred with our recommendation that it assess why reverse auctions conducted using existing vehicles have higher one bidder rates and provide information to contracting officials about factors that indicate conducting reverse auctions using existing vehicles is appropriate . however , dhs did not believe that it needed to conduct an assessment specific to reverse auctions . the department stated that the factors that contribute to one bidder participating in other procurements — such as inadequate market research and poorly defined requirements — would similarly affect reverse auctions . nevertheless , dhs stated that the office of the chief procurement officer will communicate to its contracting officials that when market research for a planned reverse auction buy on an existing contract vehicle demonstrates that only one bid is expected , a reverse auction must not be used to conduct the procurement . dhs expects to complete actions in response to this recommendation by the end of november 2018 . dhs also concurred with our recommendation that it determine if it would be advantageous for the agency to enter into contracts with third party reverse auction providers .