the quality of the vehicles has decreased . for example , in 2006 the charity spent about $156,000 on parts in order to repair donated vehicles , which is more than it spent in previous years . this may be because of potential donors selling or trading higher - value vehicles instead of donating them because they can get more money for the vehicles . this was in part because of a decrease in bequests . to offset the decrease in revenue from vehicle donations , the charity decreased some services , such as the hours of operation for a homeless shelter from 24 hours per day to the evening hours only . the charity also was unable to expand existing services or start new services . in addition , the charity reduced staff , instituted a hiring freeze , and has not given or has postponed merit pay raises . an increase in grants and bequests has offset some of the loss from vehicle donations ; however this revenue is often earmarked for certain activities or programs and may not be used for general program administration . the charity operates its own auctions , which it also did prior to the rule changes . the number of forms the charity must complete has increased , but the charity has also become more efficient in using technology to handle the increase . donors are nervous about providing their social security numbers for fear of identity theft . the charity informs the donors that if they do not provide their social security numbers , then they cannot claim more than $500 on their returns . the officials did not identify anything in the irs publications that was unclear . the donors do not ask too many questions , mostly doing their own research before donating a vehicle . the charity operates its vehicle donation program in - house and does not share the revenue from the program with a for - profit entity . thus , all the revenue from the vehicle donation program is used to further the charitable purpose . as a result , some vehicles are eligible for the material improvement exception , and the donors can claim fair market value . the other vehicles are sold to a wholesaler or to salvage yards for the value of the metal . administrative burden has increased because of the notification and filing requirements . some donors have not wanted to provide their social security numbers . the irs publications and guidance are clear . the charity received a lot of questions about the changes to the rules in 2005 , but now donors are not asking as many questions . the charity does not have any plans to eliminate the vehicle donation program . even though it now receives fewer vehicles and lower - quality vehicles , it believes that the program is still worth operating . this is in part because of the flexibility in how the charity can use the revenues from the vehicle donation program . it uses the revenues from the vehicle donation program to pay for services that are not covered by federal grants .