industry trends . as mentioned previously , about one - quarter of flsa lawsuits filed in fiscal year 2012 were filed by workers in the accommodations and food service industry . nationally , service jobs , including those in the leisure and hospitality industry , increased from 2000 to 2010 , while most other industries lost jobs during that period . federal judges in new york and florida attributed some of the concentration of such litigation in their districts to the large number of restaurants and other service industry jobs in which wage and hour violations are more common than in some other industries . an academic who focuses on labor and employment relations told us that changes in the management structure in the retail and restaurant industry may have contributed to the rise in flsa lawsuits . for example , frontline managers who were once exempt have become nonexempt as their nonmanagerial duties have increased as a portion of their overall duties . we also reviewed dol's annual process for determining how to target its enforcement and compliance assistance resources . the agency targets industries for enforcement that , according to its recent enforcement data , have a higher likelihood of flsa violations , along with other factors . in addition , according to whd internal guidance , the agency's annual enforcement plans should contain strategies to engage related stakeholders in preventing such violations . for example , if a whd office plans to investigate restaurants to identify potential violations of the flsa , it should also develop strategies to engage restaurant trade associations about flsa - related issues so that these stakeholders can help bring about compliance in the industry . however , dol does not compile and analyze relevant data , such as information on the subjects or the number of requests for assistance it receives from employers and workers , to help determine what additional or revised guidance employers may need to help them comply with the in developing its guidance on the flsa , whd does not use a flsa.systematic approach that includes analyzing this type of data . in addition , whd does not have a routine , data - based process for assessing the adequacy of its guidance . for example , whd does not analyze trends in the types of flsa - related questions it receives . this type of information could be used to develop new guidance or improve the guidance whd provides to employers and workers on the requirements of the flsa . because of these issues , we recommended that whd develop a systematic approach for identifying areas of confusion about the requirements of the flsa that contribute to possible violations and improving the guidance it provides to employers and workers in those areas . this approach could include compiling and analyzing data on requests for guidance on issues related to the flsa , and gathering and using input from flsa stakeholders or other users of existing guidance through an advisory panel or other means . while improved dol guidance on the flsa might not affect the number of lawsuits filed , it could increase the efficiency and effectiveness of its efforts to help employers voluntarily comply with the flsa .