aie . the army developed aie to control access to its installations . aie consists of hardware and software — specifically , computers , servers , badge printers , and handheld identification devices . aie also includes additional hardware such as gate arms and automated pedestals where individuals can scan their own credentials . aie has the capability to electronically connect to authoritative government databases using imesa . rapidgate . rapidgate is a legacy system that according to dmdc officials is no longer being fielded to dod installations and , according to army officials , as of october 2018 was in use at only four domestic army installations . rapidgate does not have the capability to electronically connect to authoritative government databases . deployed by dod in 2014 , imesa verifies enrolled individuals' information against ( 1 ) dod's defense enrollment eligibility reporting system to determine if the credentials have been revoked ; ( 2 ) the federal bureau of investigation's national crime information center's wanted persons file to determine if there are records on the individuals for an outstanding felony warrant ; ( 3 ) the federal bureau of investigation's terrorist screening database to determine if the individuals are known or suspected terrorists ; and ( 4 ) the local population database , according to an ousd ( i ) official , to determine if credentials issued by installations have been revoked or have expired . individuals with enrollable credentials are enrolled in imesa when their credentials are scanned by pacs for the first time . according to dmdc officials , once individuals are enrolled , imesa continuously vets them against these authoritative government databases every 24 hours and it takes approximately 2 seconds for each individual's credential to be vetted through imesa . figure 2 illustrates the process of using pacs to electronically connect to imesa to validate individuals' identity and continuously vet individuals' fitness for access to dod installations . the under secretary of defense for intelligence is responsible for establishing department - wide physical access control standards , procedures , and guidance , consistent with dod guidance and applicable laws , to include developing processes for establishing the identity of individuals seeking access to installations . the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness is responsible for designing and maintaining imesa , and establishing and executing a plan to integrate imesa with pacs at all dod installations . dmdc is a center within the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness that provides identity management services and oversees the fielding and maintenance of dbids . dod components issue their own component - and installation - specific requirements for physical access control . these include physical access barrier requirements such as fences , as well as the use of pacs . each dod component has designated a program manager to supervise and oversee its physical security program , to include pacs . according to dod component guidance and officials: the army acquisition corps , product manager for force protection systems , is responsible for the procurement and fielding for the army's pacs . the army office of the provost marshal general develops pacs requirements based on dod and army policies for the army's physical security program .