we previously reported on this issue in 2009 . at that time , we found that vr&e's five tracks do not share the same overarching goal . therefore , we concluded that vr&e should not combine track information . types of il benefits provided: the system does not collect information on the types of il benefits provided to veterans in a standardized manner that can be easily aggregated and analyzed for oversight purposes . in several of the il track cases we reviewed , the goods and services purchased were grouped together under a general description , such as “il equipment” or “il supplies,” without any further details . in addition , we found that controls for data entry were not adequate to ensure that all important data were recorded . for example , we estimated that the service provider field was either missing or unclear for one or more services in about 15 percent of all il cases that began in fiscal year 2008 . number of il veterans served: the system does not provide vr&e with the information it needs to monitor its statutory entrant cap and program operations . the law allows vr&e to initiate “programs” of independent living services and assistance for no more than a specified number of veterans each year , which , as of 2012 , was set at 2,700 . in analyzing vr&e's administrative data , we found that vr&e counts the number of il plans developed annually rather than the number of individual veterans admitted to the track . because multiple il plans can be developed for an individual veteran during the same fiscal year , veterans with multiple plans may be counted more than once toward the statutory cap . as a result , vr&e lacks complete information on the number of veterans it is serving through the il track at any given time — information it could use to better manage staff , workloads , and program resources , and ensure that it can effectively manage its cap . similar to our report's findings , vr&e's 2012 evaluation of cwinrs has shown that the system limits vr&e's oversight abilities and does not capture all important data elements to support the agency's “evolving business needs.”that the new system modifications will enable them to individually track veterans served through the il track . however , we found that the cwinrs redesign will not enable vr&e to obtain data on il track expenditures or the types of goods and services provided . at the time of our review , no specific time frames were provided for the cwinrs redesign , but officials noted it could take up to 3 years to obtain funding for this effort . in our report , we recommended that va implement an oversight approach that enables vr&e to better ensure consistent administration of the il track across regions . this approach would include ensuring that cwinrs ( 1 ) tracks the types of goods and services provided and their costs , ( 2 ) accounts for the number of il track veterans being served , and ( 3 ) contains stronger data entry controls . va concurred with our recommendation and stated that discussions of system enhancements and the development of ad hoc reports are ongoing .