providing oversight after recovery act funding has ceased . btop and bip projects must be substantially complete within 2 years of the award date and fully complete within 3 years of the award date . as a result , some projects are not expected to be completed until 2013 . as we previously reported , ntia and rus officials maintain that site visits , in particular , are essential to monitoring progress and ensuring compliance . however , the recovery act did not provide specific funding for the administration and oversight of btop - and bip - funded projects beyond september 30 , 2010 . to effectively monitor and oversee more than $7 billion in recovery act broadband funding , ntia and rus will have to devote sufficient resources , including staffing , to ensure that recipients fulfill their obligations . because of these challenges , in our 2009 and 2010 reports , we recommended that ntia and rus take several actions to ensure that funded projects receive sufficient oversight: 1 . ntia and rus should develop contingency plans to ensure sufficient resources for oversight of funded projects beyond fiscal year 2010 . furthermore , we recommended that the agencies incorporate into their risk - based monitoring plans , steps to address the variability in funding levels for postaward oversight beyond september 30 , 2010 . ntia and rus should use information provided by applicants in the first funding round to establish quantifiable , outcome - based performance goals by which to measure program effectiveness . ntia should determine whether commercial entities receiving btop grants should be subject to an annual audit requirement . these challenges include: number and scale of projects . ntia and rus will need to monitor and oversee a combined total of 553 projects that are diverse in scale , scope , and technology . the agencies funded several types of broadband projects dispersed nationwide , with at least one project in every state . ntia funded middle - mile broadband infrastructure projects for unserved and underserved areas , public computer centers , and sustainable broadband adoption projects . rus funded both last - and middle - mile infrastructure projects in rural areas across the country . the agencies funded projects using multiple types of technology , including wireline , wireless , and satellite . in addition , the agencies awarded funds to many large projects , which may pose a greater risk for misuse of federal funds than smaller projects . one of rus's largest projects provided more than $81 million in grant funding and $10 million in loan funding to the american samoa telecommunications authority to replace old copper infrastructure with a fiber - optic network to link the main islands of american samoa ; rus reported that this project will make broadband services available to 9,735 households , 315 businesses , and 106 anchor institutions , and create an estimated 2,000 jobs .