invention begins . once basic principles are observed , practical applications can be invented . applications are speculative , and there may be no proof or detailed analysis to support the assumptions . examples are limited to analytic studies . analytical and experimental critical function and / or characteristic proof of concept . active research and development is initiated . this includes analytical studies and laboratory studies to physically validate the analytical predictions of separate elements of the technology . examples include components that are not yet integrated or representative . component and / or breadboard validation in laboratory environment . basic technological components are integrated to establish that they will work together . this is relatively low fidelity compared with the eventual system . examples include integration of ad hoc hardware in the laboratory . component and / or breadboard validation in relevant environment . fidelity of breadboard technology increases significantly . the basic technological components are integrated with reasonably realistic supporting elements so they can be tested in a simulated environment . examples include high - fidelity laboratory integration of components . system / subsystem model or prototype demonstration in a relevant environment . representative model or prototype system , which is well beyond that of trl 5 , is tested in a relevant environment . represents a major step up in a technology's demonstrated readiness . examples include testing a prototype in a high - fidelity laboratory environment or in a simulated operational environment . system prototype demonstration in an operational environment . prototype near or at planned operational system . represents a major step up from trl 6 by requiring demonstration of an actual system prototype in an operational environment ( eg , in an aircraft , in a vehicle , or in space ) . actual system completed and qualified through test and demonstration . technology has been proven to work in its final form and under expected conditions . in almost all cases , this trl represents the end of true system development . examples include developmental test and evaluation of the system in its intended weapon system to determine if it meets design specifications . actual system proven through successful mission operations . actual application of the technology in its final form and under mission conditions , such as those encountered in operational test and evaluation . examples include using the system under operational mission conditions . in addition to the contact named above , john oppenheim , assistant director ; danielle greene ; john krump ; sean merrill ; robert miller ; carol petersen ; and scott purdy also made key contributions to the report . program control is exercised at the program and project level . post - milestone b , conducting engineering and manufacturing development tasks aimed at meeting validated requirements prior to full - rate production . prototype performance is near or at planned operational system levels . characteristics involve mature system development , integration and demonstration to support milestone c production decisions , and conducting live fire test and evaluation and initial operational test and evaluation of production representative articles . rdt&e management support ( 6.6 ) efforts to sustain and / or modernize the installations or operations required for general rdt&e .