cbp concurred with this recommendation . chairman hatch , ranking member wyden , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact kimberly gianopoulos , director , international affairs and trade , at ( 202 ) 512-8612 or gianopoulosk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are joyee dasgupta , kara marshall , katie bassion , kristen timko , reid lowe , sarah collins , neil doherty , ramon rodriguez , helina wong , julie spetz , kevin loh , wayne mcelrath , grace lui , james murphy , mary moutsos , justin fisher , rachel stoiko , and sarah veale . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . figure 1 shows examples of these counterfeit items . the risks associated with the types of counterfeit goods we purchased can extend beyond the infringement of a company's ipr . for example , a ul investigation of counterfeit iphone adapters found a 99 percent failure rate in 400 counterfeit adapters tested for safety , fire , and shock hazards and found that 12 of the adapters tested posed a risk of lethal electrocution to the user . similarly , according to a rights holder representative , counterfeits of common consumer goods , such as yeti travel mugs , may contain higher - than - approved concentrations of dangerous chemicals such as lead , posing health risks to consumers . according to ice , seized counterfeit cosmetics have been found to contain hazardous substances , including cyanide , arsenic , mercury , lead , urine , and rat droppings . representatives of rights holders and e - commerce websites whom we interviewed reported taking independent action to try to protect ipr within their areas of responsibility . for example , both rights holders and e - commerce websites maintain ipr protection teams that work with one another and with law enforcement to address infringement issues . e - commerce websites may also take a variety of steps to block and remove counterfeit items listed by third - party sellers . ipr infringement can also threaten the health and safety of american consumers . our january 2018 report includes information on steps that consumer protection organizations and government agencies recommend consumers take to limit the risk of purchasing counterfeits online . these steps include , for example , buying only from authorized retailers online , avoiding prices that look “too good to be true,” and reporting counterfeit purchases .