reg . education , to reduce the burden of time distribution reports that school personnel must complete . according to education , states , districts , and other stakeholders have repeatedly identified time distribution reports , required by omb , as a source of administrative burden . education officials told us they solicited feedback from stakeholders as they were designing this initiative . while the omb notice did not include a timeline for this pilot , education officials told us they expect to issue a notice to invite states and school districts to participate in the pilot later in 2012 . and ( 3 ) what federal efforts are underway to reduce or eliminate burdensome requirements ? for our review , we interviewed officials from selected states and school districts ; selected national education stakeholder organizations ; and the department of education ( education ) , the department of agriculture ( usda ) , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) . according to education officials , data on how students complete high school is no longer required in the crdc , because education already collects that information through its edfacts data collection . education officials also told us of an effort to consolidate district - level esea and idea reports and implement single file reporting in the 2011- 2012 school year . to address the first two questions , we interviewed state education officials in kansas , massachusetts , and ohio , and officials in four school districts in each of those states . we selected these states because they varied in terms of several factors — including their geographic location and the number of elementary and secondary education students in the state — and based on recommendations from stakeholders . within each state , we selected school districts that varied in terms of whether they were in urban , suburban , or rural areas and the number of students , among other factors . the information we collected in these interviews represents the experiences and perspectives of the state and district officials we interviewed and is not representative of all states and districts . we interviewed a variety of officials , including superintendents , federal program directors , special education directors , food and nutrition supervisors , and finance directors . we asked state and school district officials to identify ( 1 ) the most burdensome federal requirements that affect states and school districts , ( 2 ) the factors that contribute to that burden , ( 3 ) the benefits associated with the requirements , and ( 4 ) whether they have information on the financial cost of complying with the requirement . when state and district officials told us about certain requirements , we conducted additional research to confirm that they were federal requirements ( not state or local requirements ) . we also confirmed that the provisions in question were actually requirements as opposed to recommended activities contained in other nonmandatory sources , such as guidance . we asked state and district officials to provide us with the cost of implementing certain requirements . if they were unable to do so , we asked them to explain the factors that limit their ability to collect cost information .