mr . chairmen , this concludes my testimony . i will be happy to respond to any questions you or other members may have . to determine the amount of federal expenditures to support the commercial marine , aviation , and highway transportation systems and the amount of collections from federal assessments on the users of these systems for fiscal years 1999 , 2000 , and 2001 , we reviewed prior gao reports and other relevant documents , and interviewed officials from the office of management and budget and various industry representatives . on the basis of this determination , we contacted 15 federal agencies and asked them to provide information on the expenditures and collectionsthat were specific to the transportation systems , relying on each agency to identify expenditures and collections related to activities that support the transportation systems . in addition , we also received data from the u.s. customs service on the amount of duty collected on commodities imported by the transportation modes . the u.s. customs service provided estimates , developed by the u.s. census bureau , on the percent of collections that were attributable to water , sea , and land transportation modes . we applied these percentages to the total customs duties collected for fiscal years 1999 , 2000 , and 2001 provided by the u.s. customs service to compute the amount of total customs duties collected by the marine , aviation , and highway transportation systems each year . we performed limited reasonableness tests on the data by comparing the data with the actual trust fund outlays contained in the budget of the u.s. government for fiscal years 2001 , 2002 , and 2003 . although we had each agency validate the data provided , we did not verify agency expenditures and collections . to identify initial considerations that could help the congress in addressing whether to change the scope or nature of federal investments in the marine transportation system , we conducted a review of prior gao reports and other relevant studies to identify managerial best practices in establishing strategic plans and federal investment approaches . we also interviewed u.s. army corps of engineers and department of transportation officials to obtain information on the current state of the commercial marine transportation system , the ability of the system to keep pace with growing demand , and activities that are under way to assess the condition and capacity of the infrastructure . our work was carried out from january 2002 to september 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . federal agencies spent an average of $3.9 billion annually on the marine transportation system , $10 billion annually on the aviation system , and $25 billion annually on the highway system . whereas the primary source of funding for the marine transportation system is general tax revenues , the vast majority of federal funding invested in both the aviation and highway systems came from assessments on users of the systems . during the three - year period , general revenues were the funding source for 80 percent of the expenditures for the marine transportation system .