gao - 01-506 . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2001 . doj is involved in a balancing act . on one hand , if offices have sufficient evidence to allege that false claims have been filed , but do not pursue them , the government loses the opportunity to use the sanctions of the act for the intended purpose of discouraging false claims for federal monies . on the other hand , if offices overextend themselves by opening more matters than they can reasonably be expected to resolve within the required timeframes , the hospitals are kept in a state of uncertainty about their investigations for unnecessarily prolonged periods while the government is also unable to use the act as a deterrent . one of the offices we visited had opened many laboratory unbundling matters in 1995 , prior to the issuance of doj's guidance , and is still in the process of resolving some of these matters . however , offices participating in the two newer national initiatives — pps transfer and pneumonia upcoding — are now opening fewer investigations , reducing the likelihood that this situation will resurface . we provided a draft of this report to doj for comments . officials from doj's executive office for u.s . doj's executive office for u.s . attorneys would then be tasked with monitoring the offices' implementation of these plans . similarly , doj's requirement that all u.s. attorneys' offices involved in civil health care fraud matters annually certify their compliance with the guidance , a process also instituted 2 years ago in response to our recommendations , appears to have continued to promote compliance . according to doj officials , all u.s. attorneys' offices participating in civil health care matters had attested to their compliance for the period ending december 31 , 2001 . although doj has not required offices to document their compliance with the guidance as part of the certification process , the offices we visited this year , like those we visited the year before , had either specifically documented their compliance in individual investigative files , instituted a review process under the direction of their office's civil chief , or developed a process to document compliance in a particular stage of an investigation . for example , closed investigative files we reviewed in one office contained certifications that the investigations had been conducted in accordance with the guidance . finally , some hospital associations raised an issue that was also brought to our attention in preparing last year's report . association representatives continue to be concerned that corporate integrity agreements they regard as burdensome may be included in settlement agreements of national initiative matters at the insistence of the hhs - oig . consistent with our findings last year , the imposition of these agreements was not routine for the matters we reviewed this year . these agreements were required in 7 of the 19 closed matters we examined . moreover , in an open letter to the medical community in november 2001 , the hhs inspector general announced new criteria that would be used in determining when a corporate integrity agreement would be required .