( app . i contains additional information on our scope and methodology. ) from fiscal year 1999 through fiscal year 2003 , award - and incentive - fee contract actions accounted for 4.6 percent of all dod contract actions over $25,000 . however , when taking into account the dollars obligated — award - and incentive - fee contract actions accounted for 20.6 percent of the dollars obligated on actions over $25,000 , or over $157 billion , as shown in figure 1 . our sample of 93 contracts includes $51.6 billion , or almost one - third , of those obligated award - and incentive - fee contract dollars . dod utilized the contracts in our sample for a number of purposes . for example , research and development contracts accounted for 51 percent ( or $26.4 billion ) of the dollars obligated against contracts in our sample from fiscal years 1999 through 2003 , while non - research - and - development services accounted for the highest number of contracts in our sample . contract actions include any action related to the purchasing , renting , or leasing of supplies , services , or construction . contract actions include definitive contracts ; letter contracts ; purchase orders ; orders made under existing contracts or agreements ; and contract modifications , which would include the payment of award and incentive fees . table 3 shows the dollars obligated and the types of contracts by product and service . appendix iv contains a breakdown of the contracts in our sample by contract type and military service . dod has the flexibility to mix and match characteristics from different contract types . the risks for both dod and the contractor vary depending on the exact combination chosen , which , according to the federal acquisition regulation , should reflect the uncertainties involved in contract performance . based on the results from our sample , about half of the contracts in our study population were cost - plus - award - fee contracts . the theory behind these contracts is that although the government assumes most of the cost risk , it retains control over most or all of the contractor's potential fee as leverage . on cost - plus - award - fee contracts , the award fee is often the only source of potential fee for the contractor . according to defense acquisition regulations , these contracts can include a base fee — a fixed fee for performance paid to the contractor — of anywhere from 0 to 3 percent of the value of the contract ; however , based on our sample results , we estimate that about 60 percent of the cost - plus - award - fee contracts in our study population included zero base fee . tables 4 and 5 show the estimated percentage of dod award - fee contracts that had a particular percentage of the value of the contract available in award fees and base fees . based on the results from our sample , an estimated 16 percent of the contracts in our study population were fixed - price incentive contracts , and an estimated 13 percent were cost - plus - incentive - fee contracts .