that report is being released today . for our issued report , we reviewed nine surveys and academic studies that assessed the public's understanding of social security benefits and identified the factors that influence claiming . we also interviewed social security experts from academia , public policy organizations , and financial firms to obtain their views on how ssa provides information about claiming benefits . we reviewed applicable federal laws and regulations , and ssa's program operations manual system ( poms ) , a primary source of information used by ssa employees to process claims for social security benefits . we also interviewed ssa headquarters officials to learn how social security benefit claims are to be processed . we observed a nongeneralizable sample of 30 face - to - face claims interviews at 7 ssa local offices in 3 different regions of the country . we selected these offices , taking into consideration regional geographic diversity , income level , urban and rural composition , and the number of new claims each office processes . in our observations , we noted the information ssa claims specialists provided to claimants during this process and evaluated what we observed against poms guidance and to determine how fully specialists were addressing key information categories we identified from our literature review and expert interviews . we interviewed managers and claims specialists at these offices about the process for completing retirement benefit claims , training on completing claims applications , and how claims specialists' performance is evaluated . ssa also demonstrated the online claims process for us , showing the information on each screen that a claimant might see when filing a claim . a more detailed explanation of our methodology is available in our full report . our work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . our review of surveys and academic studies , and interviews with people with social security expertise , suggest that most individuals do not understand key details of social security rules that could potentially affect their retirement benefits or the benefits of their spouses and survivors . specifically , many people approaching retirement age are unclear on how claiming age affects the amount of monthly benefits , how earnings ( both before and after claiming ) affect benefits , the availability of spousal benefits , and other factors that may influence their claiming decision . for example , while some people understand that delaying claiming leads to higher monthly benefits , many are unclear about the actual amount that benefits increase with claiming age . the surveys also showed that many people do not understand the implications of the retirement earnings test , under which ssa withholds benefits for some claimants earning above an annual income limit but which are , on average , paid back later with interest . understanding these rules and other information , such as life expectancy and longevity risk , could be central to people making informed decisions about when to claim benefits . with an understanding of social security benefits , people would also be in a better position to balance other factors that influence when they claim benefits , including financial need , poor health , and psychological factors .