there were approximately 320 such firms . after drawing our sample of broker - dealers , we further restricted this survey to only those who were engaged in retail activity . for transfer agents , our target population was all transfer agents that made required filings with sec for fiscal year 1999 , maintained at least one customer account , and were active at the time of this survey — approximately 700 firms . as shown in tables 1 and 2 , our overall survey response rate was 54 percent for broker - dealers and 69 percent for transfer agents . response rates also varied by size of firm in both samples , with lower response rates in the stratum of larger firms than in the two strata of smaller firms . because of these low response rates , and the inability of some respondents to provide complete lost account data , we are restricting our analysis to that subset of firms that participated in our survey and are not making estimates about the larger population of broker - dealers and transfer agents in the united states . the low response rates to the surveys and individual questions threaten the validity of estimates made using these data , if those not providing data were materially different from those who do . because the largest firms , which are important to our estimates for the population because they account for much of the activity of the two industries , are providing data at such low rate , the representativeness of weighted estimates for the population might be subject to significant bias . therefore , we present survey results in this report in unweighted form , representing only those firms that participated in our study and provided answers to the individual questions being analyzed . to address our third objective , we interviewed officials from sec's division of market regulation . we also reviewed sec's revised rules relating to reporting requirements for transfer agents . to answer our fourth objective on sec's efforts to ensure that transfer agents comply with its 1997 rule on lost security holders , we interviewed and reviewed data provided by officials in sec's office of compliance inspections and examinations . the officials provided us with several electronic files containing transfer agent examination data that we analyzed to determine how many inspections were conducted in each year , how many violations were found , and whether the firm had been reinspected or withdrawn or cancelled its registration with sec . we conducted our review from december 2000 through july 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to those named above , brian d. berg , emily r. chalmers , tom conahan , heather t. dignan , monty kincaid , carl m. ramirez , and sindy r. udell made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people .