fletc provides all instruction . training is offered in three basic training programs: criminal investigator training program , uniformed police training program and the land management police training program . center integrated basic is a fletc training program category that provides entry - level law enforcement officers or direct law enforcement support personnel from a single partner organization with the core competencies of a specific job series or a group of closely related job series . fletc provides all common and basic core foundational instruction ( i.e. , firearms , physical techniques , etc. ) bop corrections officers also echoed this challenge . they said that despite having back - up mental health staff on call , their initial reaction to an inmate exhibiting some type of erratic behavior has to be fairly quick to secure the safety of the staff and other inmates . officers and agents across components and departments made clear that they are not mental health professionals or psychologists and , as such , are charged with responding to the behaviors that are exhibited to secure the scene . communicating with individuals with a mental illness some of the officers and agents in our discussion groups stated that communicating effectively with someone exhibiting signs of a mental illness and understanding what he or she may be going through or how he or she sees reality can be challenging . in order for us to consider an independent researcher as a stakeholder , the individual needed to have ( a ) authored or co - authored at least 2 of the 16 documents that met our search criteria as outlined earlier and ( b ) been recommended by another stakeholder . these criteria yielded two independent researchers from whom to solicit views . in order for us to consider an organization as a stakeholder , the organizations needed to have either ( a ) conducted research on law enforcement responses to individuals with mental illness ; ( b ) administered law enforcement - mental health collaborative programs ; or ( c ) launched a national campaign on law enforcement responses to individuals with mental illness . after reviewing the websites of organizations that potentially met these criteria , we selected four organizations from which to solicit views . in addition , we selected individuals within the organizations as knowledgeable stakeholders if they were either ( 1 ) recommended by another stakeholder ; or ( 2 ) managed a law enforcement - mental health program or national campaign . as a result of these steps , we identified and interviewed six stakeholders ( two independent researchers and four organizations ) to gather their broad views of the dynamic between law enforcement and individuals with mental illness ; to obtain their observations of any practices or tools , such as training guides or reports that have been used to enhance officer response ; and to provide feedback on leading practices . the six selected stakeholders were: amy watson , ph.d.: professor at the jane addams college of social work , university of illinois at chicago . melissa reuland , m.s . : research fellow at the police foundation and senior research program manager at johns hopkins school of medicine , department of psychiatry .