instead , the nonprofit corporation provided the funding . there are other conflict of interest procedures that investigators in some locations must follow . for example , investigators at three of the five va nonprofit corporations we visited were required by the va medical center or its affiliated university to disclose their financial interests related to each research project they conducted . at one of these locations , the corporation , the university , and va formed a conflicts of interest committee to review financial disclosures and identify and manage conflicts of interest . additionally , to guard against potential conflicts of interest , nonprofit corporation board members , officers , and employees must sign a certification that they comply with federal statutes and regulations on conflicts of interest ; however , they are not required to file financial disclosure forms . certain nonprofit corporation board members and officers are required to file financial disclosure forms because of their positions at the medical center . for example , a va medical center's director and chief of staff , who also serve on the nonprofit corporation's board of directors , are required to file financial disclosure statements because of the positions they hold at the medical center . a va official told us that there is no routine comparison of these financial disclosure forms and ongoing research projects at a particular facility . while federal regulations govern the financial interests of individuals , no similar regulations apply to the financial interests of an institution . institutional conflicts of interest occur when an entity's financial interests conflict with its goals of conducting and fostering objective , unbiased research . financial interests may color an entity's review , approval , or monitoring of research conducted under its auspices or its allocation of equipment , facilities , and staff for research . some institutions , such as universities , may obtain financial benefits from owning stock in a company that sponsors research or from owning patents that result from research . in contrast , va nonprofit research corporations cannot own stock , have an equity interest in private companies , or own patents . consequently , these types of institutional conflicts are unlikely to occur . va nonprofit corporations may only invest in government - backed securities such as certificates of deposit or u.s. treasury bonds . va , not the nonprofit corporations , controls the rights to patents arising from research administered by nonprofit corporations . in addition , nonprofit corporations cannot accept funds to administer a research project unless the local va medical center approves it . the secretary of va has delegated responsibility for overseeing and evaluating nonprofit corporations to the directors at local medical centers . this responsibility includes ensuring that deficiencies noted in audited financial statements and management letters are corrected .