icps . in october 2015 , the sls program completed work on the test version of the icps . additionally , in december 2015 the sls program began construction of the icps liquid oxygen tank , which will provide liquid oxygen to help power the icps . in addition , the program as a whole met best acquisition practices design goals by releasing approximately 92 percent of design drawings for the program - level critical design review ( cdr ) in july 2015 . because the cdr is the time in a project's life cycle when the integrity of a project's design and its ability to meet mission requirements are assessed , it is important that a project's design is stable enough to warrant continuation with design and fabrication , which is evidenced by release of 90 percent of design drawings at cdr . a stable design allows projects to “freeze” the design and minimize changes prior to beginning the fabrication of hardware . it also helps to avoid re - engineering and rework efforts due to design changes that can be costly to the project in terms of time and funding . as the program continues with final design and fabrication , the program faces known risks . such risks are not unusual for large - scale programs , especially human exploration programs which are inherently complex and difficult . the program's management of these risks , however , may increase pressure on already reduced cost and schedule reserves . although the program is making progress resolving some technical challenges with the core stage , the core stage development schedule remains aggressive and any additional delays will threaten the sls program's readiness for its internal goal of launch readiness by september 2018 . as of may 2016 , the core stage development effort had approximately 50 days of schedule margin — or time within the schedule where activities can be delayed before affecting a key milestone , which for the core stage is delivery to kennedy space center to begin integrated operations with the orion and egs programs . figure 4 shows the approximately 50 days of core stage schedule margin as well as the 2 months of sls program schedule reserve . in addition , because the core stage is the sls program's critical path — the path of longest duration through the sequence of activities that determines the program's earliest completion date — any delay in its development reduces schedule reserve for the whole program . and with only 2 months of schedule reserve remaining between the program's internal goal and committed launch readiness date of november 2018 , any reduction in program reserves threatens the committed launch readiness date . as of april 2016 , the sls program was tracking core stage risks , including late component delivery and concerns about application of the thermal protection system that provides heat shielding , which could require the program to use some of the core stage's margin . further , the sls standing review board — an independent nasa team responsible for reviewing sls at each major program milestone — found in a 2015 report that it was unlikely the core stage would be able to support the sls program's committed date for launch readiness .