dod had neither of these . given the unreliability of the input data , the lack of individual troop location information , and the widely divergent results of the simulations conducted based on varying models , dod's analyses cannot adequately estimate the extent of u.s. troops' exposure to chemical warfare agents and other related releases . in particular , the models selected were not fully developed for projecting long - range environmental fallout , and the assumptions used to provide the source term data were inaccurate or flawed . even when models with the same source term data were used , the results diverged . what were the costs for the cia's and dod's various plume modeling efforts ? how valid are the dod and department of veterans affairs ( va ) conclusions from epidemiological studies , based on dod's plume modeling results , that there was no association between cw exposure at khamisiyah and the troops' hospitalization and mortality rates ? to determine the validity of dod's conclusion — that u.s. troops' exposures to chemical warfare agents were as dod estimates suggested — based on its plume - modeling analysis , we examined the meteorological and dispersion models dod used to model chemical warfare agent releases from the u.s. demolition of khamisiyah and coalition bombings of al muthanna , muhammadiyat , and other sites in iraq during the gulf war deployment period . we evaluated the basis for the technical and operational assumptions dod made in ( 1 ) conducting the modeling for the bombing and demolition of iraqi sites and ( 2 ) estimating the specific data and information used in the modeling , relating to source term , meteorological conditions , and other key parameters . we also evaluated the efforts of the cia and dod to collect and develop data on source term and other key parameters used in the modeling efforts . we interviewed dod and cia modelers and officials involved with the modeling and obtained documents and reports from dod's deployment health support directorate . we also interviewed and received documents from doe officials who were involved with the modeling at llnl . in addition , we interviewed officials and obtained documents from the institute for defense analyses ( ida ) concerning the ida expert panel assessment of cia's modeling of khamisiyah . we also interviewed u.s. army officials at dugway proving ground , utah , to determine how chemical warfare agents might have been released during the khamisiyah pit area demolitions . finally , we interviewed officials at the u.s. army center for health promotion and preventive medicine , to determine how specific troop unit exposures were identified , and officials of the united nations monitoring , verification , and inspection commission ( unmovic ) , to obtain information on source term data from the united nations special commission's ( unscom ) analyses and inspections of the khamisiyah , al muthanna , muhammadiyat , and other sites . to determine the validity of dod's and the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) conclusions — based on epidemiological studies — that there was no association between khamisiyah exposure and the rates of hospitalization or mortality , we reviewed published epidemiological studies in which hospitalization and mortality among exposed and nonexposed u.s. troops were analyzed .