license determination delays . to confirm whether a defense or dual - use item is controlled and requires a license , inspectors , investigators , and prosecutors request license determinations from the licensing agencies of state and commerce . these license determinations are integral to enforcement agencies' ability to seize items , pursue investigations , or seek prosecutions . dhs's exodus command center operates the exodus accountability referral system — an ice database that initiates , tracks , and manages enforcement agency requests for license determinations from the licensing agencies.identifies three different levels of license determinations: initial ( to seize an item or begin an investigation ) , pre - trial ( to obtain a search warrant , among other things ) , and trial ( to be used during trial proceedings ) . the exodus command center has established internal timeliness goals for receiving responses to requests for initial determinations within 3 days ; pre - trial certifications within 45 days ; and trial certifications within 30 days . however , as shown in table 5 , these goals are often not met , which can create barriers for enforcement agencies in seizing shipments before they depart the united states ; obtaining search warrants ; and making timely arrests . given the wide - ranging mission of most of the agencies involved in export control enforcement , it is essential that agencies track resources expended on export control inspections , investigations , and prosecutions to assess how these resources are contributing to fulfilling their missions and are focused on the highest priorities in export control enforcement . while agencies , such as dhs and justice , have recognized the need to better track their resources , a more comprehensive approach , including enhanced measures of effectiveness , could help these and other enforcement agencies assess workload and efficiency in making resource allocations and in determining whether changes are warranted . the creation of the export enforcement coordination center presents such an opportunity for the entire export control enforcement community . the center has the potential to become more than a co - location of enforcement agencies , but can be a conduit to more effectively manage export control resources . as the center's operation progresses , it has the opportunity to address ongoing challenges in export control enforcement , including reducing potential overlap in investigations , and help agencies to work as efficiently as possible , maximize available intelligence and agency investigative data , and measure the effectiveness of u.s. export control enforcement activities . challenges presented by delays in license determinations can affect the inspection , investigation , and prosecution of export control cases but may be outside of the mission of the center since they primarily involve the licensing agencies . having goals for processing license determinations can help establish transparency and accountability in the process . given that the licensing agencies and the exodus command center have not agreed to timeliness goals for responding to such requests , these agencies may benefit from collaborating to help improve the effectiveness of the process .