stipends . during the first 2 years of the program , stipends lowered the cost of obtaining teacher certification for ttt participants . in a dantes survey of ttt teachers who had completed their 5-year teaching commitment for receiving the stipend , 59 percent reported that the ttt program was very important in making their decision to become a teacher , and 68 percent reported that the stipend was the most important feature of the ttt program . incentive grants . during the first 2 years of the program , ttt incentive grants lowered the cost to school districts of hiring ttt teachers relative to other job candidates , thereby increasing the demand for ttt teachers . the increased probability of being hired would have made the program more attractive to applicants . demand for teachers . education data show that teacher shortages became more widespread in 1998 , thus the demand for teachers expanded and intensified . the increased likelihood of employment for ttt teachers after certification could have increased the number of applicants to the program . accomplishments of state ttt offices . state ttt offices have experienced some success in decreasing the time and cost of teacher certification for military personnel and in increasing the demand among school districts for ttt hires . both of these accomplishments probably made the program more attractive to potential applicants . more alternative teacher certification programs are available to persons pursuing second careers as teachers , including military personnel , sometimes as a direct result of the ttt program . for example , the florida , wisconsin , and washington state ttt offices played roles in convincing their state legislatures in 2000 to authorize new alternative teacher certification programs . some state ttt offices , working with dantes , created opportunities for military personnel to satisfy some teacher certification requirements while still on active duty . for example , the texas ttt office , working in conjunction with three texas universities , implemented a distance learning program in the fall 2000 offering teacher certification classes at military bases worldwide . texas also worked with dantes to make its teacher certification examination available at military bases worldwide . some states lowered the cost of teacher certification for military personnel in response to the efforts of their state ttt office . for example , california and washington reduced the fees they charged military personnel to take courses at state universities . outreach and promotional activities by state ttt offices increased school districts' demand for ttt hires . for example , the colorado , illinois , north carolina , and ohio ttt offices increased the number of school districts that posted their teacher vacancies on the ttt data base . the following factors may have decreased the number of ttt applicants and / or teachers hired . demand for specialized workers . a nationwide increase in demand for workers with math / science backgrounds , especially in information technology and the sciences , which generally pay higher salaries than teaching , may have attracted potential military personnel with these skills away from pursuing a teaching career . between 1994 and 1999 , the number of workers employed in the mathematical and computer sciences increased by almost 56 percent while total employment increased by about 8.5 percent .