supplemental payments were made only to hospitals . see table 11 for a description of each supplemental payment program administered by texas . officials from the five surveyed states reported making dsh and non - dsh supplemental payments in fiscal year 2006 to a variety of provider types ( such as hospitals , nursing facilities , or physician groups ) and provider ownership categories ( state government , local government , or private ) . in fiscal year 2006 , in total , the five states reported making $10.4 billion in payments to hospitals ( 85 percent of total payments ) , $852 million to psychiatric hospitals ( 7 percent ) , $577 million to managed care organizations ( 5 percent ) , $329 million to nursing facilities ( 3 percent ) , $53 million to physician groups ( less than 1 percent ) , and $19 million to clinics ( less than 1 percent ) . what information do cms medicaid expenditure reports provide regarding medicaid supplemental payments ? in selected states , how much was distributed as medicaid supplemental payments , to what types of providers , and for what purposes ? to determine what information cms medicaid expenditure reports provide regarding the amount and distribution of medicaid supplemental payments , we analyzed medicaid expenditure data reported to cms by states on a standardized form , the cms - 64 , for the most recent year available , fiscal year 2006 . we compiled the amount of dsh and non - dsh payments reported by individual states and analyzed their distribution by category of service ( such as inpatient hospital , mental health facility , or nursing facility ) and provider category ( that states report as either state government , local government , or private ) , where those data were available . to understand cms expenditure reports , medicaid reporting requirements , and dsh and non - dsh supplemental payments , we conducted interviews with cms officials and reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance . to assess the reliability of states' cms - 64 submissions , we reviewed the steps cms takes to ensure the accuracy of expenditure data submitted by states . we determined that the data were reliable for use in this report , and include any limitations identified . a discussion of our methodology and data reliability assessment can be found in appendix i . finally , we discussed planned changes to cms's medicaid supplemental payment reporting requirements with cms officials . to examine how medicaid supplemental payments are distributed to providers and for what purposes , we surveyed a nongeneralizable sample of five states: california , massachusetts , michigan , new york , and texas . we selected these states on the basis of the significance of their supplemental payments: specifically , we reviewed dsh payment information reported to cms and the most complete information available on non - dsh supplemental payments , which was reported by states to the urban institute , a nonpartisan economic and social policy research organization , for fiscal year 2005 . based on these sources , the five states we selected spent the largest amount on medicaid supplemental payments in 2005 , with each state making estimated payments of more than $1.6 billion that year .