website . vha's contractor maintains the content displayed on the vcl website ( veteranscrisisline.net ) , including much of the content it develops for other platforms , such as psas and social media content . visitors to the website can both view the content on the website and share it on their own platforms . paid digital media . an example of paid digital media includes online keyword searches , in which vha pays a search engine a fee for its website to appear as a top result in response to selected keywords , such as “veterans crisis line” or “veteran suicide.” paid digital media also includes social media posts for which vha pays a fee to display its content to a widespread audience , such as users with a military affiliation . paid “out - of - home” media: “out - of - home” refers to the locations where this type of content is typically displayed . vha had a total budget of $17.7 million for its suicide prevention and mental health media outreach for fiscal year 2018 , of which $6.2 million was obligated for suicide prevention paid media . as of september 2018 , vha said it had spent $57,000 of its $6.2 million paid media budget . vha officials estimated that they would spend a total of $1.5 million on suicide prevention paid media for fiscal year 2018 and indicated that the remaining funds would be de - obligated from the contract at the end of the fiscal year and not used for suicide prevention media outreach . vha officials indicated that the reason they did not spend the remaining funds on suicide prevention paid media in fiscal year 2018 was that the approval of the paid media plan was delayed due to changes in leadership and organizational realignment of the suicide prevention program . as a result , vha officials said they limited the paid media outreach in fiscal year 2018 to activities that were already in place , including 25 keyword search advertisements , and 20 billboards and 8 radio advertisements in selected cities across the united states . in prior fiscal years , vha conducted a variety of digital and out - of - home suicide prevention paid media . for example , in fiscal year 2015 , with a suicide prevention paid media budget of more than $4 million , vha reported that it ran 58 advertisements on google , bing , and facebook , and ran 30 billboards , 180 bus advertisements , more than 19,000 radio advertisements , 252 print advertisements , and 39 movie theatre placements in selected cities across the united states . vha ran similar types of paid media in fiscal years 2013 , 2014 , and 2016 with variation in quantities based on the approved budget in each of these years . in fiscal year 2017 , vha had a budget of approximately $1.7 million to spend on paid media for both the suicide prevention and mental health outreach campaigns . however , vha spent less than 10 percent of the funds ( approximately $136,000 ) to run paid advertisements on google and bing for suicide prevention in fiscal year 2017 ; the remainder was spent on mental health outreach . suicide prevention month .