we agree . the incremental investment actions described , if effectively implemented , are consistent with our recommendations . see comments 1 and 2 . see comment 1 . we generally agree . the activities described in the comment are the very activities that we recommend as conditions for investing beyond the first increment . further , it was not our intent to suggest that only the bsm program manager should measure and use actual benefit accrual or that one increment must be fully completed and fully evaluated before another can begin . in fact , effective incremental investment management necessitates some overlap among increments , and our recommendations do not preclude this . on the matter of who should measure and validate actual benefit accrual , we are not opposed to dla assigning this responsibility to someone other than the program manager , and we acknowledge that the program manager is not the appropriate person to ensure that investment decisions on subsequent increments are based on economic justifications . accordingly , we have slightly modified the recommendation and clarified language elsewhere in the report to reflect this . we agree . we have changed the title of the report . we disagree . the statement in our report is supported by dla's draft enterprise information architecture plan , which clearly shows that the initial component of dla's enterprise architecture will be , by design , limited to the materiel management business area . the plan also shows that dla's other business areas are to be incorporated into the enterprise architecture following completion of the bsm program , which , according to bsm documents , is 5 years from now . our report has given the department credit for its dod logistics strategic plan , as well as joint vision 2020 and other strategic planning directions . however , as previously stated , these plans are not a sufficient substitute for an effective dod - wide logistics management enterprise architecture . moreover , in its comments , dod states that having an architecture - based approach to investing in modernized systems is a more efficient means to optimizing enterprise performance and accountability . dod also states that having an architecture would provide a more efficient and effective means for developing and overseeing the implementation of a common vision . we disagree . while we have recognized these “interim measures” in our report , our position is that these are just what dod terms them — temporary controls until dod has in place the architecture - based approach to modernization that its comments state are needed to achieve end - to - end optimization . see also comment 3 . we disagree . notwithstanding dla's recent commitments to incrementally invest in bsm , dla has so far treated bsm as a single investment decision . the economic analysis used to justify dla's decision to invest in bsm is dated april 2000 , and this analysis was for the entire program . we requested any further economic analyses developed to justify the ongoing bsm increment as well as any plans to produce such analyses . dla did not provide either .