our work is ongoing . to date , we have contacted state and local officials in several states , attended professional meetings , and opened discussion with the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and other key federal agencies . we are conducting our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . my testimony today focuses on the broad and complex nature of the interoperability issue and the challenges the nation faces in addressing this issue . interoperability problems existed among public safety agencies for many years prior to the september 11 attacks on the pentagon and new york city . reports on incidents have documented a number of problems in public safety wireless communications . for example , the national task force on interoperability ( ntfi ) documented interoperability problems in several states - including south dakota , indiana , and minnesota - - that had developed over a number of years . for over 15 years the federal government has been concerned about public safety spectrum issues , including communications interoperability issues . a variety of federal agencies have been involved in defining the problem and identifying potential solutions . in addition , congress has taken several actions over the past two decades to address the availability and use of the public safety wireless spectrum . the events of september 11 , 2001 , have resulted in greater public and governmental focus on the role of first responders and their capacity to respond to emergencies , including those resulting from terrorist incidents . one result has been significantly increased federal funding for state and local first responders , including funding to improve interoperable communications among federal , state , and local first responders . in fiscal year 2003 , congress appropriated at least $154 million for interoperability through a variety of grants administered by the department of homeland security , the department of justice , and other agencies . in addition to appropriating more funds , the executive branch and congress have attempted to consolidate federal efforts and coordinate federal grant programs . within the executive branch , the office of management and budget in 2001 created the wireless public safety interoperable communications program , or safecom , to unify the federal government's efforts to help coordinate the work at the federal , state , local and tribal levels , in order to provide reliable public safety communications and achieve national wireless communications interoperability . in discussing the issue of interoperable communications , it is important to recognize that interoperable communications is not merely a technological issue or an end in itself . it is rather a key means of achieving a desirable objective — the effective response to and mitigation of events or incidents that require the coordinated actions of emergency responders . these events could encompass a wide range of possibilities , such as multi - vehicle accidents , major floods or wildfires , or a terrorist attack that involved thousands of injuries . interoperable communications is also but one component , although an important one , of an effective incident command planning and operations structure . as a standard practice , public safety agencies are to establish communications capabilities to support command and control of their operations at an incident scene .