regulatory review . omb's conduct of paperwork clearance in close alignment with its review of agency regulations under presidential executive orders has periodically raised questions about the extent to which omb review should affect the policies and substantive requirements of agency decisions . public participation . the ability of the public to contribute to and be informed about agency and omb paperwork clearance decisions has been a concern of those who questioned the extent to which the process affects the substance of agency program decisions , as well as those who argued that the process has not been sensitive enough to the burdens placed on respondents . information resources management . omb and agencies have been criticized for inadequate attention to the other information resources management requirements of the act , ranging from overall irm strategic planning to specific functions such as information security and the management of information technology . the congress addressed these and other issues when reauthorizing the act in 1986 and 1995 . with regard to paperwork reduction , the legislation's drafters stated that the intention was to revise the act to make a more thorough and open agency paperwork clearance process to improve the quality of paperwork reviews and public confidence in government decision making . the 1995 amendments to the act established detailed paperwork clearance requirements for agencies before omb review . while similar job - referral services exist at the state level , and some nation - wide disability organizations offer similar services to people with certain disabilities , we are not aware of any existing survey that would duplicate the scope or content of the proposed data collection . furthermore , because this information collection involves only providers and employers interested in participating in the earn service , and because this is a new service , a duplicate data set does not exist . while this example shows that the agency attempted to identify duplicative sources , it does not discuss why information from state and other disability organizations could not be aggregated and used , at least in part , to satisfy the needs of this collection . the lack of support for these certifications appears to be influenced by a variety of factors . irs officials , for example , told us that ( 1 ) tax data , by its very nature , is not collected by other agencies so there is no need for irs to contact them about proposed collections and ( 2 ) irs has an effective internal process for coordinating proposed forms among the various irs organizations that may have similar information . as a result , these officials said that irs does not need to further justify that its collections are not duplicative . nonetheless , the law and instructions require support for these assertions , which was not provided . in addition , agency reviewers told us that management assigns a relatively low priority and few resources to reviewing information collections . further , program offices have little knowledge of and appreciation for the requirements of the pra . as a result of these conditions and a lack of detailed program knowledge , reviewers often have insufficient leverage with program offices to encourage them to improve their justifications .