gao - 03-682 . washington , d.c.: july 7 , 2003 . 2460 definition of depot maintenance . 2460 exclusion of nuclear refueling of aircraft carriers from the definition of depot maintenance to mean that no work associated with the refueling complex overhaul of nuclear carriers is reportable for 50-50 purposes . navy officials also said that non - nuclear depot repairs on carriers are not severable tasks to be split out from contracts . we continue to believe that the costs of depot repairs and tasks not directly associated with nuclear refueling tasks during carrier overhauls should be reported . many maintenance tasks performed at the same time as the nuclear refueling are not related to the refueling ; and when these and similar tasks are performed during other maintenance activities , the navy does report them as depot maintenance . we found that the funding for these tasks is clearly identifiable in the contract financial records and could be counted just like other 50-50 work . in our view , without some nexus between that work and refueling work , it would be inconsistent with the plain language of section 2460 to exempt that work simply because it was performed during a refueling complex overhaul of nuclear carriers . we deleted the reference to severable tasks in the body of the report , as our intent was not to suggest that the navy break out non - nuclear work from nuclear work onto separate contracts or work orders , but rather that the funding for non - nuclear refueling work accomplished on existing contracts be identified and reported . the department did not agree with our adjustment for surface ship inactivations . dod considers nuclear ship inactivation work to be a relatively complex process that is equivalent to depot level maintenance , but that conventional ship inactivation work performed by the private sector is not as complex and is not equivalent to depot - level maintenance . in addition , the department's written response indicated that surface ship inactivation work accomplished by the public sector is also not reported in the 50-50 data . we believe that inactivation work should be reported because the relevant title 10 statutes and osd's 50-50 guidance do not make this distinction of relative complexity and requires reporting of all depot maintenance , regardless of location and source of funding . further , dod's financial management regulation 7000.14-r , vol . 6a , ch . 14 ( which prescribes depot maintenance reporting requirements ) includes inactivation as a depot maintenance activity . although we did not review inactivation work accomplished by public sector workers , it should also be reported if it meets the definition of depot maintenance . the air force did not agree with our reversal of the 50-50 reporting adjustment it makes for the salaries and overhead expenses of government employees administering depot maintenance contracts . the air force believes that the costs for government personnel managing depot maintenance contracts represent public sector costs ; therefore , to report them as contract would misrepresent the public - private sector percentage allocations .