states have their own chartering requirements . as of december 2004 , the federal government chartered about 62 percent of the slightly more than 9,000 credit unions and states chartered the remainder . both federally and state - chartered credit unions are exempt from federal income taxes , with federally chartered and most state - chartered credit unions also exempt from state income and franchise taxes . another distinguishing feature of credit unions is that they may serve only an identifiable group of people with a common bond . more specifically , credit union membership may be based on one of three types of common bond: single , multiple , or community . for example , a group of people that share a single characteristic , such as a common profession , could constitute the “field of membership” for a single - bond credit union . field of membership is used to describe all the individuals and groups , including organizations , which a credit union is permitted to accept for membership . more than one group having a common bond could constitute the membership of a multiple - bond credit union . and , persons or organizations within a well - defined community , neighborhood , or rural district could form a community - bond credit union . further , credit unions can offer members additional services made available by third - party vendors and by certain profit - making entities with which they are associated , referred to as credit union service organizations ( cuso ) . the tax - exempt status of credit unions originally was predicated on the similarity of credit unions and mutual financial institutions ; however , while congress did not always cite its reasons for continuing this exemption , recent legislation mentions the cooperative structure and service to persons of modest means as reasons for reaffirming their exempt status . the revenue act of 1913 exempted domestic building and loan associations ( now called “savings and loans” ) , and mutual savings banks not having a capital stock represented by shares , from federal income tax . furthermore , they argued that larger credit unions , relative to smaller credit unions , were more stable and efficient and therefore better able to offer programs targeted to low - and moderate - income households . opponents of credit union taxation also have argued that other financial institutions are not without tax privileges and tax relief . specifically , credit union trade organizations have pointed out that an increasing number of banks have converted to s - corporation status and , thereby , have avoided paying corporate income taxes . in general , u.s. tax law treats corporations and their investors as separate taxable entities . corporate earnings are taxed first at the corporate level and again at the shareholder level , as dividends if the corporation distributes earnings to shareholders , or as capital gains from the sale of stock .