see comment 11 . in addition to the contact named above , the following individuals made contributions to this report: cary russell , assistant director ; grace coleman ; eric essig ; paul kinney ; ronald la due lake ; stephen lipscomb ; lonnie mcallister ; paulina reaves ; james reynolds ; brian shiels ; glenn slocum ; yong song ; and john strong . jieddo introduces processes that do not directly address our recommendation . fmfia establishes the overall requirements with regard to internal control . accordingly , an agency head must establish controls that reasonably ensure that ( 1 ) obligations and costs are in compliance with applicable law ; ( 2 ) funds , property , and other assets are safeguarded against waste , loss , unauthorized use , or misappropriation ; and ( 3 ) revenues and expenditures applicable to agency operations are properly recorded and accounted for to permit the preparation of accounts and reliable financial and statistical reports and to maintain accountability over the assets . specific internal control standards underlying the internal controls concept in the federal government are promulgated by gao and are referred to as the green book . in march 2007 , the senate appropriations committee directed jieddo to identify and track all civilian , military , and contractor personnel in the organization . in addition , dod directive 1100.4 , “guidance for manpower management,” provides that dod components shall designate an individual with the authority to establish and maintain a manpower data system that accounts for all manpower resources , to include active military , dod civilian , reserve component , contract , and host - nation support . the senate appropriations committee , in its report on emergency supplemental appropriations , expressed concern over jieddo's exponential personnel growth and ability to track this growth . the report stated that the committee has limited visibility into current staffing and future staffing requirements and is concerned that jieddo is not accounting for certain contractor support properly . as a result of these concerns , the committee directed jieddo to provide a report to the congressional defense committees on current staffing levels and future staffing requirements , broken down by function , contractor , civilian , military , and detailed from other agencies , and should include all contractor support that is provided through various contracts . the committee further directed jieddo to update this report whenever jieddo personnel authorizations change . ieds also have been a significant threat to u.s. forces operating in afghanistan . the congressional research service recently reported that ieds have caused 60 percent of all american combat casualties both killed and wounded in iraq and 50 percent of casualties in afghanistan . prior dod efforts to defeat ieds included various process teams and task forces . for example , dod established the joint ied defeat task force in june 2005 for which the army provided primary administrative support . this task force replaced the army ied task force , the joint ied task force , and the under secretary of defense , force protection working group .