privacy . we agree that these are significant . in fact , our work on the year 2000 issue specifically acknowledged the important role that omb played in leading , coordinating , and monitoring federal activity . and in 2000 we testified that firstgov.gov represented an important , previously unavailable capability that was rapidly and successfully put into place . regarding the development of general irm policy , oira officials said that they see policymaking as a primary responsibility . oira most recently updated circular a - 130 , management of federal information resources in november 2000 to incorporate changes resulting from the clinger - cohen act of 1996 and subsequent policies outlined in omb circular a - 11 . this version of circular a - 130 specifically incorporates the requirements that agencies focus irm planning to support their strategic missions , implement a capital planning and investment control process that links to budget formulation and execution , and rethink and restructure their business processes before investing in information technology . in terms of oversight , according to oira officials , they leverage existing statutory processes , including reviews of the budget , proposed agency information collections , regulations , legislation , and systems of recordsunder the privacy act to oversee agency irm activities . additionally , they noted that they work with agency cios through the budget process , government performance and results act reporting , and information - collection reviews to further policy oversight . oira officials also emphasized their work with the cio council and other interagency groups as a means of overseeing agency activities . they stressed that omb is not an audit organization , and that a - 130 requires agencies to monitor their own compliance with irm policies , procedures , and guidance . oira has also taken action to respond to the specific irm functional responsibilities in pra: information collection , dissemination , statistical policy and coordination , records management , privacy and security , and it . since 1995 , omb has issued guidance in each of these areas including on such topics as internet privacy , dissemination , and information technology . in addition , it has responded to specific requirements by reviewing and approving proposed agency information collections , appointing a chief statistician to coordinate statistical activities , seeking statutory authority to expand data sharing among statistical agencies , and working with the cio council to improve it management . the full range of these actions are recounted in appendix ii . our past work demonstrates , however , that oira faces continuing and new challenges in each of these areas . for example: information collection / burden reduction . over the past 3 years , we have reported that federal paperwork has continued to increase . for example , in april 2001 , we reported that paperwork had increased by nearly 180 million burden hours during fiscal year 2000 — the second largest 1-year increase since the act was passed . this increase was largely attributable to the internal revenue service , which raised its paperwork estimate by about 240 million burden hours .