these efforts are ongoing . sba's current transformation objectives are to: streamline oda by realigning offices , employees , and space to better serve disaster victims and leverage use of the new disaster loan processing system ; centralize all 7 ( a ) loan processing in two centers to standardize procedures and reduce the workforce required for this program ; centralize all 504 loan liquidations in two centers to standardize processing and increase efficiency ; centralize disaster loan liquidations in one center to standardize processing and increase efficiency ; and transform the regional and district offices by standardizing their size and function . in october 2003 , when we reported on sba's transformation , sba was near completion of the first phase of its transformation process . this initial phase aimed to transform the role of the district office to focus on outreach to small businesses about sba's products and services , and link these businesses to the appropriate resources , including lenders ; and centralize some of its loan functions to improve efficiency and the consistency of its loan approval and liquidation processes . we found that the agency had applied some key practices important to successful organizational change , but had overlooked aspects that emphasize transparency and communication . for example , sba had top leadership support and a designated transformation - implementation team , but the makeup of the team was not communicated to employees and stakeholders , and the team's leadership was not always consistent . also , sba had developed a transformation plan that contained goals , anticipated results , and an implementation strategy - - but the plan was not made public , and employees and stakeholders were not apprised of the details of the plan . also , certain aspects of the plan were revised , causing further confusion among non - management employees . further , sba had developed strategic goals to guide its transformation , but these goals were not linked with measurable performance goals that would demonstrate the success of the agency's plan to expand the focus of the district offices on marketing and outreach . based on our findings and the possibility that further progress could be impeded by budget and staff realignment challenges , we recommended that sba: ensure that implementation leadership is clearly identified to employees finalize its transformation plan and share it with employees and stakeholders ; develop performance goals that reflect the strategic goals for transformation , and budget requests that clearly link resource needs to achieving strategic goals ; use the new performance management system to define responsibilities ; develop a communication strategy that promotes two - way communication ; solicit ideas and feedback from employees and the union , and ensure that their concerns were considered . sba officials have told us of the administrator's increased efforts to communicate with staff by holding agencywide meetings with employees , for example . in addition , the agency plans to finalize a transformation plan and share it with employees in june . these actions could address some of the recommendations we made to sba , but we have not documented or evaluated the efforts .