nlrb did not have any comments on the draft report . we received technical comments from labor , which we incorporated as appropriate . none of the 20 federal contractors had been debarred or suspended from federal contracts . further , we do not know the extent , if any , that contracting officers considered whd assessments in the awarding of the federal contracts . the federal government has also awarded contracts to companies that labor has assessed large fines against for violating health and safety regulations . from our analysis of the 50 largest osha fines for health and safety violations for closed investigations from fiscal year 2005 through fiscal year 2009 , we found that almost 40 percent of these fines were made against companies that subsequently received federal contracts in fiscal year 2009 . specifically , we found that 8 of the 50 largest osha fines were made against 7 other federal contractors for safety violations . further , these 7 companies accounted for about $3.7 million in osha fines . according to fpds - ng , the federal government obligated approximately $180 million in federal contracts to these contractors during fiscal year 2009 . none of the 7 federal contractors had been debarred or suspended from federal contracts . further , we do not know the extent , if any , that contracting officers considered osha fines in the awarding of the federal contracts . table 1 describes the different violations and their associated penalties . whd works to enhance the welfare and protect the rights of the nation's workers through enforcement of the federal minimum wage , overtime pay , record keeping , and child labor requirements of the fair labor standards act ; the family and medical leave act ; and employment standards and worker protections provided in certain other laws . additionally , whd administers and enforces the prevailing wage requirements of the davis - bacon act ( dba ) , the service contract act ( sca ) , and other statutes applicable to federal contracts for construction and for the provision of goods and services . when whd finds violations during enforcement actions , it computes and attempts to collect and distribute back wages owed to workers and , where permitted by law , also imposes penalties and other remedies . if employers refuse to pay the back wages and any penalties assessed , whd officials , with the assistance of attorneys from labor's office of the solicitor , may pursue the cases in court . we analyzed osha and whd databases and determined they were sufficiently reliable for purposes of our audit and investigative work . whd may also request that the federal agency withhold contract payments to protect the back wages and benefits and may request that the federal agency terminate a contract . the national labor relations act ( nlra ) is the primary federal law governing relations between labor unions and employers in the private sector and is administered by the nlrb .