ii ) . ssa agreed that standardizing the truncation of ssns would be beneficial and supported our recommendation for congressional action . in addition , ssa stated that while it does not have the legal authority to compel organizations to truncate ssns or to specify how such truncating should be done , it would be willing to publish information on best practices for truncating ssns on ssa's web site . we also provided a draft of this report to the federal trade commission for technical review and received comments that were incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman of the federal trade commission , the commissioner of the social security administration , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov / . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . other contacts and acknowledgments are listed in appendix iii . others offered services related to employment or background checks . internet resellers also offered different ways for buyers to purchase their information . for example , some offered memberships that allowed online access to the reseller's information , with the member performing the search . another reseller offered to sell a software package that would allow a buyer to purchase access to the internet reseller's information through the purchased software and allowed many different types of information searches . the majority of resellers would require selected information about the buyer and then would perform the data search and provide an information report to the buyer . we identified over 50 types of information offered for purchase by these resellers , which we categorized into six major categories including personal , legal , financial , employment , driver or vehicle , and telephone . table 2 gives examples of the types of information found in these categories . all the resellers offered to sell information from at least one of the six categories . for these analyses , the computer programs were checked by a second , independent analyst . our analyses found 154 internet resellers with ssn - related services . to determine the extent to which internet resellers sell social security numbers , we analyzed data collected from the review of internet resellers just described , attempted to purchase ssns from a nonprobability sample of internet resellers , and collected data about the transactions . appendix i explains the scope and methodology of our work in greater detail . we conducted our work between april 2005 and may 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the ssn was created in 1936 as a means of tracking workers' earnings and eligibility for social security benefits . ssns are issued to most u.s. citizens , and to some noncitizens lawfully admitted to the united states . through a process known as enumeration , a unique nine - digit number is created .