all taxpayers . beyond screening returns with known tax - related identity theft issues , screening all tax returns for possible refund fraud would pose similar trade - offs , but on a grander scale . for example , as noted above , one way to check for identity theft is to look for significant differences between current year and prior year tax returns , but this could be confounded by a large number of false positives . irs officials told us that in 2009 there were 10 million address changes , 46 million changes in employer , and millions of deaths and births . checking all returns that reflect these changes for possible refund fraud could overwhelm irs's capacity to issue refunds to legitimate taxpayers in a timely manner . looking forward . irs's identity protection strategy and the creation of pipds were part of an effort to more efficiently identify refund and employment fraud as well as to assist innocent taxpayers . since adopting the recommendation in our 2009 report regarding using performance measures to assess effectiveness , irs has followed through , using its improved performance information to identify additional steps it could take . resolution . identity theft indicators speed resolution by making a taxpayer's identity theft problems visible to all irs personnel with account access . taxpayers benefit because they do not have to repeatedly explain their identity theft issues or prove their identity to multiple irs units . indicators also alert irs personnel that a future account problem may be related to identity theft and help speed up the resolution of any such problems . since our 2009 report , irs developed a new , temporary indicator to alert all irs units that an identity theft incident has been reported but not yet resolved . irs officials told us that they identified a need for the new indicator based on their ongoing evaluation of their identity theft initiatives . the temporary indicator's purpose is to expedite problem resolution and avoid taxpayers having to explain their identity theft issues to multiple irs units . as discussed in our 2009 report , taxpayers with known or suspected identity theft issues can receive assistance by contacting the identity protection specialized unit . the unit operates a toll - free number taxpayers can call to receive assistance in resolving identity theft issues . detection . irs also uses its identity theft indicators to screen tax returns filed in the names of known refund and employment fraud victims . during the 2009 , 2010 , and 2011 filing seasons , irs screened returns filed in the names of taxpayers with identity theft indicators on their accounts . there are approximately 378,000 such taxpayers . in this screening , irs looks for characteristics indicating that the return was filed by an identity thief instead of the legitimate taxpayer , such as large changes in income or a change of address . if a return fails the screening , it is subject to additional irs manual review , including contacting employers to verify that the income reported on the tax return was legitimate .