projects . we noted that the cost increases and schedule delays that occurred for most of these projects were attributable to an inconsistent application of project management tools and techniques on the part of both doe and its contractors , including inadequate systems for measuring contractor performance , approval of construction activities before final designs were sufficiently complete , ineffective project reviews , and ineffective development and integration of the technologies used in these projects . while doe has taken many steps to improve contract and project management , the office of environmental management ( em ) — one of doe's largest program offices — — and the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) — a separately organized agency within doe — continue to experience significant problems completing major projects on time and on budget . my testimony today is based primarily on reports we issued from march 2009 to december 2012 that assess doe management of various major construction projects . specifically , i will focus my testimony on ( 1 ) prior gao findings on doe major projects and the impact of recent doe steps to address project management weaknesses and ( 2 ) preliminary observations from our ongoing work for this subcommittee on the reasons behind the planned increase in the performance baseline — a project's cost , schedule , and scope — for two projects being constructed as part of nnsa's plutonium disposition program — the mixed oxide ( mox ) fuel fabrication facility and the waste solidification building at the savannah river site in south carolina.prior work can be found in these reports . detailed information on our scope and methodology for our to develop our preliminary observations , we reviewed documents related to the performance baseline changes for both the mox facility and waste solidification building , interviewed nnsa and contractor officials , and visited the savannah river site to meet with project officials and observe the construction progress for both facilities . we are conducting our ongoing work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we obtained nnsa's views on new information in our testimony concerning our ongoing work on the mox facility and waste solidification building . to manage major construction projects , doe project directors in em and nnsa are required to follow specific doe directives , policies , and guidance for contract and project management . among these is doe order 413.3b , which provides direction for planning and executing projects . to oversee projects and approve critical decisions , doe conducts its own reviews , often with the help of independent technical experts . for example , for large projects ( i.e. , projects with a total cost of greater than $100 million ) , doe's office of acquisition and project management is required to validate the accuracy and completeness of a project's performance baseline as part of each important project step .