sba agreed with our suggestion . in addition , sba provided technical comments which we incorporated into our report . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the administrator of the small business administration , interested congressional committees and members , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report were andy o'connell , assistant director ; matthew valenta , assistant director ; lerone reid , analyst - in - charge ; eric eskew , agent - in - charge ; jason kelly ; barbara lewis ; jeff mcdermott ; and timothy walker . we decided to abandon the application and our application was withdrawn from the program . as of march 2010 , the sba has reviewed the status of all 29 firms we referred to it from our prior hubzone investigations . since our march 2009 report , these firms have received more than $66 million in federal obligations for new contracts . not all of these obligations are necessarily improper , and some do not relate to hubzone contracts . we provided the requested information 3 days after receiving the request . two weeks later , we followed up to confirm receipt of our documents . the sba indicated that it did not receive the information that we provided , so we resent the information and requested that the agency confirm receipt . three weeks later , after failing to receive confirmation on the receipt of our documentation , we inquired about the status of our application . again , the agency told us that it did not receive the documentation and subsequently gave us one day to resubmit it . if not provided , the agency indicated , our application would be withdrawn . of the 29 firms , 16 were decertified by the sba , 8 voluntarily withdrew from the hubzone program , and 5 were found by the agency to be in compliance with program requirements and remain certified . we did not attempt to verify sba's work . and although sba indicated that firms sometimes come in and out of compliance while in the program , we maintain that the firms represented in the cases that the sba reviewed and determined to meet hubzone program requirements were out of compliance at the time of our review . in addition , we found that five decertified firms continued to market themselves , through their web sites , as hubzone certified even after the sba removed them from the hubzone program . tables 1 and 2 below show the results of the sba's review of the 29 firms we referred from our july 2008 testimony and march 2009 report .