and this brings us to the present . the recent december 2004 update to circular a - 123 reflects policy recommendations developed by a joint committee of representatives from the cfo council ( cfoc ) and pcie . as i have stressed throughout my testimony today , internal control is a fundamental responsibility of management , including ongoing oversight . the auditor's role , similar to its opinion on the financial statements issued by management , would be to state whether the auditor agrees with management's assertion that its internal control is adequate so that the reader has an independent view . as an example , consider dod which has many known material internal control weaknesses . of the 25 areas on gao's high - risk list , 14 relate to dod , including dod financial management . given that dod management is clearly not in a position to state that the department has effective internal control over financial reporting , there would be no need for the auditor to do additional audit work to render an opinion that internal control was not effective . on the other hand , as i just mentioned for fiscal year 2004 , ssa management reported that it does not have any material internal control weaknesses over financial reporting . the auditor's unqualified opinion over financial reporting at ssa provided an independent assessment of management's assertion about internal control , which we believe by its nature adds value and creditability similar to the auditor's opinion on the financial statements . as you know , mr. chairman , recent legislation making the department of homeland security ( dhs ) subject to the provisions of the cfo act , which this subcommittee spearheaded , requires dhs management to provide an assertion on the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting for fiscal year 2005 and to obtain an auditor's opinion on its internal control over financial reporting for fiscal year 2006 . in addition , the cfo council and pcie are required by the dhs legislation to jointly study the potential costs and benefits of requiring cfo act agencies to obtain audit opinions on their internal control over financial reporting , and gao is to perform an analysis of the information provided in the report and provide any findings to the house committee on government reform and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs . we believe that the study and related analysis are important steps in resolving the issues associated with the current reporting on the adequacy of internal control . in addition , this issue is being discussed by the principals of the joint financial management improvement program — the comptroller general , the director of omb , the secretary of the treasury , and the director of the office of personnel management . in closing , as the congress and the american public have increased demands for accountability , the federal government must respond by having a high standard of accountability for its programs and activities . areas vulnerable to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement must be continually evaluated to ensure that scarce resources reach their intended beneficiaries ; are used properly ; and are not diverted for inappropriate , illegal , inefficient , or ineffective purposes .