however there were some significant differences . for example , a greater percentage of retention - critical personnel in this occupation area raised preparedness concerns attributed to staffing , and parts and equipment shortfalls compared to other enlisted personnel . the department concurred with our report . in addition , the department indicated it is important that the retention - critical occupations provided by the services be viewed as a "snapshot in time," and the occupations cited in our report represent those that were deemed retention - critical at the time of submission to gao . according to dod , these career fields , along with their priority order , periodically change as a result of many factors . the full text of the department's comments appears in appendix ii . the department also suggested some technical changes , which we incorporated as appropriate . appendix i contains our objectives , scope , and methodology . appendix ii contains dod's comments on this report . appendixes iii , iv , and v provide a detailed analysis of the survey responses for each occupational area . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the honorable donald h. rumsfeld , secretary of defense ; and david s. c. chu , under secretary of defense , personnel and readiness . copies will also be made available to other interested parties upon request . all of our analyses were conducted at this occupational area level . by organizing the service occupations into their respective groups and ultimately into occupational areas , we were able to consolidate the services' list of 64 retention - critical occupations into 16 occupational groups and then further into three occupational areas ( see table 1 ) . in a november 2000 report to congress , dod acknowledged that the services had shortages in some critical skill areas . although concerned , dod indicated it was working with each service to prioritize the use of available personnel and planned to continue focusing on pockets of retention problems within critical skill areas . dod officials attribute retention problems in certain occupations to factors such as the growth of civilian job opportunities , the negative impact of increasing military operations , and servicemembers' concerns over benefits and quality - of - life conditions . the expectations and experiences of personnel serving in retention - critical occupations were similar to those of other enlisted personnel ( see fig . the dod coding scheme is organized into three levels of detail: an aggregate level ( one - digit ) called an "occupational area," a middle level ( two - digits ) called an "occupational group," and a more detailed level ( three - digits ) called an "occupational subgroup. since dod's survey was not specifically designed to gather information about military occupations , our analysis focused predominantly on the occupational area because a more detailed analysis would have limited the precision of our results . conducting our analysis at the occupational area level provided a large enough sample size to make our analysis more precise . widespread reports of flagging military morale raise an important question: is dissatisfaction with the military way of life driving highly trained individuals out , or are they being lured away by more favorable civilian opportunities ?