not all undocumented aliens are eligible for medicaid . undocumented aliens are eligible for emergency medicaid coverage only if , except for immigration status , they meet medicaid eligibility criteria applicable to citizens . many state hospital association officials we interviewed commented that hospitals were concerned about undocumented aliens who do not qualify for medicaid . to qualify , undocumented aliens must belong to a medicaid - eligible category — such as children under 19 years of age , parents with children under 19 , or pregnant women — and meet income and state residency requirements . arizona hospital and medicaid officials said that many undocumented aliens treated at their hospitals are only passing through the state and cannot meet medicaid state residency requirements . what has been the availability of federal funding sources to help offset hospitals' costs of treating undocumented aliens ? what is the responsibility of the department of homeland security ( homeland security ) to cover the medical expenses of aliens needing emergency medical care who are either encountered by border patrol agents or granted humanitarian parole by u.s. port - of - entry officials ? to conduct this work , we focused our review on 10 states: arizona , california , florida , georgia , illinois , new jersey , new mexico , new york , north carolina , and texas . we selected the 4 southwest states — arizona , california , new mexico , and texas — because uncompensated care costs due to treating undocumented aliens has been a long - standing issue for hospitals located in communities near the u.s. - mexican border . we selected the other 6 states because high estimated numbers of undocumented aliens resided there in 2000 , according to ins . in all , the 10 states comprised an estimated 78 percent of the population of undocumented aliens in the united states in 2000 . we mailed a questionnaire to 503 hospitals located in the 10 states . we received survey responses from 351 hospitals ( 70 percent ) , of which 198 ( 39 percent of surveyed hospitals ) provided the information necessary for us to calculate their total uncompensated care costs and the proportion of care they provided to patients without a social security number , a proxy we used for undocumented aliens . to determine the availability of federal funding sources to hospitals treating undocumented aliens , we obtained documents and interviewed officials from state medicaid offices and state hospital associations in the 10 states , as well as from the department of health and human services' centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . in addition , we reviewed provisions of the recently enacted medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 pertaining to payments to providers for treating undocumented and other aliens . finally , to determine the policies and practices used by the u.s. border patrol and u.s. port - of - entry officials when they encounter aliens needing emergency medical care , we interviewed homeland security officials , including officials from relevant border patrol jurisdictions and u.s. ports of entry along the u.s. - mexican border . we also interviewed coast guard officials about their encounters with sick or injured aliens at sea .