the employer is the beneficiary of these policies . some of this insurance protects against the loss of key executives — called key - person insurance — while some of it covers larger groups of employees and is called broad - based insurance . unless prohibited by state law , businesses can retain ownership of these policies regardless of whether the employment relationship has ended . generally , business - owned life insurance is permanent rather than term life insurance , lasting for the life of the employee and accumulating cash value as it provides coverage . attractive features of business - owned life insurance , which are features common to all permanent life insurance , generally include both tax - free accumulation of earnings on the policies' cash value and tax - free receipt of the death benefit . to address concerns that businesses were abusing their ability to deduct interest expenses on loans taken against the value of their policies , congress passed legislation to limit this practice , and the internal revenue service ( irs ) and department of justice pursued litigation against some businesses . but concerns have remained regarding employers' ability to benefit from insuring their employees' lives — specifically , whether ( 1 ) employers should be considered to have an insurable interest in employees' lives that allows them to hold business - owned life insurance , ( 2 ) employers' insurable interest should continue after the employment relationship ends and , if so , under what circumstances , ( 3 ) employers should be required to obtain their employees' consent before purchasing business - owned life insurance , and ( 4 ) businesses should be allowed to receive tax advantages from owning these policies . proponents of business - owned life insurance point out that , among its other purposes , businesses use these policies to fund broad - based benefits for their employees , including pre - and postretirement health care . we currently have work underway , and today , i will provide some preliminary information on ( 1 ) the uses and prevalence of business - owned life insurance and ( 2 ) federal and state regulatory requirements for and oversight of business - owned life insurance . to obtain this information , we analyzed the financial reports that banks filed with their regulators as well as the corporate annual financial statements that publicly traded insurers and noninsurers filed with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) . we found that 3,209 banks and thrifts ( 34 percent of all institutions ) reported the cash surrender value of their policies at $56.3 billion . twenty - three of the top 50 banks and thrifts — ranked by total assets — reported owning policies worth $36.9 billion , or 66 percent of the reported total of all banks and thrifts . overall , 259 large banks and thrifts — those with assets of $1 billion or more , including those among the top 50 — held 88 percent , or $49.4 billion , of the total reported cash surrender value of business - owned life insurance .