it was constructed in 1974 . a managing agent oversees operations for the owner and an on - site manager maintains the units and collects rent . the complex consists of 8 1-bedroom , 26 2-bedroom , and 16 3-bedroom units . all of the properties' units have section 8 project - based assistance . this extract contained information on over 2,000 properties that had entered omhar's portfolio since late 1998 , including properties omhar assigned to its watch list . we focused on the reasons why omhar assigns properties to the watch list and summarized the various results for each cause . we also conducted telephone interviews with the agents responsible for developing the restructuring plans for a random sample of the properties on the watch list to determine why the owners of the properties did not complete the restructuring process . to determine the physical and financial condition of the watch list properties , we used omhar's april 15 , 2002 , database extract and obtained a second database extract from hud's real estate management system ( rems ) as of june 2002 . this system contained the latest complete information on watch - list properties' physical and financial scores . we also used demographic data found in rems to select our six case studies . to assess the physical and financial conditions of watch - list properties , we sorted this inventory into various scoring ranges and computed aggregate average physical and financial scores for omhar's watch - list inventory . we compared these results with similar data for all properties that have gone through the mark - to - market program , of which there are over 2,000 properties , to determine if the physical and financial conditions of each inventory is similar . where we found discrepancies ( such as nonpopulated fields or data - entry errors ) we brought them to omhar's attention and worked with these individuals to correct the discrepancies before conducting our analyses . we determined the data we used were reliable for purposes of this report . to assess the effectiveness of hud's monitoring procedures , we reviewed hud's policies and procedures for monitoring properties and discussed hud's implementation of the policies and procedures at selected hud field offices . we also visited a judgmental sample of properties that are monitored by hud offices that are geographically distributed to determine whether hud's monitoring procedures are sufficient to quickly detect signs of physical and / or financial deterioration of the properties . in conducting our review , we interviewed officials in hud and omhar headquarters in washington , d.c. , and hud personnel in six hud field offices – - providence , rhode island ; denver , colorado ; jacksonville , florida ; los angeles , california ; washington , d.c. ; and fort worth , texas . in addition , we conducted a structured telephone interview with paes for a random sample of 60 watch - list properties . we also interviewed officials in omhar headquarters in washington , d.c. and omhar staff in chicago , illinois . we performed our work from october 2001 through july 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .