revised cost estimate . in the revised dd form 1391 , annual cost savings from reduced operation and maintenance expenditures were estimated to result in a net first - year savings of $2.68 million . the same capital costs would be avoided . ( see fig . 1 for a map of clear air force station. ) the existing combined heat and power plant at clear air force station is owned by the air force and became operational in 1961 . the plant burns coal in three coal - fired boilers to produce steam , which generates power through the use of steam turbine generators . as a byproduct of electricity generation , the plant delivers steam to the installation for heating via underground steam lines . the plant has three steam turbine generators , each capable of producing 7.5 megawatts of power , for a total capacity of 22.5 megawatts . the boilers and turbines are interconnected so that any boiler can be linked to any turbine generator ( see fig . the air force's standard operating procedure is to run two boilers and two turbine generators at the plant concurrently in order to provide backup in the event that one component fails and to better control the power system's operating frequency . according to air force officials , having readily available backup steam in the winter is important because the start - up time for a boiler is about 4 to 5 hours , which is enough time for water pipes to freeze and cause damage to facilities in the meantime . each boiler and generator runs for 8 months each year , and the boilers are rotated out of service for inspection and maintenance . in addition to the redundancy provided by running two boilers and two generators , the installation has a 300-kilowatt generator capable of providing electricity to the composite area in the event of an outage . a separate emergency power plant , which became operational in july 2012 , would provide electricity and electrical heat for the radar in the event of failure of the central power plant . we also met with officials from usibelli coal mine and golden valley electric association . further , we spoke with defense logistics agency – energy officials about the existing coal contract as well as current and potential future contracts for other fuel sources , such as diesel . finally , we interviewed missile defense agency officials for information on their roles in the current decision and the potential effect of future radar upgrades on the installation's energy needs . to determine what other options , if any , the air force considered before deciding on the alternative power source it selected , we reviewed the air force's analyses on the options it considered , including the concept opportunity study , which first laid out some options for the plant , and the feasibility study . we also reviewed documentation related to additional analyses that were not included in those two studies .