we disagree with interior's assertions . our report is reliable and based on information that we verified with the park service , the developer , the developer's lawyers , and the appraiser . specific points follow: our report incorporates the results of a desk review of the appraisals , but it does not rely exclusively on these results . our staff independently read and analyzed the appraisals , federal appraisal standards , and other relevant documents , to develop this report ; this review is the most recent of several of our examinations of appraisals used in federal land transactions . we clarified the report to better distinguish our review appraiser's work and our analysis . the appraiser we contracted with to conduct a desk review has over 40 years' experience as a professional appraiser ; he is affiliated with the appraisal institute and other professional real estate associations ; and he is licensed as a certified general appraiser in the state of colorado . although under virginia law , persons who appraise properties within virginia must be licensed by the state , this law does not apply to those who provide consulting services that are not appraisals . the appraiser we contracted with conducted a desk review and did not reappraise either parcel . appraisers conducting a desk review are not expected to visit the property that was appraised . in our review appraiser's desk review of the potomac yard appraisals , he checked the arithmetic , considered the appropriateness of the methods and techniques used , and evaluated the reasonableness of the conclusions reached . regarding the alexandria parcel's development restriction , our review appraiser found that the appraised value was not based on a credible analysis because there was no determination that a reasonable probability existed that the parcel would be rezoned to accommodate the high level of commercial development that was assumed in the “before” scenario . for this reason , our review appraiser concluded that the alexandria appraisal did not conform to all federal appraisal standards and likely overstated the fair market value of the development restriction . the full text of interior's letter is in appendix iii . we conducted our review from april 2000 through february 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . details of our scope and methodology are discussed in appendix i . as requested , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time we will send copies to the honorable gale a. norton , secretary of the interior , and the honorable denis galvin , acting director of the national park service . we will also send copies to other appropriate congressional members and make copies available to others upon request . land exchanges — trading federal lands for lands owned by corporations , individuals , or state or local governments that are willing to trade — are used by federal land management agencies , such as the park service , as a tool for acquiring nonfederal land and disposing of federal land . the potomac yard exchange was conducted under the park service's land exchange authority .