ii ) . it stated that the report findings are essentially factual and correct and that it will continue to pursue improvements where needed . state also noted , as we did , that many of the concerns presented in the report are outside the control or influence of the office of aviation . therefore , we urge the assistant secretary of state for the bureau for international narcotics and law enforcement affairs to work with the bureau of diplomatic security and the u.s. embassy in bogota , in particular , to complete required action in these areas . in addition , in oral comments , office of aviation officials provided technical comments that we have incorporated into this report , as appropriate . to determine what oversight and evaluation requirements were applicable for the dyncorp contract , we reviewed state's regulations for contract oversight and the relevant contract provisions . we also discussed the contract oversight and evaluation requirements with state's contract officer . to determine whether the office of aviation was adhering to the applicable oversight and evaluation requirements , we examined the trimester performance evaluation documentation for the period june 1999 through january 2001 in detail . specifically , we examined each of the monthly reports from bolivia , colombia , and peru and the consolidated reports and related documents prepared by office of aviation and dyncorp officials for the period and discussed the specific reports and issues raised in them with office of aviation's senior officials , including the director , the deputy director , and the contract technical officer , at patrick air force base , florida , and other office of aviation officials in washington , d.c . in colombia , we also discussed specific reports with office of aviation officials and dyncorp managers who had first - hand knowledge of the evaluations and the status of dyncorp's efforts in the country at the time the reports were prepared . to determine whether the office of aviation ensured the safe operations of its aircraft and physical security of its facilities , we examined the safety issues raised in the monthly reports prepared for the trimester performance evaluations and the findings of the recent icap and rso reports and aviation resources management surveys . we met with the team that conducted the icap review and discussed their methodology and criteria and the support for many of their findings in more detail than is presented in icap's report . we followed up with office of aviation officials in washington , d.c. ; patrick air force base , florida ; and in colombia to determine the status of their efforts to address the shortcomings raised in the reports . in colombia , we discussed safety and physical security issues with cognizant office of aviation officials and dyncorp managers at the headquarters office at the el dorado international airport in bogota , the forward operating location at larandia , and the maintenance and training facility at tolemaida . at each site , we also toured the facilities to make our own observations and met with fixed - wing aircraft and helicopter pilots and mechanics to obtain their views on flight operations , safety , and physical security .