medication . cms also does not have a mechanism to verify that plan sponsors have effectively resolved complaints . while cms caseworkers review plan sponsors' notes in the ctm , they do not routinely take a sample of complaints and follow up with beneficiaries to validate the plan sponsors' resolution actions . cms officials indicated that the agency does not have the resources to perform such a comprehensive check and stated that beneficiaries who are dissatisfied with their plan sponsor's resolution could file another complaint directly with cms . in contrast to complaints , cms's oversight of plan sponsor grievances processes has been more limited . cms provided plan sponsors with general guidance for determining whether beneficiaries' problems were grievances or coverage determinations , which are addressed through a separate process . cms also provided plan sponsors with time frames for resolving grievances , periodically reviewed plan sponsor grievances data , and began auditing plan sponsors' grievances processes in 2007 . however , although cms's guidance to plan sponsors included examples of how they could classify beneficiaries' problems , several plan sponsors we interviewed said that this guidance was not detailed enough and raised concerns about whether plan sponsors were accurately differentiating among inquiries ( i.e. , general questions about the part d program ) , grievances , or coverage determinations . cms officials acknowledged that some plan sponsors have incorrectly classified inquiries as grievances . further , in its 2007 audits of plan sponsors' grievances processes , cms found numerous cases where plan sponsors did not correctly differentiate between grievances and coverage determinations , supporting plan sponsors' concerns about the adequacy of the existing guidance . such confusion about how to classify grievances increases the likelihood that plan sponsors report erroneous or inconsistent information to cms and that they rely on the wrong processes to address beneficiaries' concerns . cms does not require plan sponsors to report certain information on grievances for each of their part d contracts , such as resolution dates , that is essential for determining whether beneficiaries' grievances are being resolved , and devotes few resources to reviewing what plan sponsors have reported for their contracts . instead , on a quarterly basis , each plan sponsor reports the total number of grievances for 11 categories for each of its contracts . cms officials also could not explain many of the anomalies we identified in the grievances data , such as substantial variation in the enrollment category from 2006 to 2007 and considerable variation in the grievance rates between contracts with similar levels of enrollment . further , they acknowledged that they had not undertaken efforts to review the data in detail or to assess their overall reliability . in fact , more than a year into the program , cms officials were still uncertain as to whether grievances had been reported for all contracts , and as of may 2008 , agency analysis was limited to calculating annual grievance rates for each contract that did report grievances .