air force . since 2014 , according to air force officials , the air force has used its dental manpower model to determine the minimum number of dentists required , by clinic , to ensure the medical readiness of servicemembers served by air force dental clinics . according to air force officials , the air force dental manpower model is subject to review and validation that includes input from the air force medical service ; surgeon general's manpower , personnel , and resources office ; air force personnel center ; and consultants . officials told us the model is reviewed and validated annually and presented to the dental operations panel and air force's medical service corporate structure . the model was most recently validated in april 2018 . according to navy bureau of medicine and surgery ( bumed ) officials , the navy does not yet have a model and therefore instead uses a general ratio of one dentist for every 1,000 sailors as a baseline to initially determine the staffing requirements of its dental clinics . this ratio is adjusted based upon emerging needs or major changes to mission . in 2013 , according to navy officials , bumed began developing a dental services model that could be used to determine dental clinic staffing needs . in november 2016 , bumed internally released a draft report recommending that the dental corps approve and implement the dental services model as the staffing standard for dental clinics . according to a navy official , this report was provided to dental corps leadership for review in july 2018 and they are expected to complete their review in october 2018 . according to bumed officials , if the dental corps leadership approves the model for use as an official staffing standard , the model would be subject to official navy validation processes which , in accordance with dod policy , would entail verification and validation throughout the model's lifecycle . conversely , if the dental corps decides to use the model as an informal staffing tool to supplement its current processes , a bumed official stated that it will be subject to an ad - hoc internal review every 3 years that mirrors the navy's review of its validation process . currently , the army , the navy and the air force each use different service - specific standards and other factors to determine the number of dentists needed at their respective dental clinics . as previously discussed , the services have developed and are in the process of implementing cross - service staffing standards — that is , a standardized approach to staffing the common day - to - day health needs of the patient population — for certain medical specialties . in response to dod policy and our 2010 recommendation , the services established a working group to identify and develop common cross - service staffing standards , and in 2017 , the tri - service working group established such standards for 42 different medical specialties . these standards are based on actual workload data for common capabilities within selected medical specialties and were incorporated into each service's staffing tools to provide consistent values for the minimum number of staff required to meet patient needs .