( see fig . the fatality rate for buses decreased slightly from 1975 to 2005 , but it has more annual variability than the fatality rate for trucks due to a much smaller total vehicle miles traveled . fmcsa's primary mission is to reduce the number and severity of crashes involving large trucks and buses . fmcsa relies heavily on the results of compliance reviews to determine whether carriers are operating safely and , if not , to take enforcement action against them . fmcsa conducts these on - site reviews to determine carriers' compliance with safety regulations that address areas such as alcohol and drug testing of drivers , driver qualifications , driver hours of service , vehicle maintenance and inspections , and transportation of hazardous materials . fmcsa uses a data - driven analysis model called safestat to assess carriers' risks relative to all other carriers based on safety indicators , such as their crash rates and safety violations identified during roadside inspections and prior compliance reviews . a carrier's score is calculated based on its performance in four safety evaluation areas: accidents and driver , vehicle , and safety management violations . ( see fig . safestat identifies many carriers that pose a high risk for crashes and is about twice as effective ( 83 percent ) as randomly selecting carriers for compliance reviews . as a result , it has value for improving motor carrier safety . however , two enhancements that we analyzed could lead to fmcsa identifying carriers that pose greater crash risks overall . these approaches entail giving more weight to crashes than the current safestat model does . fmcsa has concerns about these approaches , in part , because placing more emphasis on accidents would require it to place less emphasis on other types of problems . fmcsa recognizes that safestat can be improved , and as part of its comprehensive safety analysis 2010 reform initiative — which is aimed at improving its processes for identifying and dealing with unsafe carriers and drivers — the agency is considering replacing safestat by 2010 . in june 2007 , we reported that fmcsa could improve safestat's ability to identify carriers that pose high crash risks if it applied a statistical approach , called the negative binomial regression model , to the four safestat safety evaluation areas instead of its current approach . we used this approach to determine whether systematic analyses of data through regression modeling offered improved results in identifying carriers that pose high crash risks over fmcsa's model , which uses expert judgment and professional experience to apply weights to each of the safety evaluation areas . the negative binomial model results in a rank order listing of carriers by crash risk and the predicted number of crashes . this differs from safestat's current approach , which gives the highest priority to carriers that are deficient in three or more safety evaluation areas or that score over a certain amount — safestat categories a and b . ( see table 1. )