gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 22 , 2009 . chemical regulation: comparison of u.s. and recently enacted european union approaches to protect against the risks of toxic chemicals . gao - 07-825 . washington , d.c.: august 17 2007 . its provisions are underpinned by the precautionary principle . in general , the precautionary principle means that where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage , lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost - effective measures to reduce risks to human health and the environment . while tsca authorizes epa to review existing chemicals , it generally provides no specific requirement , time frame , or methodology for doing so . significantly , chemical companies are not required to develop and submit toxicity information to epa on existing chemicals unless the agency finds that a chemical may present an unreasonable risk of injury to human health or the environment or is or will be produced in substantial quantities and that either ( a ) there is or may be significant or substantial human exposure to the chemical or ( b ) the chemical enters the environment in substantial quantities . epa must also determine there are insufficient data to reasonably determine the effects on health or the environment and that testing is necessary to develop such data before it can require a company to test its chemicals for harmful effects . this structure places the burden on epa to demonstrate a need for data on a chemical's toxicity rather than on a company to demonstrate that a chemical is safe . as a result , epa does not routinely assess the risks of the roughly 80,000 industrial chemicals in use . epa has begun to rely on voluntary programs for data , such as the high production volume challenge program , where companies voluntarily agree to provide epa certain data on high - production volume chemicals . however , these programs may not provide epa with complete data in a timely manner . for example , there are currently over 200 high - production - volume chemicals for which chemical companies have not voluntarily agreed to provide the minimal test data that epa believes are needed to initially assess their risks . epa officials told us that in cases where chemical companies do not voluntarily provide test data and health and safety studies in a complete and timely manner , requiring the testing of existing chemicals of concern — those chemicals for which some suspicion of harm exists — is the only practical way to ensure that the agency obtains the needed information . furthermore , many additional chemicals are likely to become high production chemicals because the specific chemicals used in commerce are constantly changing , as are their production volumes .