( see fig . ssa , through an inter - agency agreement with nih , initiated an effort in 2016 to improve the current selection software , specifically to reduce the number of false cal positives and negatives , among other goals . specifically , since fiscal year 2009 , ssa has updated impairment summaries for 74 of the current 225 cal conditions , or about 33 percent . as of march 2017 , we found that impairment summaries for 157 of the 225 conditions , or about 70 percent , are at least 3 years old , and among these , 69 conditions , or about 31 percent , were 5 or more years old ( see fig . as previously noted , the impairment summaries suggest specific medical evidence for the examiner to obtain to verify the claimant's asserted condition . additionally , the summaries describe the cal condition ; provide alternate names , information on diagnostic testing and coding , and treatment options and disease progression ; and reference relevant medical listings under which the claim may be allowed . the views of staff from these dds offices are not generalizable to all dds offices nationwide . to gain additional perspectives from dds and ssa field office staff , we also interviewed officials from the national association of disability examiners and the national council of social security management associations , respectively . to gather additional information on implementation of cal , we interviewed representatives from disease and disorder patient advocacy groups , selected based on their affiliation with asserted cal conditions with high allowance or denial rates , as well as with conditions that ssa considered but did not add to the cal list . specifically , we interviewed representatives from the aplastic anemia and mds international foundation , alzheimer's association , desmoid tumor research foundation , huntington's disease society of america , lymphoma research foundation , m - cm network , national mps society , national organization of rare disorders , and parents and researchers interested in smith - magenis syndrome . in total , eight of these nine organizations had suggested at least one condition to ssa for inclusion on the cal list . five of the nine organizations had one or more condition added by ssa , and four had one or more condition not added to the list . another one of the organizations represented an asserted cal condition with a high denial rate ; ssa had consulted this organization for information about the condition in the past , although the group had not proposed the condition for the list . the views of the selected advocates we interviewed are not generalizable to all advocates who have interacted with ssa regarding cal . we also interviewed medical experts from the national institutes of health , which has performed work to identify potential conditions for the cal list and refinements for the selection software , under an inter - agency agreement with ssa . ssa has also contracted with the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( national academies ) to recommend improvements to the disability determination process , among other things , and therefore we interviewed medical and disability experts who have served on relevant national academies committees .