( see fig . asde - x uses a combination of surface movement primary radar and multilateration sensors to display aircraft position and vehicle position on an atc tower display . according to faa , the integration of these sensors provides accurate , up - to - date , and reliable data for improving airport safety in all weather conditions . asde - x was developed to prevent accidents resulting from runway incursions , which have increased since 1993 . the number of reported runway incursions rose from 186 in 1993 to 383 in 2001 . according to faa , because air traffic in the united states is expected to double by 2010 , runway incursions may pose a significant safety threat to u.s. aviation . faa expects that asde - x will increase the level of safety at airports and provide air traffic controllers with detailed information about aircraft locations and movement at night and in bad weather due to the ( 1 ) association of flight plan information with aircraft position on controller displays ; ( 2 ) continuous surveillance coverage of the airport from arrival through departure ; ( 3 ) elimination of blind spots and coverage gaps ; and ( 4 ) availability of surveillance data with an accuracy and update rate suitable for , among other things , awareness in all weather conditions . in october 2003 , faa commissioned asde - x at mitchell international airport in milwaukee , wisconsin , for use in the national airspace system . asde - x came in close to its original schedule and cost baselines . the asde - x system was approximately 5 months over its original schedule baseline , but maintained its original performance baselines . in june 2002 , faa approved $80.9 million in additional funding to add asde - x at 7 additional sites . ( see table 2. ) faa is currently scheduled to deploy asde - x at 25 u.s. airports over the next 4 years and to update existing surface detection systems ( i.e. , asde - 3 ) at 9 other facilities . faa plans to introduce an upgraded asde - x system at t.f . green airport in providence , rhode island , with deployment tentatively slated for the 4th quarter of 2004 . faa is also investigating whether to add asde - x at 25 airports that use asde - 3 and airport movement area safety systems . of the five systems we reviewed , faa faced fewer schedule and cost challenges in approving asde - x for safe use in the national airspace system . this is partly because faa included stakeholders early and throughout the approval process and because of the strong technical expertise of its managers . the asde - x program office brought in stakeholders , including maintenance technicians and air traffic controllers , beginning with the concept of operations phase and continued their stakeholder involvement through the requirements - setting , design - and - development , and test - and - evaluation phases and then continued involvement throughout the deployment phase .