sls . as we found in june 2019 , ongoing development issues with the sls core stage — which includes four main engines and the software necessary to command and control the vehicle — contributed to the sls program not being able to meet the june 2020 launch date . officials from the sls program and boeing , the contractor responsible for building the core stage , provided several reasons for the delays . these reasons include the underestimation of the complexity of manufacturing and assembling the core stage engine section — where the rs - 25 engines are mated to the core stage — and those activities have taken far longer than expected . since our june 2019 report , based on our review of the program's most recent status reports , nasa has reported progress across many parts of the sls program . for example , nasa has delivered the four rs - 25 engines to michoud assembly facility . nasa has also completed qualification testing of all components of the boosters and reports that there is schedule margin remaining for the booster deliverables . in addition , nasa reports that boeing has made continued progress and expects that the core stage will be complete and ready for testing in december 2019 . completion of the core stage will represent a significant milestone for the program . however , during our review , orion program officials originally stated that this cost estimate assumes an artemis - 2 launch date of september 2022 , which is 7 months earlier than the program's agency baseline commitment date of april 2023 that forms the basis for commitments between nasa , the congress , and office of management and budget . subsequently , during the review , program officials told us that its cost projections fund one of those 7 months . as previously stated , our prior work has shown that the integration and test phase often reveals unforeseen challenges leading to cost growth and schedule delays . nasa is currently embarking on an aggressive goal to return humans to the lunar surface in 2024 . to achieve this goal , nasa not only needs sls , orion , and egs to have completed their first two test missions , but is also developing several new systems . these new systems include a lunar gateway that will orbit the moon , landers that will transport astronauts from the gateway to the lunar surface , and new space suits . human spaceflight projects face inherent technical , design , and integration risks because they are complex , specialized , and are pushing the state of the art in space technology . moreover , these programs can be very costly and span many years , which means they may also face changes in direction from administrations and the congress . meeting the 2024 goal will also be challenging given the effort needed to better manage sls , orion , and egs , coupled with the addition of the new programs , which are likely to compete for management attention and resources . nevertheless , our past work has identified a range of actions that nasa can take to better position its human spaceflight programs for success .