we would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . epa has issued such regulations for approximately 90 drinking water contaminants . public water systems , including the dod public water systems that provide drinking water to about 3 million people living and working on military installations , are required to comply with epa and state drinking water regulations . while epa has not issued legally enforceable standards for pfas in drinking water , the agency has monitored water systems in the united states for six types of pfas chemicals — including pfos and pfoa — in order to understand the nationwide occurrence of these chemicals . this monitoring effort was part of a larger framework established by the safe drinking water act to assess unregulated contaminants . under this framework , epa is to select for consideration from a list ( called the contaminant candidate list ) those unregulated contaminants that present the greatest public health concern , establish a program to monitor drinking water for unregulated contaminants , and decide whether or not to regulate at least 5 such contaminants every 5 years ( called a regulatory determination ) . epa's regulatory determinations are to be based on the following three broad statutory criteria , all of which must be met for epa to decide that a drinking water regulation is needed: the contaminant may have an adverse effect on the health of persons ; the contaminant is known to occur or there is a substantial likelihood that the contaminant will occur in public water systems with a frequency and at levels of public health concern ; and in the sole judgment of the epa administrator , regulation of such contaminant presents a meaningful opportunity for health risk reduction for persons served by public water systems . to date , pfos and pfoa are unregulated because epa has not made a positive regulatory determination for these chemicals . even when epa has not issued a regulation , epa may publish drinking water health advisories . in contrast to drinking water regulations , health advisories are nonenforceable . health advisories recommend the amount of contaminants that can be present in drinking water — “health advisory levels” — at which adverse health effects are not anticipated to occur over specific exposure durations . most recently , in may 2016 epa issued lifetime health advisories for pfos and pfoa . these advisories set the recommended health advisory level for each contaminant — or both contaminants combined — at 70 parts per trillion in drinking water . according to dod , the department also considers information in these health advisories when determining the need for cleanup action at installations with pfos and pfoa contamination . we reported in october 2017 that , following the release of epa's lifetime health advisory for pfos and pfoa in may 2016 , each of the military departments directed their installations to identify locations with any known or suspected prior release of pfos and pfoa and to address any releases that pose a risk to human health — which can include people living outside dod installations ; and test for pfos and pfoa in their drinking water and address any contamination above epa's lifetime health advisory level .