( app . i provides additional information on the development and reliability of emissions factors. ) according to epa and state agency officials , facilities use emissions factors to make most emissions determinations for the purpose of emissions reports . epa's nationwide data on emissions determinations made by both large and small facilities show that indirect methods that do not involve site - specific direct measurement were used in about 96 percent of all determinations , while direct measures , such as monitors and source tests , were used for about 4 percent of all determinations . of the 96 percent involving indirect methods , emissions factors accounted for about 80 percent and other methods accounted for 16 percent . similarly , most facilities in the states we visited relied on indirect methods . for example , about 63 percent of the emissions determinations from large industrial facilities located in north carolina relied on epa's rated emissions factors . in virginia , about 71 percent of the large facilities used emissions factors to determine emissions from at least one of their emission sources , while about 10 percent relied on monitors for at least one emission source . the percentage of emissions determinations made by a certain method may not equal the percentage of the total emissions that were quantified by that method . epa does not track the quantities of emissions determined by each quantification method , but emissions data for electric utilities that must use monitors show that such facilities account for a large percentage of the emissions of certain pollutants . for example , while monitors are used for less than 5 percent of all emissions determinations nationwide , epa's data show that in 1998 , electric utilities required to use monitors to measure their emissions of nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide accounted for about 24 percent of total national nitrogen oxide emissions and about 65 percent of total national sulfur dioxide emissions . each of the four states included in our study assesses major sources' fees , at least in part , on the basis of the number of tons of pollution they emit . each of the states requires similar information from facilities . the facilities typically provide detailed information on emissions from production lines or processes that are regulated in their permits . for example , one state requires facilities to provide , among other things , information on the raw materials they use , their operating schedule , the sulfur and energy content of fuels , the efficiency of pollution control devices , the method used to calculate emissions , and the tons of pollution emitted . in addition to providing the information described above , each state requires a company official to certify , under penalty of law , the report's truth , accuracy , and completeness . each of the four states uses the information contained in the reports to independently calculate each facility's emissions and , in the three states where facilities provided estimates of total emissions , to compare the agency's calculations of total emissions with those provided by the facility .