( see fig . according to its manufacturer , this drug should not be prescribed for individuals who are currently taking certain heart medications , as it can lower blood pressure to dangerous levels . additionally , two samples of roaccutan , a foreign version of accutane , arrived without any instructions in english . ( see fig . possible side effects of this drug include birth defects and severe mental disturbances . compounding the concerns regarding the lack of warnings and patient instructions for use , none of the other foreign pharmacies ensured patients were under the care of a physician by requiring that a prescription be submitted before the order is filled . we observed other evidence of improper handling among 13 of the 21 drug samples we received from other foreign internet pharmacies . for example , 3 samples of humulin n were not shipped in accordance with manufacturer handling specifications . despite the requirement that this drug be stored under temperature - controlled and insulated conditions , the samples we received were shipped in envelopes without insulation . ( see fig . similarly , 6 samples of other drugs were shipped in unconventional packaging , in some instances with the apparent intention of concealing the actual contents of the package . for example , the sample purporting to be oxycontin was shipped in a plastic compact disc case wrapped in brown packing tape — no other labels or instructions were included , and a sample of crixivan was shipped inside a sealed aluminum can enclosed in a box labeled “gold dye and stain remover wax.” ( see fig . additionally , 5 samples we received were damaged and included tablets that arrived in punctured blister packs , potentially exposing pills to damaging light or moisture . ( see fig . one drug manufacturer noted that damaged packaging may also compromise the validity of drug expiration dates . among the 21 drug samples from other foreign pharmacies , manufacturers determined that 19 were not approved for the u.s. market for various reasons , including that the labeling or the facilities in which they were manufactured had not been approved by fda . for example , the manufacturer of one drug noted that 2 samples we received of that drug were packaged under an alternate name used for the mexican market . for these types of drugs in particular , a prescription and physician supervision can help ensure patient safety . in addition to the lack of prescription requirements , some internet pharmacies can pose other safety risks for consumers . many foreign internet pharmacies outside of canada dispensed drugs without instructions for patient use , rarely provided warning information , and in four instances provided drugs that were not the authentic products we ordered . consumers who purchase drugs from foreign internet pharmacies that are outside of the u.s. regulatory framework may also receive drugs that are unapproved by fda and manufactured in facilities that the agency has not inspected . other risks consumers may face were highlighted by the other foreign internet pharmacies that fraudulently billed us , provided drugs we did not order , and provided false or questionable return addresses .