agency plans had to be resubmitted . the most common deficiencies for which plans had to be resubmitted related to phas' completion of the following plan components: capital improvement needs . statement of housing needs . resident participation requirement . plans were useful in helping the field office identify a number of pha needs . plans moderately to extremely useful in identifying specific pha needs ( percentage of field offices ) . plan is important for setting management priorities for types of units ( percent of field offices ) . implementing their fiscal year 2000 plans . the most commonly cited problem areas concerned the following plan components . plan components phas reported difficulty in implementing ( percentage of field offices ) . implementing particular plan components: resident participation: resident apathy made it difficult for some phas , especially small and section 8-only phas , to fulfill this requirement . capital improvement plans: phas were affected by funding constraints or shortages . statement of housing needs: small and rural phas with limited resources had difficulty gathering the relevant information , such as local demographics . small phas lacked the resources and staff to complete the plans . phas' assessment of the usefulness of the plans varied at the eight phas we visited . larger phas generally had more positive assessments than smaller phas . positive remarks: the process and plans helped the pha get other local funding , forced the pha to review and update policies , gave pha residents a vehicle for input , and are used for strategic planning , as a training aid , and as an information source for hud field offices . some phas found it hard to establish resident advisory boards . negative remarks: the process and plans took time away from other duties , and are not used . staff time or resources preparing the plans because most of the required updating of policies had already been completed before hud provided guidance for plans . template also varied . positive remarks: the template provided guidance for formatting , was sufficiently easy to use , and was improved for fiscal year 2001 . negative remarks: the template lacked flexibility , did not sufficiently define terms such as “affordability” and “quality” , and was not user friendly , as phas had to go to several hud sources to complete it . phas' we visited assessment of the resident participation requirement also varied . positive remarks: the resident participation requirement brought a cross - section of residents together , and encouraged resident participation . negative remark: the resident participation requirement was difficult to sustain because of resident apathy . and value of the plans varied . smaller phas we visited viewed the process and plans as consuming a larger portion of their resources , and as having limited value . most hud field offices and some larger phas we visited as a valuable tool to help phas define their strategic vision and monitor their progress toward management goals , and as having limited value to tenant - based section 8-only phas . hud made changes for fiscal year 2001 plans , including simplified plans for small phas , and modified requirements for tenant - based section 8-only phas .