i will be happy to answer any questions that you have . in preparing this testimony , we relied on our body of work in space programs , including previously issued gao reports on assessments of individual space programs , common problems affecting space system acquisitions , and the department of defense's ( dod ) space acquisition policy . we relied on our best practices studies , which comment on the persistent problems affecting space acquisitions , the actions dod has been taking to address these problems , and what remains to be done . we also relied on work performed in support of our 2008 annual weapons system assessment . the individual reviews were conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we conducted this performance audit from february 26 to march 4 , 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . because there are more product ideas than there is funding to pursue them , successful organizations we have studied ensure that decisions to start new product developments fit within an investment strategy . the investment strategy determines project priority as well as providing a basis for trade - off decisions against competing projects . program managers find their company's use of investment strategies helpful because it gives them confidence that their project has commitment from their organization and from their top leaders and managers , and clearly identifies where their project stands within the company's overall investment portfolio and funding priorities . organizations we have studied generally follow an evolutionary path toward meeting market needs rather than attempting to satisfy all needs in a single step . in effect , the companies evolve products , continuously improving their performance as new technologies and methods allow . these evolutionary improvements to products eventually result in full desired capability , but in multiple steps , delivering enhanced capability to the customer more quickly through a series of interim products . the approach permits program managers to focus more on design and manufacturing with a limited array of new content and technologies in a program . the organizations we have studied are able to achieve their overall investment goals by matching requirements to resources — that is time , money , technology , and people — before undertaking a new development effort . any gaps that existed are relatively small , and it is the program manager's job to quickly close them as development begins . as part of the effort to build a business case , requirements are researched and defined before programs start to ensure that they are achievable given available resources . successful organizations ensure cost estimates are complete and accurate . they hold program managers accountable for their estimates . they also develop common templates and tools to support data gathering and analysis and maintain databases of historical cost , schedule , quality , test , and performance data .