the pilot has two phases . according to fdic officials , phase i includes fdic insured institutions currently working with schools or nonprofit organizations that help students open savings accounts in conjunction with financial education programs during the 2014 to 2015 and 2015 to 2016 school years . nine banks differing in size , location , and business models were selected for the first phase . the officials added that phase ii will include fdic insured institutions beginning or expanding youth savings account programs during the 2015 to 2016 school year . fdic is collecting summary information — including data on the number of accounts opened and financial education approaches used — from pilot participants . when the pilot is complete , fdic intends to publish a report to provide financial institutions with promising approaches to working with schools and other organizations to combine financial education with access to a savings account . the office of community services at the department of health and human services' administration for children and families administers the assets for independence program . started in 1998 , the assets for independence program awards grants to community - based entities , nonprofits and state , local , and tribal government agencies that partner with nonprofits to implement an asset - based approach for assisting low income families to become economically self - sufficient according to the administration for children and families . according to agency officials , entities receiving these grants enroll participants in assets for independence projects to save earned income in special - purpose , matched savings accounts , also called individual development accounts . according to agency officials , every dollar that a participant deposits into an assets for independence individual development account is matched by the assets for independence project . match rates can vary from $1 in match funds for every $1 the participant deposits in his or her individual development account , to as much as $8 in match funds for every $1 saved . participants generally must use their individual development accounts and matching funds for a qualified expense: the purchase of a home ; the capitalization or expansion of a business ; or post - secondary educational expenses . according to agency officials , under the program , grantees are required to assist participants in the demonstration project in obtaining the skills necessary to achieve economic self - sufficiency . examples of such activities include providing financial education and credit counseling . as illustrated in table 4 , from 2010 through 2014 , according to agency officials the administration for children and families awarded 269 assets for independence grants and over $62 million to a number of organizations including nonprofits , state or local governments , tribal governments , and community development financial institutions , to name a few . table 4 also shows that the program budget for the administration for children and families since fiscal year 2010 . according to administration for children and families data through fiscal year 2010 , more than 90 percent of assets for independence projects allowed participants to pursue homeownership as an asset goal , while more than 80 percent allowed participants to pursue postsecondary education or training and business capitalization as asset goals .