it constraints . according to ogd responses to our standard set of questions , epa did not measure ( 2 ) and partially met ( 1 ) of its performance goals because of it constraints . specifically , epa did not measure the share of grants that receive routine monitoring annually because its it system could not sufficiently track the variation in due dates for individual awards . in addition , epa did not measure its performance goal to increase the share of certain state and tribal grants offered via grants.gov because the website could not handle the increased demand during arra implementation , according to ogd responses and supporting documents . epa partially met its performance goal to reduce unexpended expired funds because epa officials said that their it system could not produce accurate data for the end of the fiscal year in 2013 . budget constraints . epa partially met 1 performance goal and did not meet 1 goal due to budget constraints , according to ogd responses to our standard set of questions and supporting documents . specifically , epa partially met its goal to improve the share of expired grants closed in a timely manner because it redirected resources from closing grants due to furloughs associated with sequestration , according to ogd responses and supporting documents . epa did not meet its performance goal to develop a long - term training plan because the agency determined that it did not have the resources to do so , according to ogd responses and budget data . for example , ogd's workforce decreased from 79 full - time equivalent staff in 2009 to 71 full - time equivalent staff in 2013 . errors requiring rework . epa officials said that epa partially met its performance goal to increase the share of applications processed in a timely manner , because errors in processing application packages required the agency to rework several packages . according to epa officials and agency workload analyses , in some cases , these errors resulted from a large workload for staff who also managed arra grants . in other cases , staff that had a small grants management workload made errors because they were not familiar with policy and it requirements . these officials said that the complexity of some grant projects was also a factor . for five performance goals , epa and ogd reported that not meeting or not measuring the goals did not affect epa's grants management activities because the agency either mitigated the potential negative effect of missing the performance goal , or the negative effect was minimal , according to our analysis of ogd responses and supporting documents ( see app . ii ) . for example , epa reported that it mitigated the potential effect of missing epa's performance goal to increase the share of grants management staff whose performance plans include grants management . specifically , epa determined that it could build staff's grants management activities into their performance by providing staff managers with ( 1 ) additional performance guidance and ( 2 ) individual and agency - level grants management performance data for comparison , according to ogd responses and epa performance guidance documents .