security architecture . the support provided to secure information , systems , and operations . technology infrastructure . the functional characteristics , capabilities , and interconnections of the hardware , software , and telecommunications . how are we investing our funds to best enable the warfighting mission ? to produce a version of the architecture according to the above scope , dod created 12 of the 26 recommended products identified in the dod architecture framework ( dodaf ) — the structural guide that the department has established for developing an architecture — including 7 products that the dodaf designates as essential . table 5 shows the dodaf products included in the architecture . ( see app . iv for a complete list of the dodaf products. ) version 3.0 of dod's business enterprise architecture partially satisfies each of the three major requirements specified in the act . with respect to the first requirement , regarding an information infrastructure , the act cites four requirements , each of which version 3.0 partially addresses , as described below . comply with federal accounting , financial management , and reporting requirements . partial compliance is achieved based on the architecture's inclusion of the standard financial information structure ( sfis ) , which includes a standard accounting classification structure ( sacs ) that can allow dod to standardize financial data elements necessary to support budgeting , accounting , cost / performance management , and external reporting . the sfis and sacs are based upon mandated requirements defined by external regulatory entities , such as the u.s. treasury , omb , the federal accounting standards advisory board , and the joint financial management improvement program . as a result , sfis can enable compliance with these entities' requirements if implemented properly . sfis , while not complete , has been used to develop and incorporate business rules in the architecture for such areas as managerial cost accounting , general ledger , and federally owned property . business rules are important because they explicitly translate important business policies and procedures into specific , unambiguous rules that govern what can and cannot be done . however , the architecture does not provide for compliance with all federal accounting , financial , and reporting requirements . for example , it does not do the following: it does not contain the information needed to achieve compliance with the department of the treasury's united states standard general ledger . in particular , the logical data model ( ov - 7 ) does not contain all the data elements or attributes that are needed to facilitate information sharing and reconciliation with the treasury . the architecture also does not include a strategy for achieving compliance with the treasury's general ledger . for example , it does not state whether dod will adopt the treasury data model or simply map its data model to the one for the treasury . program officials agreed and stated that this limitation is being reviewed and may be addressed in version 3.1 of the architecture . it does not address the locations where specified activities are to occur and where the systems are to be located .