we also contacted enforcement officials in other sec offices as appropriate . to address our first objective — evaluating the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) division of enforcement's ( enforcement ) internal processes and information systems for planning , tracking , and closing investigations and planned changes to these processes and systems — we reviewed relevant sec and enforcement documentation and data , including the agency's strategic plan , annual performance reports , performance measurement data , investigation and enforcement action data from the case activity tracking system ( cats ) , and enforcement personnel data . we also reviewed guidance on enforcement's intranet — enforcenet — to determine internal procedures for conducting and managing the investigation process and obtained documentation and attended demonstrations for the first phase of enforcement's new planned successor system for cats ( the hub ) and for the base model system for the hub ( m&m ) . we also reviewed prior gao reports on sec and enforcement processes and information technology systems , as well as federal internal control standards . further , we interviewed the sec chairman , two commissioners , officials from sec's offices of the executive director and general counsel , and enforcement officials in washington and the agency's new york , boston , and philadelphia regional offices . to address our second objective — evaluating the implementation of sec's fair fund responsibilities — we reviewed a 2005 gao report that discussed sec's fair fund process , as well as relevant legislation . we also obtained and analyzed summary fair fund statistics and documentation and data on individual funds , as provided by enforcement . however , enforcement did not provide data on 24 fair fund plans that were identified in our 2005 report . among the reasons enforcement officials cited for the omissions were that some of the 24 funds had been fully distributed and thus were not included in an information system established in 2006 that was designed to track only ongoing plans . however , these 24 fair fund plans are generally smaller ( accounting for about $118 million or 1 percent of total fair funds ) , and their exclusion does not change our overall conclusion that distributions have been limited . in addition to fair fund data , we reviewed sec guidance on fair funds , including rules on distribution plans , tax treatment , selection of consultants , and distribution procedures . we also reviewed fair fund guidance from the u.s. department of labor . in addition to discussing the fair fund program with relevant sec and enforcement officials , we interviewed six consultants hired to design and implement fair fund plans , attorneys , consumer advocates , an academic expert , and a representative of a trade group for a retirement plan service provider trade group . to address the third objective — evaluating enforcement's efforts to coordinate investigative activities with other sec divisions and federal and state law enforcement agencies — we reviewed previous gao reports on mutual fund trading abuses and enforcement's coordination efforts with law enforcement . we also reviewed relevant sec documentation , including internal referral policies , and guidance regarding coordination between enforcement and outside law enforcement authorities .