( see fig . the huge budgetary pressures that we are sure to face in the coming years require that we set priorities so that any benefit expansions are in line with available resources . in this regard , the application of basic health insurance principles to any proposed benefit could help moderate the cost for both beneficiaries and taxpayers . under these principles , beneficiaries receive protections against the risk of catastrophic medical expenses while remaining conscious of the cost of care . at the same time , it is important that benefit expansion proposals include targeting mechanisms to ensure that federal support is directed at the beneficiaries with the greatest financial risk . nevertheless , as i have stated previously , no matter how well designed a new benefit may be , adding benefits without fundamentally reforming the existing program will merely hasten the exhaustion of medicare's hospital insurance ( hi ) trust fund and the draining of general revenues . any benefit expansion will also serve to make our long - range fiscal challenge even greater . ideally , medicare reforms should be designed to improve our long - range fiscal situation . at a minimum , they should be designed so as not to make our long - range fiscal challenge worse . extensive research and development have led to new and improved prescription drug therapies that , in some instances , have replaced other health care interventions . for example , new medications for the treatment of ulcers have virtually eliminated the need for some surgical treatments . as a result of these innovations , the importance of prescription drugs as part of health care has grown . however , not all new drug therapies serve to reduce the need for more invasive and expensive medical procedures . some new drug therapies are substitutes for already existing , less expensive , ones and may not appreciably improve efficacy or reduce side effects . others may be used more for making lifestyle enhancements than for extending life or treating a serious medical condition . spending on the new drug therapies , along with the mass media advertising of prescription drugs , serves to significantly increase total drug spending as a component of health care costs . the medicare benefit package , largely designed in 1965 , provides virtually no outpatient drug coverage . beneficiaries may fill this coverage gap in various ways . all beneficiaries have access to individually purchased supplemental policies — medigap — when they first become eligible for medicare at age 65 . those policies that include drug coverage tend to be expensive and provide only limited benefits . some beneficiaries have access to coverage through employer - sponsored policies or medicare health maintenance organizations ( hmo ) . in recent years , coverage through these sources has become more expensive and less widely available . beneficiaries whose income falls below certain thresholds may qualify for medicaid or other public programs . in recent years , prescription drug expenditures have grown substantially , both in total and as a share of all heath care outlays .