specifications . cms made changes to cqm specifications — that is , the documentation that describes to providers , technology developers , and others how data on cqms were to be collected through ehrs . these changes were made to correct previously identified errors and to help ensure the feasibility of implementing cqms in the electronic format — that is , to ensure that the required data are readily available or can be collected in ehrs without undue burden . problems with feasibility can compromise the accuracy or completeness of the data . certification criteria . to address providers' concern that their 2011- edition ehrs did not collect all of the data elements necessary to calculate the cqms , onc modified the cqm - related certification criteria . specifically , 2014-edition ehrs must collect each of the data elements associated with a specific cqm to be certified for that measure . certification program . the program for certifying 2011-edition ehrs did not test whether the ehr system correctly collected and calculated the cqms . however , beginning with the certification of 2014-edition ehrs , the certification bodies and testing laboratories will test whether ehrs accurately collect and calculate cqms . these tests will be performed using a certification testing tool developed by onc , known as cypress . further , beginning in 2014 , the certification bodies will be required by onc to conduct specific annual surveillance activities to determine whether 2014-edition ehrs are functioning as intended after being implemented by providers . cqms have been identified as a priority area for these surveillance activities , which may help to inform cms and onc on whether the changes they have made to the specifications , certification criteria , and certification program are improving the reliability of cqms , as intended , and whether further changes are needed . cms and onc officials indicated the changes made thus far should help to address reliability concerns , but provider experience with 2014-edition ehrs will be an important gauge of the effectiveness of the changes . furthermore , there are still issues that could result in reliability problems , hindering cms's ability to use the data for its quality measurement activities . for example , after ehrs are certified as 2014-edition ehrs , the agencies do not require them to be recertified following updates to the specifications , which may be made annually or more frequently , or following updates to the certification testing tool . testing bodies use the certification testing tool — cypress — to test that ehrs accurately export , calculate , and electronically submit the data . this tool includes synthetic patient data used in the testing process . vendors also have access to the testing tool prior to submitting their ehr products for certification . providers may report cqms based on and tested to different requirements . cms has taken some steps to mitigate the potential effect of these issues on the reliability of cqm data submitted by professionals who electronically submit cqm data by requiring them to report cqms collected using ehr technology based on and tested to the most recent version of the electronic specifications .