relicensing . during relicensing , ferc staff are to review the engineering studies as well as information such as historical hydrological data and extreme weather events , which also inform their safety evaluation of the licensee's application . ferc officials also stated that as a result of their relicensing review , they might alter the articles of the new license before it is issued should their reviews indicate that environmental conditions affecting the dam's safety have changed . we found that ferc generally met its requirement to evaluate dam safety during the relicensing process for the 42 dams we reviewed . during the relicensing process , we found that for the dams we reviewed , ferc staff review safety information such as the past reports , inspections , and studies conducted by ferc , the licensee , and independent consultants and determine whether or not a dam owner operated and maintained its dam safely . according to ferc staff , the safety review for relicensing is generally a summary of prior safety and inspection information , rather than an analysis of new safety information , unless the licensee proposes a change to the operation or structure . ferc's review during relicensing for the high hazard and significant hazard dams we reviewed was generally consistent with its guidance and safety memo template , though the extent of its review of low hazard dams varied . ( see fig . for example , for the 22 high and significant hazard dams we reviewed , the safety relicensing memos followed the template and nearly all included summaries of hydrology studies , stability analyses , prior ferc inspections , and applicable independent consultant reports . for the 20 low hazard dams , ferc staff noted that some requirements in the template are not applicable or have been exempted and therefore were not reviewed during relicensing . the potential failure mode analysis is to occur during the recurring independent consultant inspection and is conducted by the licensee's independent consultant along with other key dam safety stakeholders . as previously explained , the analysis incorporates the engineering studies and identifies events that could cause a dam to potentially fail . during the potential failure mode analysis , ferc , the licensee , the consultant , and other key dam safety stakeholders are to refer to the engineering studies to establish environmental conditions that inform dam failure scenarios , the risks associated with these failures , and their consequences for an individual dam . further , according to a ferc white paper on risk analysis , ferc is beginning to use information related to potential failure modes as inputs to an analysis tool that quantifies risks at each dam . with this information , ferc expects to make relative risk estimates of dams within its inventory and establish priorities for further study or remediation of risks at individual dams , according to the white paper . ( see fig . while low hazard dams were more inconsistently reviewed during relicensing , ferc staff also noted that there has been a recent emphasis to more closely review , replace , or conduct engineering studies , such as the stability study , for low hazard dams during relicensing .