doj had no comments on our report . this complicates interpretation of these data . for more information on expenses , see appendix iii . through its examinations , irs can analyze the operations and finances of tax - exempt organizations and propose tax assessments or changes to exempt status when necessary . in general , irs attempts to select entities that it believes are likely to have violated requirements , such as unauthorized use of an organization's assets , or engaging in political activity . on the basis of these examinations , irs can accept the form 990 as filed or can change the status of the entity , impose excise taxes for certain types of violations , or revoke the tax - exempt status if the violations are serious enough . whatever approach to measuring compliance eo adopts , it should be consistent with our recommendation that eo develop quantitative , results - oriented compliance goals and additional performance measures that can be used to assess the impact of its activities on compliance . we also received technical comments from irs , which we incorporated into the final report where appropriate . we plan to send copies of this report to the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of internal revenue , the assistant attorney general for administration , doj , and other interested parties . the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact us at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or mctiguej@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs are on the last page of this report . gao staff members who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . this report ( 1 ) describes what is known about the number , type , size , and other characteristics of 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) charitable organizations ; ( 2 ) describes irs oversight activities for charitable organizations ; ( 3 ) determines how irs assesses its oversight efforts of charitable organizations to ensure they are meeting their charitable purposes ; and ( 4 ) determines how irs collaborates with state charity regulators and u.s . attorneys to identify and prosecute organizations suspected of engaging in fraudulent or other criminal activity . to address the first objective , we reviewed internal revenue service ( irs ) forms and publications . we also analyzed data from the irs's statistics of income ( soi ) files for form 990 , return of organization exempt from income tax and form 990-ez short form , return of organization exempt from income tax for tax year 2011 ( the most recent year available ) . although private foundations are considered charitable organizations , we did not analyze data from form 990-pf , return of private foundation or form 990-n , e - postcard because the data for these organizations is less complete and has other limitations . these limitations included total expenses not broken out into program service , management and general , and fundraising expenses ; and private foundations not identified by mission category .