inconsistent guidance . our review of dod's guidance found inconsistent language describing when dod should provide information to state about new acsas that could affect dod's transfer of such information . specifically , the cjcsis on international agreements and acsas note that dod should provide state with information on new acsas no later than 20 days after an agreement is signed . however , dod directives on international agreements and acsas indicate that the relevant deadline is no later than 20 days after an agreement enters into force , which can be days or years after an acsa is signed . dod officials noted that the officials who drafted the guidance may not have understood the difference between the signing and entry into force of international agreements . limitations in training . as of december 2019 , dod's standard online training on acsas did not address responsibilities to share information about newly signed agreements with state . specifically , while dod's two required training courses on acsas include some aspects of negotiation and signing new agreements , neither mentions dod's responsibility to report signed acsas to state . according to dod officials , the requirement may be included during in - person training conducted by personnel from dod's office of general counsel for dod's combatant command officials . congress depends on state and dod for information to oversee the use of acsas , which dod officials have cited as important tools for furthering national security interests , particularly involving activities with broad coalitions . without timely notification of entry into force , congress will not have full information about countries and international organizations to and from which dod can and may already be using acsas to transfer logistic support , supplies , and services . cjcs instruction 2120.01d contains policy and procedural guidance concerning the use of acsa authorities , and addresses , among other things , maintenance of acsa transaction orders . specifically , the instruction establishes agatrs as dod's system of record for the joint staff , combatant commands , and the military services to manage acsa orders ; describes processes to execute an acsa order ; and notes that agatrs will be used to fully record all transfers of acsa support , including documentation such as invoices . additionally , federal standards for internal control state that management should use quality information to make informed decisions and achieve agency objectives . quality information is defined as information that is accurate , complete , and provided on a timely basis , among other attributes , and should include relevant data obtained from reliable sources . however , based on our analysis of a generalizable sample of orders , we found that dod's acsa system of record lacked quality data to track the status of acsa order reimbursement . lack of experience . dod officials told us that the relevant dod officials had overlooked the responsibility to send information to state about newly signed acsas , at times because of a lack of experience .