it goals . the paperwork reduction act and the clinger - cohen act require agencies to establish goals that address how it contributes to program productivity , efficiency , effectiveness , and service delivery to the public . we have previously reported that leading organizations define specific goals , objectives , and measures , use a diversity of measure types , and describe how it outputs and outcomes impact operational customer and agency program delivery requirements . the agencies generally had the types of goals outlined in the paperwork reduction act and the clinger - cohen act . however , five agencies did not have one or more of the goals required by the paperwork reduction act and the clinger - cohen act . it is important that agencies specify clear goals and objectives to set the focus and direction for it performance . it performance measures . the paperwork reduction act , the clinger - cohen act , and an executive order require agencies to establish a variety of it performance measures — such as those related to how it contributes to program productivity , efficiency , and effectiveness — and to monitor the actual - versus - expected performance using those measures . although the agencies largely had one or more of the required performance measures in place , these measures were not always linked to the agencies' enterprisewide it goals . moreover , few agencies monitored actual - versus - expected performance for all of their enterprisewide it goals . specifically , although some agencies tracked actual - versus - expected outcomes for the it performance measures in their performance plans or accountability reports and / or for specific it projects , they generally did not track the performance measures that were specified in their irm plans . as we have previously reported , an effective it performance management system offers a variety of benefits , including serving as an early warning indicator of problems and the effectiveness of corrective actions ; providing input to resource allocation and planning ; and providing periodic feedback to employees , customers , stakeholders , and the general public about the quality , quantity , cost , and timeliness of products and services . moreover , without enterprisewide performance measures that are tracked against actual results , agencies lack critical information about whether their overall it activities are achieving expected goals . benchmarking . the clinger - cohen act requires agencies to quantitatively benchmark agency process performance against public - and private - sector organizations , where comparable processes and organizations exist . benchmarking is used because there may be external organizations that have more innovative or more efficient processes than their own processes . seven agencies in our review had mechanisms in place — such as policies and strategies — related to benchmarking their it processes . in general , however , agencies' benchmarking decisions were ad hoc . few agencies had developed a mechanism to identify comparable external private - or public - sector organizations and processes and / or had policies related to benchmarking , although all but 10 of the agencies provided examples of benchmarking that they had performed .