seven state agencies had other policies . for example , 1 state agency reported that it authorized its case managers to distribute the collections based on the preferences of the custodial parent and another state reported it would hold as much as 1 month of support received before it was due and refund the remaining amount to the noncustodial parent . in addition to written comments , officials from hhs , fms , and irs provided technical comments . ( 2 ) what are the causes of undistributed collections ? as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date . at that time we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , the secretary of the treasury , and other interested parties . ( 3 ) what are state agencies doing to reduce undistributed collections ? ( 4 ) how has ocse assisted state agencies' efforts to reduce the amount of undistributed collections ? we obtained information from several sources that provided some data for all of the objectives . we conducted a mail survey of all 54 iv - d child support enforcement agencies . forty - eight state agencies responded to the survey . we did not assess the reliability of the data the state agencies reported in response to our survey . however , we reviewed the data for completeness and reasonableness . we conducted site visits to 6 state agencies . we selected california , florida , iowa , new york , texas , and virginia because they represented diversity in amounts of undistributed collections , and geographical location , and they provided examples of statewide and county administered programs . we interviewed federal and state officials , reviewed related reports and analyzed applicable laws and regulations . in addition , we took specific steps to address each of the objectives . to address how undistributed collections have changed , we analyzed ocse data for fiscal years 1999 to 2002 reported by state agencies . the fiscal year 1999 data was the earliest year with data comparable to fiscal year 2002 ; the most current data available at the time of our review . we assessed the reliability of undistributed collections data reported to ocse and found that the data were inconsistent and unreliable . we also reviewed state and federal reports that discussed issues associated with calculating and reporting undistributed collections . to identify the causes of undistributed collections , steps state agencies have taken to reduce undistributed collections , and assistance ocse has provided to state agencies , we reviewed relevant research and audit reports ; examined ocse guidance and documents related to funded projects ; and interviewed child support advocates and experts . we conducted our work between may 2003 and march 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for more details on our scope and methodology and appendix ii for a copy of our survey .