vendors need improvement . gao - 11-355 . washington , d.c.: june 8 , 2011 . warfighter support: cultural change needed to improve how dod plans for and manages operational contract support . gao - 10-829t . washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2010 . warfighter support: dod needs to improve its planning for using contractors to support future military operations . we agree that the scorecard is not such a replacement . however , as noted in the report , africom officials stated that they plan to incorporate ocs scorecards into the defense readiness reporting system , the system used to gauge readiness across dod . this recommendation was intended to ensure that ocs scorecard assessment standards are clearly defined so that africom can accurately assess ocs actions taken by subordinate commands . without improvements , either full or partial incorporation of the scorecard assessments into dod's readiness reporting system could compromise the integrity of that system by capturing an inaccurate picture of ocs readiness . dod concurred with our fourth recommendation , that the secretary of defense , in coordination with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , direct joint staff to clarify what types of contractor personnel should be accounted for in its guidance on personnel status reports . in its comments , dod stated that chairman of the joint chiefs of staff manual 3150.13c , joint personnel reporting structure - personnel manual provides policy and guidance on what types of contractor personnel to account for in personnel status reports , but that additional training and amplifying local procedures issued by africom's personnel directorate may be needed to fully implement its provisions and ensure consistent interpretation of the guidance . as we noted in the report , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff guidance identifies spot as the designated web - based contractor database and lists the types of contractor personnel included in spot — including u.s. , local national , host nation , and third country national — but it does not clearly specify the types of contractor personnel to report in the daily personnel status report , and as a result , service component officials at some forward operating sites inconsistently included various types of contractors in personnel status reports . while we believe that additional guidance provided by africom's personnel directorate would provide further clarification on this issue , we continue to believe that clarifying joint staff guidance to clearly specify the types of contractor personnel to be accounted for in joint personnel status reports would provide africom better assurance that its staff consistently provides it with comprehensive information . dod did not concur with the fifth recommendation , that the secretary of defense , in coordination with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , direct africom to develop area of responsibility - wide contractor personnel accountability guidance on or before december 2015 , when the current guidance expires , that clarifies which types of contractor personnel should be accounted for using spot and when spot accountability requirements should be incorporated into contracts . dod stated that there is not a requirement for the secretary of defense to direct africom to develop this guidance .