below are key examples . fort benning the recommendations report suggests transferring responsibility for schools to chattahoochee county vice muscogee county ( five of seven ddess schools are within chattahoochee county ) . it noted that installation officials had expressed concerns about quality of chattahoochee county schools , but noted ddess students would represent the vast majority of student enrollment within the lea . it expected that most students would still be educated on base and most teachers still have opportunity to teach . it said the pupil - teacher ratios and the per pupil expenditures of the ddess and chattahoochee county are already comparable ( gao note: data suggest less comparability in costs than stated here ) . the white book points out that salaries and benefits make up 90 percent , 86 percent , and 84 percent of the fort benning ddess , chattahoochee county , and muscogee county school budgets . the white book indicates per pupil expenditures of approximately $8,244 , $7,345 , and $5,956 for fort benning ddess , chattahoochee county , and muscogee county respectively . the white book points out that fort benning ddess students test results ranged from the 52nd to 65th percentile for grades 3 , 5 , and 8 . chattahoochee county and muscogee county test scores were mostly above predicted scores for grades 3 , 5 , and 8 . the blue book shows that four of the benning ddess schools were deemed underperforming and three overperformed . it confirms muscogee test scores were mostly deemed over performing for 5th grade but some underperforming for 8th grade , while chattahoochee's were deemed underperforming for 8th grade . fort campbell the recommendations report suggests transferring responsibility for schools to lea , christian county versus clarksville - montgomery county . the report notes that considering all factors , christian county , kentucky has higher quality measures than clarksville - montgomery county , tennessee . the white book notes salaries and benefits make up 88 percent , 64 percent and 64 percent respectively of the fort campbell ddess , and clarksville - montgomery county and christian county school budgets . fort campbell's per pupil expenditure , which is projected to be about $7,962 in fiscal year 04 , has been rising in recent years due to increasing costs and decreasing enrollment ( reason for decreasing enrollment not indicated ) . clarksville - montgomery's per pupil expenditure in fiscal year 2004 is $5,166 but will decline because of recent budget cuts . christian county's per pupil cost is about $ 6,589 in fiscal year 2004 but notes escalating salary costs coupled with relatively stable enrollment will likely lead to increased per pupil expenditure . the white book indicates that fort campbell ddess students performed at or above the 60th percentile for most subjects and grades . performance of lea schools of both districts was mixed . clarksville - montgomery matched or exceeded predicted scores in seven of nine instances cited . the christian county matched or exceeded in five of nine instances cited .