exit . design baseline should be established and balanced across cost , schedule , performance , and risk considerations over the investment's lifecycle ; system risks should be identified and mitigation plans should be in place . the spo did not follow the defined process for conducting technical reviews defined in the respective task orders to guide each review . however , the task orders do not define entry and exit criteria . rather , they list a set of documents that the contractor is to provide and the spo is to review . for example , for the block 1 cdr , the relevant task order requires that the contractor deliver , among other documents , ( 1 ) baselined component and system requirements , ( 2 ) interface descriptions ( i.e. , descriptions of the data to be exchanged and the protocols used to exchange the data ) , and . instead , program officials told us that they used the requirements ( 3 ) all identified risks and mitigation plans for those risks . however , the task orders do not associate these documents with either entry or exit criteria , and they do not specify characteristics or qualities that the documents are to satisfy . without explicit entry and exit criteria , the basis for beginning and e the technical reviews is unclear , thus increasing the risk that a program will be allowed to proceed and begin the next phase of development before it is ready to do so . in fact , this risk was realized for sbinet . technical reviews were concluded without adequate justification , which ultimately resulted in problems that required additional time and resources to fix . for example: nding noc / soc requirements review . at this review , the contractor did not deliver a requirements traceability matrix , as required by the relevant task order , until almost a month after the review was completed . nonetheless , program officials stated that they concluded the review in june 2008 , without knowing whether the applicable higher - level system requirements were fully satisfied . block 1 cdr . for this review , the contractor delivered ( 1 ) the baselined component and syste ( 3 ) all identified risks and mitigation plans for those risks . m requirements , ( 2 ) the interface descriptions , and however , these deliverables did not demonstrate that all component - leve requirements were baselined and interface descriptions we as we previously reported , baselined requirements associated with the noc / soc were not adequately defined at the time of the cdr , as evidenced by the fact that they were significantly changed 2 months later.program officials stated that while they knew that requirements were not adequately baselined at this review , they believed that the interface requirements were understood well enough to begin system development . however , this was also not the case . specifically , 39 of 90 noc / soc interface requirements were removed from the baseline , and 2 new interface requirements were added after cdr . l re understood . further , all relevant risks were not identified , and not all identified r had mitigation plans .