to police compliance with the oecd tied aid rules . to protect u.s. exporters when foreign aid that meets oecd rules would nevertheless undermine the exporters' competitive position for winning future commercial sales . the following outline presents specific criteria that have been developed for matching foreign tied aid offers under the third circumstance . i. u.s. response to foreign tied aid when u.s. exporter is not a . appendix iii provides further information on our scope and methodology . congress first established the tied aid credit program in 1983 to counter foreign tied aid offers and to encourage oecd members to negotiate a reduction in the use of tied aid credits , as shown in figure 1 . in the export - import bank act amendments of 1986 , congress established the tied aid credit fund , also known as the war chest . this fund was intended to ( 1 ) make other countries aware of the united states' willingness to challenge foreign tied aid offers when u.s. exporters were in a disadvantageous competitive position and ( 2 ) create bargaining leverage in u.s. negotiations with the other oecd members to discipline or set rules for tied aid . oecd negotiators concluded a landmark tied aid agreement in 1992 , known as the helsinki package . neither the july 2001 agreement between ex - im bank and treasury nor the recently enacted ex - im bank reauthorization act changed this dynamic . it established a comprehensive framework for the use of tied aid based on two major principles: ( 1 ) tied aid should not be used for commercially viable projects and ( 2 ) higher - income developing countries should be graduated from eligibility for tied aid credits . in 1994 , ex - im bank established the tied aid capital projects fund , which incorporated the tied aid credit fund . the $150 million fund was established to provide the united states with the means to support its efforts to discipline tied aid in oecd and to match trade - distorting foreign tied aid offers that were undermining u.s. exporters' competitiveness . appendix i provides more information on activity under the u.s. tied aid program . ex - im bank became concerned that the fund's restrictive criteria might have discouraged u.s. exporters from bidding on projects in which tied aid was offered by foreign competitors . in 1998 , ex - im bank initiated an internal policy review , followed by an interagency review with treasury in 1999 . these reviews resulted in modifications of the criteria for matching foreign tied aid offers , making them somewhat less restrictive . the review also resulted in a set of separate criteria that were designed to facilitate the matching of foreign tied aid credits in africa . although the policy review was intended to ease the criteria and facilitate additional opportunities for tied aid matching , the lasting effects of international events , such as the asian financial crisis of 1997 and the enhancement of the highly indebted poor countries initiative in 1999 , as well as reductions in the level of foreign tied aid offers , had a significant impact on its implementation .