this can be done in several ways . for instance , the u.s . citizenship and immigration service involves its employees through focus groups , project teams , and meetings with union representatives . information gathered from focus groups will be used to create feedback surveys . we found that state did not effectively involve employees in the process and directed the reorganization in a top - down fashion . for example , it excluded career officials in deciding who the acting office directors would be . only in response to employee concerns was a career official appointed to the panel . in addition , according to american foreign service association ( afsa ) officials , state did not effectively engage afsa , the union that represents fsos . state did not focus on key principles and priorities from the outset of the merger , such as adherence to sound personnel management principles . for example , the new organization must have a clear set of core values and priorities that serve as a framework to assist in the creation of a new culture and to define the attributes that are intrinsically important to the new organization . aside from stating that the placement process would be done fairly and in accordance with personnel laws and regulations , state's informal implementation guide never explicitly identified a set of principles to guide internal decision making . in addition , a senior t bureaus official criticized the smp for focusing on only the most basic legal or regulatory aspects of the personnel placement process and not adhering to sound personnel management principles . according to this official , this included not finalizing office mission and position descriptions and not extensively involving career and other officials , such as ones from hr , from the beginning of the reorganization . state did not set implementation goals and a timeline to build momentum and show progress from day one . at a minimum , successful mergers and acquisitions have careful and thorough 30- , 60- , and 90-day plans in place well before the effective implementation date , as well as a timeline for achieving their goals . this can help an organization track its progress toward intermediate and long - range goals , show progress , help pinpoint performance shortfalls and gaps , and suggest midcourse corrections . however , the smp's informal implementation guide did not set goals or a timeline . smp officials said that they did not set a timeline for the reorganization because they wanted to complete the reorganization quickly and did not know how long it would take . in addition , state did not craft the reorganization with reference to its larger workforce planning goals in mind . moreover , it did not make use of a september 2004 baseline workforce allocation study performed by the hr bureau in anticipation of the reorganization , which was based on data from state's domestic staffing model . according to state officials , this study was made available to the task force formed to respond to the state ig's recommendations , but was not provided to the smp . as a result , p workload imbalances or staffing gaps identified in the report were not addressed .