education and awareness . cisa disseminates educational materials to raise awareness of election security - related issues and services available to state and local election officials . for example , cisa provides a web - based training course to help election officials understand the principles of information technology management and has developed guidance to help states and localities adopt recommended information technology practices to improve their security posture . according to cisa , as of november 2019 , 1,201 individuals had completed the online course . further , cisa conducted two election infrastructure tabletop exercises known as “tabletop the vote” in august 2018 and june 2019 to help the election infrastructure subsector community collaborate and identify best practices and areas for improvement in election - related cyber incident planning , identification , response , and recovery . the 2018 tabletop exercise included 44 states , the district of columbia , 16 federal entities , the national association of secretaries of state , and the national association of state election directors . according to cisa officials , the june 2019 exercise included 47 states , the district of columbia , 15 federal entities , the national association of secretaries of state , the national association of state election directors , the national governors association , and the national conference of state legislatures . cisa officials also noted that cisa personnel , including regional personnel , have presented at numerous national and state meetings of election officials , such as the election center's annual conference in august 2019 . in addition , as part of cisa's last mile initiative , the agency collaborates with state and local election officials to create customized posters that highlight efforts to strengthen election security . the purpose of the posters is to describe the state's or local jurisdiction's election infrastructure assets and systems , characterize risks , and offer specific measures it should implement to mitigate those risks . election officials can present the posters to voters , lawmakers , and their own personnel to bolster confidence in the security of their election systems . as of november 2019 , cisa reported that it had delivered last mile posters to 19 states ( including six states since the 2018 election ) and 1,202 local election jurisdictions . information sharing and analysis . cisa collects and analyzes election security - related information — such as threat indicators , incident alerts , and vulnerability data — and shares this information with election officials to help them assess cybersecurity controls , detect threats , and mitigate risks . to further this goal , cisa partnered with the center for internet security and the election infrastructure subsector government coordinating council to create the election infrastructure information sharing and analysis center ( ei - isac ) in february 2018 . state and local election offices can join the ei - isac at no cost and receive election - focused cyber defense tools and products . according to the director of the ei - isac , as of november 2019 , its members included 50 states , the district of columbia , and 2,267 local jurisdictions . cisa officials stated that the ei - isac is the primary mechanism that cisa uses to exchange information throughout the election community .