however , the 4 other components did not . this revision is expected to be finalized in 2017 . dhs component officials told us that they were working to improve their ability to identify non - major acquisitions . for example , officials from 4 components stated that they were using new guidance provided in a 2016 update to the dhs instruction manual to more consistently categorize all acquisitions as ( 1 ) capital acquisitions , ( 2 ) service acquisitions , or ( 3 ) simple procurements . the guidance includes a series of yes - or - no questions that acquisition officials answer to categorize a particular acquisition . the components lack effective procedures for identifying those acquisitions . citizenship and immigration services , u.s. coast guard , and u.s. secret service . for example , fema officials said they have used the new guidance to determine whether acquisitions considered procurements should actually be managed as non - major acquisitions . officials from the other components reported efforts such as updating component policies and performing ongoing reviews to identify which activities are acquisitions . however , it was unclear when these various efforts to identify the full scope of all non - major acquisitions would be complete because no timelines had been established by dhs headquarters , which may have resulted in components losing traction in their efforts . federal internal controls standards establish that management should obtain relevant data from reliable sources in a timely manner . until components have identified all of their non - major acquisitions , they cannot effectively manage their acquisition portfolios or apply the level and type of oversight that complies with department policy . having an established time frame should help ensure that the actions underway are seen to completion . in addition to the components' inability to identify all non - major acquisitions , our analysis and information received from component officials identified a number of data reliability issues . specifically , our analysis found that the data provided by 8 of the 11 components were not complete . for example , several life cycle cost estimates did not include government personnel costs . in addition , most of the components that reported active acquisitions could not provide approved baselines supporting the data they provided , in part because some components did not require approved baselines . officials from 6 components also acknowledged they have issues with data reliability , specifically with accuracy and completeness , which could hinder their caes' ability to manage non - major acquisitions in accordance with dhs acquisition policy . our analysis of all non - major acquisition data provided by the dhs components found that the data were complete for over 60 percent of the acquisitions reported and that data for active acquisitions had fewer issues with incomplete data than acquisitions that were post - foc . in responding to our requests for information , 5 components did not provide a complete foc date or cost information for at least one of their active non - major acquisitions . although the components have different requirements for documenting such information , key acquisition management best practices recommend that all acquisitions have well defined requirements and establish realistic cost and schedule estimates .