gao - 09-342 . washington , d.c.: march 25 , 2009 . human capital: opportunities exist to build on recent progress to strengthen dod's civilian human capital strategic plan . gao - 09-235 . washington , d.c.: february 10 , 2009 . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . high risk series: an update . gao - 09-271 . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . establishing the defense acquisition workforce joint assessment team . according to an at&l official , the team will now focus its efforts on identifying , tracking , and reporting information on contractor personnel supporting the acquisition workforce — including developing a common definition to be used across the department . the secretary of defense recently announced that efforts will begin in fiscal year 2010 to increase the size of the acquisition workforce by converting 11,000 contractor personnel to government positions and hiring an additional 9,000 government personnel by 2015 . dod faces significant challenges in assessing and overseeing its acquisition workforce to ensure that it has the capacity to acquire needed goods and services and monitor the work of contractors . while dod's recent and planned actions could help address many of these challenges , the department has yet to determine the acquisition workforce that it needs or develop comprehensive information about contractor personnel — including the skill sets , functions performed , or length of time for which they are used . in addition , without guidance on the appropriate circumstances under which contractor personnel may perform acquisition work , dod runs the risk of not maintaining sufficient institutional capacity to perform its missions , paying more than necessary for the work that it needs , or losing control over and accountability for mission - related policy and program decisions . until dod maintains more comprehensive information on its contractor personnel , it will continue to have insufficient information regarding the range of skills and the functions performed by this key component of the acquisition workforce . without having this information on a departmentwide basis , dod runs the risk of not having the right number and appropriate mix of civilian , military , and contractor personnel it needs to accomplish its missions . in our report released march 25 , 2009 , we made several recommendations to the secretary of defense to better ensure that dod's acquisition workforce is the right size with the right skills and that the department is making the best use of its resources . we recommended that the secretary: collect and track data on contractor personnel who supplement the acquisition workforce — including their functions performed , skill sets , and length of service — and conduct analyses using these data to inform acquisition workforce decisions . identify and update on an ongoing basis the number and skill sets of the total acquisition workforce that the department needs to fulfill its mission .