pub . the following are the 37 states that have entered into an agreement with nrc , whereby nrc has relinquished authority , and those states have assumed regulatory authority over certain byproduct , source , and small quantities of special nuclear materials: alabama , arizona , arkansas , california , colorado , florida , georgia , illinois , iowa , kansas , kentucky , louisiana , maine , maryland , massachusetts , minnesota , mississippi , nebraska , nevada , new jersey , new hampshire , new mexico , new york , north carolina , north dakota , ohio , oklahoma , oregon , pennsylvania , rhode island , south carolina , tennessee , texas , utah , virginia , washington , and wisconsin . with nrc regulations . figure 1 shows which states are overseen by nrc and which are agreement states . the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a separately organized agency within the department of energy ( doe ) , established a voluntary program in 2008 as part of its domestic material protection program to provide security upgrades , beyond what nrc requires , to u.s. commercial facilities that contain high - risk radiological materials . the upgrading of hospitals and medical facilities is one component of the domestic material protection program , which also secures high - risk radiological sources in other commercial facilities and sites . nnsa has identified approximately 1,500 u.s. hospitals and medical facilities with high - risk radiological sources that contain approximately 28 million curies of radioactive material and that are candidates for security upgrades . nnsa also provides training for hospital personnel and local police departments through its alarm response training program at the y - 12 national security complex in oak ridge , tennessee . this nnsa - funded training is designed to teach facility personnel and local law enforcement officials how to protect themselves and their communities when responding to alarms indicating the possible theft or sabotage of nuclear or radioactive materials . additionally , other federal agencies , such as the departments of defense ( dod ) and veterans affairs ( va ) , which are nrc licensees , are required to implement their programs to meet all nrc requirements to secure radiological sources at u.s. hospital and medical facilities . this report responds to your request for a review of radiological source security . for this report , we determined ( 1 ) the extent to which nrc's requirements ensure the security of high - risk radiological sources at u.s. hospitals and medical facilities and ( 2 ) the progress nnsa has made and the challenges it faces providing security upgrades at u.s. hospitals and medical facilities that contain high - risk radiological sources . to conduct this work , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and guidance for overseeing radiological sources . we interviewed agency officials at nnsa , nrc , dod , va , and the departments of homeland security ( dhs ) , and justice ( doj ) . we also interviewed experts in the field of nuclear security , state government officials in selected states , and safety and security personnel at hospitals to obtain their views on how radiological sources are secured at u.s. hospitals and medical facilities .