two was not compatible . finally , although the project outlined and documented the ground rules and assumptions , we were unable to determine whether risks associated with any assumptions were identified and traced to specific elements . well documented: the jwst cost estimate only partially met the criteria for being well documented because it did not include a step - by - step description of how the estimate was developed , the raw data used to develop the estimate , or the calculations and estimating methodology for specific cost elements of the work breakdown structure . without good documentation , a cost analyst unfamiliar with the program will not be able to replicate the estimate , because he or she will not understand the logic behind it . good documentation , for example , assists management and oversight in assessing the credibility of the estimate , helps to keep a history of reasons for cost changes and to record lessons learned , defines the scope of the analysis , and answers questions about the approach or data used to create the estimate . project documentation , however , does provide evidence that nasa management reviewed and accepted the cost estimate because managers were briefed on the technical aspects of the estimate and were provided an overview of the joint cost and schedule risk analysis that was conducted . accurate: the jwst cost estimate only partially met the criteria for being accurate because the projected costs of schedule reserve did not reflect actual data , the summary schedule used to derive the jcl prevented us from sufficiently understanding how risks were incorporated , and the project did not provide evidence that it regularly updates the estimate or plans to conduct another jcl . for example , using historical actual cost data from northrop grumman , we estimated that 13 months of schedule reserve is likely to be $204 million instead of nasa's estimate of $121 million — a potential underestimation of 69 percent related to the schedule reserve . project officials , however , believe they have adequate reserves available to offset any underestimation . in addition , the summary schedule the project used as an input to the jcl , although deemed acceptable by nasa , contained many long - duration activities , some with 1,000 days or more . because of these long durations in the summary schedule used for the jcl , the lack of detail prevented us from identifying the activities that were on the critical path , as well as which risks were applied to remaining activities . as a result , there is no way to ensure that risks were appropriately assigned to activities in the schedule to account for the impact of the risks during the jcl analysis . finally , it was unclear whether the cost estimate was regularly updated to reflect material changes in actual costs and in the project itself , such as when schedules or other assumptions change , due to a lack of detailed documentation for the cost estimate . project officials stated that in keeping with nasa policy they do not plan , nor are they required , to conduct another jcl analysis .