the spark ! platform allows all employees to share ideas and submit suggestions on how to improve the agency's performance and efficiency , thereby improving communication within the agency . the dhs office of policy reviewed the dual missions of the secret service and issued a report that emphasized the importance of the protective and investigative missions ( january 2017 ) . secret service officials cited this report as evidence that the agency evaluated its priorities and resource allocation decisions . secret service data show that agents increased the share of work hours spent on protection compared with investigation from fiscal year 2014 to fiscal year 2018 . overall , based on our analysis of secret service data , 59 percent of special agent hours in fiscal year 2018 were spent on protection and 26 percent on investigations . this is in contrast to 54 percent protection and 36 percent investigations in fiscal year 2014 . however , agents worked an average of 2.2 million hours annually on investigations over that period , even though agents assigned to the ppd and vpd did not meet training targets during that time . despite shifting resources toward protection , the secret service's operations and associated resource allocation do not fully align with its stated priority , protection , because training is an essential component of agents' protection assignments . promote specialized expertise in its budget , workforce , and technology functions . according to the pmp , “filling important administrative functions with agents rather than professional administrators may not be optimal.” status: implemented ; ongoing work may be required to ensure recommendation is sustained . actions taken by the secret service summary: to promote specialized expertise in certain business functions , the secret service hired a chief operating officer to run the agency's business functions and elevated senior civilian ( non - agent ) executives , including the chief technology officer and the chief financial officer , to lead key staff offices . the agency also hired new professional administrators , instead of promoting special agents , to serve in other senior positions , such as chief human capital officer and chief strategy officer . the secret service reorganized the agency to promote specialized expertise in certain functions . in 2015 , the secret service established the position of chief operating officer . this principal administrator , who is equivalent in rank to the deputy director , directs the agency's business and programmatic activities , with a focus on improving performance , hiring and retaining personnel , and aligning budgetary and strategic planning efforts . the secret service professionalized the leadership of several directorates by elevating or hiring civilian senior executives , instead of placing special agents in these specialized positions . for example , in 2015 , the civilian who was serving as chief financial officer was placed in charge of the newly created office of the chief financial officer . similarly , the chief information officer was placed in charge of the newly created office of the chief information officer .