navigators . ppaca required all exchanges to establish “navigator” programs to conduct public education activities to raise awareness of the availability of coverage available through the exchanges , among other things . as part of hhs's funding agreement with navigator organizations in states using the federally facilitated exchange , hhs requires them to maintain relationships with consumers who are uninsured or underinsured . they must also examine consumers' eligibility for other government health programs , such as medicaid , and provide other assistance to consumers — for example , by helping them understand how to access their coverage . agents and brokers . licensed by states , agents and brokers may also provide assistance to those seeking to enroll in a health plan sold on the exchanges ; however , they are generally paid by issuers . they may sell products for one issuer from which they receive a salary , or from a variety of issuers and be paid a commission for each plan they sell . about 8.7 million consumers enrolled in healthcare.gov plans during the open enrollment period for 2018 coverage , 5 percent less than the 9.2 million who enrolled for 2017 . this decline continues a trend from 2016 , when a peak of 9.6 million consumers enrolled in such plans . hhs officials told us that they did not want to speculate on the specific factors that affected enrollment this year , but noted that the exchanges are designed for consumers to utilize as needed , which includes degrees of fluctuation from year to year . a decreased demand for exchange - based insurance could be influenced by increases in the numbers of people with other types of health coverage , such as coverage through other public programs , or that which is sponsored by their employers . enrollees who were new to healthcare.gov coverage comprised a smaller proportion of total enrollees in 2018 than in 2017 , continuing a trend seen in prior years . the proportion of new enrollees decreased from 33 percent ( 3 million ) in 2017 to 28 percent ( 2.5 million ) in 2018 ( see fig . some stakeholders noted the importance of enrolling new , healthy enrollees each year to maintain the long - term viability of the exchanges . however , other stakeholders noted that they had expected the number and proportion of new enrollees to decrease over time because a large majority of those who wanted coverage and were eligible for financial assistance had likely already enrolled . the increasing proportion of enrollees who return to the exchanges for their coverage could also demonstrate their need for or satisfaction with this coverage option . the demographic characteristics of enrollees remained largely constant from 2017 through 2018 . for example , the proportion of enrollees with household incomes of 100 to 250 percent of the federal poverty level remained similar at 71 percent in 2017 and 70 percent in 2018 . in addition , the proportion of enrollees whose households were located in rural areas was 18 percent in both years . however , the proportion of healthcare.gov enrollees aged 55 and older increased from 27 percent in 2017 to 29 percent in 2018 .