public notification . the act directs each county , before moving forward with title iii projects , to publish a proposal describing its planned use of title iii funds in local newspapers or other publications , after which the county must allow a 45-day comment period before using the funds . some counties in our review followed only part of the public notification requirement . for example , some counties published notices in their local newspapers but did not allow for a 45-day comment period before moving ahead with projects or activities , according to county officials and documents , while other counties issued public notices in some years but not in others . we also found four counties that did not issue any public notices on their title iii project proposals ; officials from these counties told us that they were unaware of the requirement to do so . however , as noted , the agencies did not have a process to ensure an accurate accounting of the amount of title iii funds spent and unspent , making it difficult to ensure that unobligated funds are returned to the u.s. treasury when the act expires . in response to our recommendation that the agencies strengthen their oversight by issuing regulations or clear guidance specifying the types of allowable county uses of title iii funds , the forest service and blm provided additional guidance to counties , which clarifies the types of allowable uses of county funds . in addition , the agencies reported that they plan to update their expenditure reporting requirements for title iii funds , so that counties report not only funds expended the previous year but also amounts remaining unobligated . regarding guidance , soon after our report was issued in july 2012,agencies updated their websites to provide substantial additional information on allowable expenditures under the act . given that this information includes specific discussion about , and numerous examples of , expenditures that are and are not authorized by the act , we believe the that this additional guidance addresses our recommendation . the guidance addressed each of the three main areas of allowable spending under title iii , as follows: wildland fire preparedness . as we noted , several counties reported expending funds for broad emergency preparedness activities under the firewise communities program that did not appear consistent with the act because they did not involve providing fire - related education or assistance to homeowners . this issue is specifically addressed in the guidance , which now states that title iii authorizes funds to be “spent on firewise communities program activities that ( 1 ) educate homeowners in fire - sensitive ecosystems about techniques in siting ( positioning or locating ) a home , constructing a home , landscaping and maintenance around a home . .or ( 2 ) assist homeowners in implementing these techniques” ( emphasis in original ) .