contract . a mutually binding legal relationship obligating the seller to furnish the supplies or services ( including construction ) and the buyer to pay for them . it includes all types of commitments that obligate the government to an expenditure of appropriated funds and that , except as otherwise authorized , are in writing . in addition to bilateral instruments , contracts include ( but are not limited to ) awards and notices of awards ; job orders or task letters issued under basic ordering agreements ; letter contracts ; orders , such as purchase orders , under which the contract becomes effective by written acceptance or performance ; and bilateral contract modifications . contracts do not include grants and cooperative agreements . travel . this payment stream represents all travel expenses , including travel costs incurred for educational language training , evacuation , postassignment travel to field , home leave and rest and relaxation , site visits to mission offices , conferences , seminars , and meetings , and other operational travel . transportation . this payment stream consists of all transportation and freight costs incurred to missions or headquarters and from missions or headquarters . training . this payment stream consists of all costs incurred to obtain technical and professional training , such as language training , certification training for contract , project , and financial offices , training support costs , and other technical and professional training . other operating expenses . this payment stream consists of other expenses incurred by usaid to perform its work . examples of other operating expenses are supplies , local travel , conferences , and other miscellaneous expenses that are deemed necessary for the successful performance of usaid's work . payments to other agencies . this payment stream consists of all payments made to other federal agencies for services and / or goods received . outlays include rental payments to the general services administration for office and warehouse rent , payments to the office of personnel management for background investigation services , and payments to the defense contract audit agency for federal audit services . credit - financing funds . this payment stream is principally intended for credit enhancement purposes and may be used where ( a ) the agency's sustainable development objectives may best be achieved effectively using credit , and ( b ) the risks of default may be reasonably estimated and managed . it is a financing tool to be used in addition to or in lieu of grant funding where appropriate . credit financing funds agreements will be utilized only when the partner is a non - sovereign entity . no sovereign loan guarantees are permissible under existing credit financing authorities . credit financing shall be a demand - driven initiative , with operating units having primary responsibility for designing , authorizing , and implementing activities in support of approved strategic objectives and within administration and congressional priorities for assistance . credit financing operations require a clear separation of responsibility for assessing the developmental soundness and the financial soundness of each activity , with the latter responsibilities entrusted to a credit review board within the agency .