b . the following questions pertained to nonfederal npl sites with unacceptable human exposure , as of september 30 , 2009 . in what fiscal year did epa determine that there was an unacceptable risk of human exposure at this site ? prior to fy 1999 b. fy 1999 c. fy 2000 d. fy 2001 e. fy 2002 f. fy 2003 g. fy 2004 h. fy 2005 i. fy 2006 j. fy 2007 k. fy 2008 l. fy 2009 m. unknown 2 . did this site receive funding to begin construction in the fiscal year when it was ready ? please choose an option below and briefly explain your response . yes b . no c. unknown 5 . will the stimulus funds decrease the total cost of construction at this site ? please choose an option below and briefly explain your response . yes b . no c. unknown 6 . will the use of stimulus funding control human exposure at this site ? please choose an option below and briefly explain your response . yes , completely b . yes , partially c. no d. not applicable e. unknown 7 . please describe your region's involvement , if any , in identifying sites to receive stimulus funding . as of the end of fiscal year 2009 , epa identified 75 nonfederal sites on the npl as having unacceptable human exposure . the human exposure at these 75 sites is due to a variety of contaminants that may be present in soil , groundwater , sediments , or other media at the site and may impact areas where people live , work , and recreate . as figure 7 shows , the most common medium of concern at sites with unacceptable human exposure is soil , with 42 sites containing this medium of concern . the next most common media are fish or shellfish , sediment , and groundwater . many sites had more than one medium of concern . for example , the caldwell trucking co. site in new jersey has four media of concern: soil , groundwater , surface water , and indoor air . at this site , groundwater contaminated with solvents is seeping onto surface soils and discharging into surface - water streams in a residential area , and the solvents may have potentially migrated from groundwater to indoor air , posing a risk of vapor intrusion . the contaminants that most commonly cause unacceptable human exposure are lead , polychlorinated biphenyl ( pcb ) , arsenic , and metals other than lead . some sites contained several contaminants , present in different media . risks to workers and other commercial tenants and those who recreate at contaminated sites are present at fewer sites . the exposed populations face different health risks based on the contaminants present at the site . for example , consuming pcb in fish may cause liver disease , problems with the immune and endocrine system , developmental problems , and cancer , while human health threats from arsenic include irritation of the stomach and intestines , blood vessel damage , reduced nerve function , and increased mortality rates in young adults .