sels . dhs's actions to address these gaps consist primarily of efforts to develop , test , and deploy current generation or newly developed radiation detectionequipment ; conduct studies or analyses to identify and address particular threats or gaps ; develop new procedures to guide scanning for radiation in pathways where no scanning had occurred before ; and develop and learn from pilot programs . dhs is taking a number of steps it believes will improve its odds of deterring or detecting attempts to smuggle nuclear or radiological materials across the more than 6,000 miles of land border susceptible to illegal crossings by people and vehicles into the united states . specifically , according to dhs officials , the department is procuring more current generation mobile radiation detection technology , seeking new technology , and further studying gaps in the detection architecture and the threat they pose . these efforts are , however , not yet complete and in some cases are behind schedule . for example , dhs is currently working to equip border patrol officers responsible for patrolling the u.s. borders with canada and mexico between ports of entry with current generation portable radiological and nuclear detection equipment — specifically , personal radiation detectors ( prd ) and riids . portability is critical to strengthening radiation detection efforts , according to dhs officials , because it expands border patrol agents' ability to detect a potential radiological threat beyond fixed ports of entry . according to its deployment plan , dhs planned to buy a certain number of prds and riids each fiscal year from 2008 through 2011 to complete acquisition by 2012 . however , the department has fallen short of these targets , citing a lack of funds . according to officials , dhs has undertaken some initiatives to scan private aircraft entering the united states as international general aviation . since december 2007 , dhs has been scanning 100 percent of arriving international general aviation aircraft ( approximately 400 flights per day ) with a standard hand - held riid for nuclear and radiological material . dhs depends on the aircraft operators to obey the law by either arriving in the united states only at an international airport — which are all equipped with scanning capability — or departing for the united states from one of four overseas airports where such aircraft can be scanned before departure . accordingly , dhs has already initiated studies to help it address this challenge and plans , according to officials , to initiate further studies in 2011 . specifically , among other things , dhs plans to update its analysis of pre - clearance scanning capabilities at airports overseas and evaluate the feasibility of expanding the number of overseas airports with scanning capabilities . it also plans to study the characteristics of aircraft that do not comply with u.s. scanning requirements and develop interim surveillance options to enhance dhs capabilities and mitigation strategies to detect and interdict these aircraft . a coast guard analysis revealed that small boats pose a greater threat than shipping containers for nuclear smuggling . these small boats , which include maritime craft less than 300 gross tons , number in the millions .