these comments are reprinted in appendix i . dod has taken important steps to highlight the threat to its networks and systems and to enhance its ability to respond to computer incidents . for example , in 1997 , dod conducted a military exercise known as eligible receiver that demonstrated that hostile forces could penetrate dod systems and networks and further highlighted the need for an organization to manage the defense of its systems and networks . a series of computer attacks against dod systems in early 1998 further highlighted the need for a single departmentwide focal point for incident response . in december 1998 , dod established jtf - cnd as the primary department - level agent to coordinate and direct internal activities aimed at preventing and detecting cyber attacks , containing damage , and restoring computer functionality . the services — air force , army , marine corps , and navy — were directed to provide jtf - cnd with tactical support through their certs and other supporting components . the u.s. space command assumed operational control over jtf - cnd in october 1999 . jtf - cnd serves as the departmentwide focal point for incident response activities . in 1998 , dod also established the defense - wide information assurance program ( diap ) to promote integrated , comprehensive , and consistent information assurance activities across the department . “information assurance” refers to the range of information security activities and functions needed to protect and defend dod's information and systems . while jtf - cnd coordinates and oversees incident response activities on a day - to - day operational basis , diap's responsibilities include coordinating dod plans and policies related to incident response . dod's network of certs , jtf - cnd , and other related organizations engage in a variety of preventive , detective , investigative , and response activities , as described in further detail below . dod's preventive activities are aimed at stopping cyber attacks or minimizing the likelihood that they will be successful in penetrating systems or networks through exploiting known vulnerabilities . these activities have included ( 1 ) vulnerability assessments of the security of dod systems and networks , ( 2 ) using technical experts to try to surreptitiously gain access to systems and networks , thus exposing security weaknesses before adversaries can exploit them , and ( 3 ) alerting systems administrators to identified vulnerabilities . conducting vulnerability assessments can help ensure that system and security software is properly installed and configured and that the proper configuration is maintained through any updates or other modifications . upon request , the air force , army , navy , and national security agency conduct vulnerability assessments of dod systems and networks using a variety of automated computer security assessment tools . these tools automatically check systems and networks for known security weaknesses and generate reports summarizing results . during 2000 , the air force , army , navy , and national security agency completed over 150 assessments that identified hundreds of vulnerabilities for commands to address .