standards may be mandatory . ( see app . i for a table listing the actions taken by dot modal administrations since september 11. ) 3 ) how do multilateral efforts attempt to stem manpad proliferation ? 4 ) what types of countermeasures are available to minimize this threat and at what cost ? key questions: ( 1 ) what is the nature , scope , and operational framework of the designee program ? ( 2 ) what are the identified strengths and weaknesses of the program ? ( 3 ) what is the potential for faa's oda proposal and other stakeholders' alternatives to address the identified program weaknesses ? key questions: ( 1 ) how has customs developed the automated targeting system ( ats ) and the new anti - terrorism rules ? ( 2 ) how does customs use ats to identify containerized cargo as “high risk” for screening and inspection to detect cargo that might contain weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) ? ( 3 ) to what extent is ats implemented at seaports , including impact and challenges involved ? ( 4 ) what is customs' plan for assessing system implementation and performance ? key questions: 1 ) what are the current and emerging national challenges to freight mobility and what proposals have been put forth to address these issues ? 2 ) to what extent do these current and emerging challenges exist at container ports and surrounding areas and to what extent do the proposals appear to have applicability to these locations ? key questions: ( 1 ) what are states' policies and practices for verifying the identity of driver's license / id card applicants and how might they more effectively use ssns or other tools to verify identity ? ( 2 ) how does ssa assist states in verifying ssns for driver's license / id card applicants and how can ssa improve the verification service it provides ? key questions: ( 1 ) what are the status , plans , and technical and programmatic risks associated with the national distress and response system ( ndrs ) modernization project ? ( 2 ) how is the coast guard addressing concerns with the new ndrs , such as communication coverage gaps and the inability to pinpoint distressed boaters ? ( 3 ) how will coast guard's new homeland security role affect the ndrs project ? key questions: ( 1 ) what is the status of customs' plan to install radiation detection equipment at u.s. border crossings ? ( 2 ) what is the basis for the plan's time frame ? ( 3 ) what is customs' technical capability to implement the plan ? ( 4 ) how well is customs coordinating with other agencies in the area of radiation detection ? ( 5 ) what are the results of customs' evaluations of radiation detection equipment and how are the evaluations being used ? key questions: ( 1 ) was the $5 billion used only to compensate major air carriers for their uninsured losses incurred as a result of the terrorist attacks ? ( 2 ) were carriers reimbursed , per the act , only for increases in insurance premiums resulting from the attacks ?