rec . data , we also calculated the average atd program cost per day per alien . we could not compare this cost per day for aliens who are released under other conditions , such as being released on bond , because ice does not capture cost data associated with these release options . we also reviewed the department of justice's eoir data on the length of time aliens spend in immigration proceedings before receiving their final disposition . we assessed the reliability of these data by interviewing or soliciting written responses from ice and eoir officials regarding their oversight of their respective databases , as well as the atd database maintained by ice's contractor , and reviewed the data for any missing data fields , entries with values beyond expected ranges , or other entries that appeared to be unusual . ( 2 ) to what extent has ice measured the performance of the atd program for fiscal years 2011 through 2013 ? this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) 160 cong . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also interviewed ice and contractor headquarters officials regarding ( 1 ) how ice has structured the atd program and how ice officials decide which aliens to place in the atd program and at what supervision level ; ( 2 ) how ice officials determine when to terminate an alien from the atd program or one of the program's components ; ( 3 ) changes to program implementation over time , including future plans ; and ( 4 ) benefits and challenges of the program . in addition , we interviewed ice ero field office officials and contractor officials in four locations — dallas , texas ; los angeles , california ; las vegas , nevada ; and st. paul , minnesota — regarding their implementation of the program . we selected these offices on the basis of various factors , including the ( 1 ) size of the program at each office , ( 2 ) geographic location , ( 3 ) program components offered , and ( 4 ) recommendations from cognizant dhs officials . while we cannot generalize the results of our interviews to all ice ero field office locations , officials we interviewed provided us with a general overview and perspective on how ice implements the atd program at the selected locations . in addition , we compared ice's management of the atd program against standards in standards for internal control in the federal government . to determine how ice measured the performance of the atd program for fiscal years 2011 through 2013 , we analyzed dhs documents , congressional budget justifications , and ice's teleconference meeting notes regarding the atd program . we also analyzed ice and ice contractor data from fiscal years 2011 through 2013 related to atd program performance , including data on court appearances , removals from the united states , and other performance metrics . to assess the reliability of these data , we interviewed ice and atd contractor headquarters officials regarding database oversight and reviewed the data for any missing data fields , entries with values beyond expected ranges , or other entries that appeared to be unusual .