( see fig . among the four covered provider types for which information was available , our analysis of 12 studies found that hospital patients were least likely to have advance directives and that hospice patients , who are by definition close to the end of life , were the most likely to have advance directives as compared with nursing home and hha patients . we did not find peer reviewed studies in our literature review on the prevalence of those with advance directives among individuals enrolled in ma and medicaid managed care plans , although these individuals may also be served by the other four covered provider types . in addition to variations by provider type , the prevalence of advance directives also varies among individuals based on certain demographic characteristics , such as medical conditions including chronic and life threatening diseases , according to the literature . for example , in 2010 , individuals 18 years of age and older with chronic diseases were more likely than those without such diseases to have advance directives , with an estimated 33 percent and 22 percent prevalence , respectively . ( see fig . a total of 20 studies found that individuals with certain medical conditions were more likely to have advance directives than healthier individuals . in general , certain medical conditions — such as diabetes , malignancies , renal dysfunction , dementia , or declining health — increased the likelihood that individuals had advance directives , according to the literature . the prevalence of advance directives also varies by age , race , income , education , and gender , according to the literature . older individuals were more likely to have advance directives than younger individuals . for example , a 2009 and 2010 nationally representative survey found that an estimated 51 percent of individuals 65 years of age and older had advance directives , while among individuals 18 to 34 years old , an estimated 12 percent had advance directives . the survey also indicated that an estimated 31 percent of whites compared to an estimated 17 percent of african americans or latinos had advance directives . the survey process covers multiple standards . for example , there are about 200 quality and safety standards for nursing homes that range from determining the prevalence of pressure sores and use of restraints to documenting the posting of an individual's bill of rights . however , in some cases , particularly for hospitals , accrediting organizations provide primary oversight . specifically , hospitals , hhas , and hospices that choose to undergo accreditation by an accrediting organization , rather than certification from a state agency , must demonstrate to the accrediting organization their ability to meet the standards of accreditation , including psda standards . the accreditation organization subsequently recommends to cms certification of providers meeting such standards . the processes that accrediting organizations use to certify providers for medicare participation are subject to cms review and approval . in addition , under agreements with cms , state survey agencies annually survey a sample of accredited providers to verify the results of surveys conducted by the accrediting organizations , and assess the organizations' ability to monitor providers' compliance with federal standards .