this concludes my statement . i would now be pleased to answer any questions for the subcommittee . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8816 . seto bagdoyan , stephen l. caldwell , kathi ebert , jim russell , brian sklar , keith rhodes , and katherine davis also made key contributions to this statement . to assess whether the cbp's development of its targeting strategy is consistent with recognized risk management and modeling practices , we compiled a risk management framework and recognized modeling practices , drawn from an extensive review of relevant public and private sector work , prior gao work on risk management , and our interviews with terrorism experts . we selected these individuals based on their involvement with issues related to terrorism , specifically concerning containerized cargo , the ats , and modeling . several of the individuals that we interviewed were referred from within the expert community , while others were chosen from public texts on the record . we did not assess ats's hardware or software , the quality of the threat assessments that cbp has received from the intelligence community , or the appropriateness or risk weighting of its targeting rules . to assess how well the targeting strategy has been implemented at selected seaports in the country , we visited various cbp facilities and the miami , los angeles - long beach , philadelphia , new york - new jersey , new orleans , and seattle seaports . these seaports were selected based on the number of cargo containers processed and their geographic dispersion . at these locations , we observed targeting and inspection operations ; met with cbp management and inspectors to discuss issues related to targeting and the subsequent physical inspection of containers ; and reviewed relevant documents , including training and operational manuals , and statistical reports of targeted and inspected containers . at the seaports , we also met with representatives of shipping lines , operators of private cargo terminals , the local port authorities , and coast guard personnel responsible for the ports' physical security . we also met with terrorism experts and representatives from the international trade community to obtain a better understanding of the potential threat posed by cargo containers and possible approaches to countering the threat , such as risk management . we conducted our work from january to november 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . maritime security: progress made in implementing maritime transportation security act , but concerns remain . gao - 03-1155t . washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2003 . container security: expansion of key customs programs will require greater attention to critical success factors . gao - 03-770 . washington , d.c.: july 25 , 2003 . homeland security: challenges facing the department of homeland security in balancing its border security and trade facilitation missions . gao - 03-902t . washington , d.c.: june 16 , 2003 . container security: current efforts to detect nuclear material , new initiatives , and challenges . gao - 03-297t . washington , d.c.: november 18 , 2002 . customs service: acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment . gao - 03-235t . washington , d.c.: october 17 , 2002 .