the other 6 claims had not been reopened . thus , 11 unique claims were to be referred to osc . of the 11 unique claims , 6 had been reviewed by both a vets regional office and the office of the solicitor as of september 30 , 2006 ( 3 of the reopened claims and 3 of the others ) . to calculate the average processing time for dol to process claims that were referred through dol to osc using actual dates , we used the average processing time of these 6 claims . we based this average on the number of days that it took dol to process a claim from the date that vets opened the investigation through the date that the office of the solicitor completed its review and made a recommendation to osc . it is not clear what course of action vets took at that time . following a briefing on our preliminary findings in december 2006 , a vets official told us that because vets's userra operations manual had not clearly articulated when and how to notify claimants of their rights , some investigators were not aware that claimants should be notified in writing at the end of the investigation . citing our preliminary findings , vets officials required each region to revise its guidance concerning the notification of rights . more than 75 percent of these claims included only allegations of userra violations . the remaining were mixed claims — allegations of both userra violations and a related prohibited personnel practice . table 2 shows the number and type of claims osc received and closed during the demonstration project . table 3 shows osc's average processing time overall and for both userra only and mixed claims . we assessed the reliability of selected data elements in osc's case tracking system in an earlier report . we found the closed dates in osc's case tracking system to be sufficiently reliable ; however , the corrective action data element , which would be used for identifying the outcomes of userra claims , was not sufficiently reliable for reporting specific outcomes of userra claims . we separately reviewed those claims that vets investigated but could not resolve and for which claimants requested referral of their claims to osc . for these claims , two sequential dol reviews take place: a vets regional office prepares a report of the investigation and makes a recommendation on the merits , and a regional office of the solicitor conducts a separate legal analysis and also makes a recommendation on the merits . from february 8 , 2005 , through september 30 , 2006 , 11 claimants asked vets to refer their claims to osc . of those 11 claims , 6 claims had been reviewed by both a vets regional office and a regional office of the solicitor and sent to osc , and 5 were still at dol . the office of the solicitor recommended litigation on 1 of the claims sent to osc . for those 6 claims , it took from initial investigation through the regional office and regional office of the solicitor reviews an average of 247 days or about 8 months before the office of the solicitor sent the claims to osc .