gao - 04-248 . more details about our methodology are in appendix i . the global hawk unmanned aerial vehicle system is designed to support warfighting and peacekeeping missions by providing decision makers with up - to - date information about potential adversaries' locations , resources , and personnel . operators on the ground can change global hawk's navigation and direct the onboard sensors to survey a geographic area the size of illinois within a 24-hour cycle . as a high - altitude , long - endurance aircraft , global hawk was originally designed to reach an altitude of 65,000 feet and fly for up to 35 hours . global hawk began in 1994 as an acquisition concept technology demonstration program , managed first by the defense advanced research projects agency and , since 1998 , by the air force . seven demonstrator aircraft were eventually produced ; three have since been destroyed in mishaps . the demonstrator models logged several thousand - flight hours and effectively supported combat operations in afghanistan and iraq . the system passed a military usefulness assessment , completed several demonstrations and other tests , and dod judged it a success . however , testing identified that significant improvements in reliability , sensor performance , and communications were needed before producing operationally effective and suitable systems . in march 2001 , dod approved the global hawk for a combined start of system development and low - rate initial production of six air vehicles based on the successful demonstrations and operational deployments of demonstrator aircraft . the air force planned to slowly develop more advanced capabilities and acquire 63 air vehicles . this model , now called the rq - 4a , is shown in figure 1 . in march 2002 , dod restructured the acquisition strategy to include a second global hawk model , the rq - 4b . the new strategy includes 51 air vehicles , 10 ground stations , multiple intelligence sensors , support equipment , and facilities at a cost of $6.3 billion . of the 51 air vehicles to be purchased , 7 are rq - 4as and 44 are rq - 4bs . separately , the navy is procuring 2 rq - 4as and a ground station for about $300 million ( including development costs ) to evaluate the vehicles' potential for the broad area maritime surveillance program . in december 2002 , dod restructured the program again . instead of buying all rq - 4bs with multiple intelligence capability , the rq - 4bs will now have a mix of multimission and single - mission capabilities . the two restructurings also increased low - rate initial production quantities to 19 ( recently increased to 20 ) air vehicles: 7 rq - 4as and 12 ( now 13 ) rq - 4bs . the rq - 4a and the rq - 4b differ significantly . the new rq - 4b model is intended to have 50 percent greater payload capacity , a longer fuselage and longer wing span and will be heavier than the a model . dod considered these changes necessary to carry new advanced sensor payloads and to provide multi - intelligence capabilities on a single rq - 4b .