elevation . all new and substantially improved or substantially damaged structures must be elevated to or above the base flood elevation ( bfe ) . the bfe is the projected level that flood water is expected to reach or exceed during a flood with an estimated 1 percent chance of occurring in any given year . the flood depth — height at which structures should be built — is calculated by the difference between the bfe and ground elevations that is established by topographic surveys . dry flood - proofing . nonresidential structures , including agricultural structures , may be flood - proofed instead of elevated . nonresidential structures that are dry flood - proofed are designed to be watertight below the bfe . wet flood - proofing . fema also has guidance to allow communities to grant some categories of nonresidential structures , including certain agricultural structures , an exception from the requirement that certain structures be elevated or dry flood - proofed . this variance enables certain structures to be wet flood - proofed — applying permanent or contingent measures to a structure and / or its contents that prevent or provide resistance to damage from flooding by allowing flood waters to enter the structure . fema has instructed communities that variances may be issued for certain types of agricultural structures located in wide , expansive floodplains that are used solely for agricultural purposes , such as storage , harvesting , or drying . these types of structures include grain bins , corn cribs , general purpose barns open on at least one side , and buildings that store farm machinery and equipment . fema bases premium rates for nfip policies on a property's risk of flooding and several other factors . specifically , fema uses location and property characteristics , such as flood zone designation , elevation of the property relative to the property's bfe , building type ( eg , residential or nonresidential ) , number of floors , presence of a basement , and the year of construction relative to the year of a community's original flood map . additionally , fema uses data on prior claims , coverage amount , and policy deductible amount . nfip has historically had two types of flood insurance premium rates: those that reflect the full risk of flooding to a property ( full - risk rates ) and those that do not . properties that have not been charged property - specific full - risk rates have included those with grandfathered and subsidized rates . the largest number of subsidized policies has been for properties built before the initial flood insurance rate maps became available . the authority for subsidized rates was included in the national flood insurance act of 1968 as an incentive to encourage participation in the program . in july 2012 , congress enacted the biggert - waters act , which made significant changes to fema's ability to charge subsidized rates .