( recommendation 2 ) . a physical access control system works as follows . when employees or contractors who are piv cardholders attempt to enter a controlled area managed by a physical access control system , they will encounter the physical access control system at the “front end.” at this point , depending on the controlled area's level of security , the cardholder will scan their piv cards via a card reader , insert their piv cards and enter personal identification numbers ( pin ) via an input device such as a keypad , or insert their piv cards , enter pins , and provide biometric identification ( such as a fingerprint ) via an input device . after the cardholders present their identification information , the cardholders' identification information from a piv card's integrated circuit chip is transmitted to the physical access control system's “back end,” which consists of physical and logical access control systems and authorization data . at the back end , the physical access control system determines the validity of the cardholder's access authorization . results from our interviews with the selected agencies cannot be generalized . to identify challenges selected federal agencies face in adhering to federal physical access control system requirements , we reviewed relevant trade industry literature and conducted an analysis of our interviews with agency officials . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . developed in response to hspd - 12 , personal identity verification ( piv ) cards are a common authentication mechanism used across the federal government , and are a component of physical access control systems . piv cards are used to securely identify federal government employees and contractor personnel seeking access to valuable and sensitive federal resources , including facilities and information systems . also known as a “smart card,” a piv card is similar in size to a credit card and contains information that is either printed on the outside or stored on the card's integrated circuit chip ( see fig . piv cards are required to be interoperable with all gsa - approved physical access control system equipment included on the approved products list , regardless of that equipment's manufacturer . likewise , gsa - approved physical access control system equipment is required to be interoperable with all piv cards . physical access control systems are used to manage access to controlled areas , such as a building or a room in a building . physical access control products include devices such as card readers and the id cards used to validate an individual's authorization to enter a building ( see fig.2 below ) . this report focuses on physical access and does not address logical ( computer network ) access . the cardholder will be able to access the area only if the authorization is valid . when deciding which access control mechanisms to implement , agencies must first understand the level of risk associated with the facility .