processes for coordinating r&d . as a result , we recommended that dhs develop and implement policies and guidance for defining and overseeing r&d at the department - level that includes a well - understood definition of r&d that provides reasonable assurance that reliable accounting and reporting of r&d resources and activities for internal and external use are achieved . dhs agreed with our recommendation , and in april 2014 , updated its guidance to include a definition of r&d , but efforts to develop a specific policy outlining r&d roles and responsibilities and a process for coordinating r&d with other offices remain ongoing and have not yet been completed . with the cancellation of the gen - 3 acquisition , dhs will continue to rely on its currently deployed gen - 2 system as an early indicator of an aerosolized biological attack . cancellation of the gen - 3 system also raises questions that need to be answered about the future maintenance of the gen - 2 system , since it will no longer be replaced , as planned . according to program officials that we recently contacted , dhs is considering multiple options to upgrade the current technology to improve detection capabilities in the wake of the gen - 3 acquisition cancellation . in april 2014 , program officials described some of the options they are considering to upgrade the currently deployed system , including: the addition of a trigger to the current system to enhance performance indoors . these are generally systems that provide very fast but nonspecific warnings of a potential agent release , because they do not identify the type of biological material detected . however , dhs is exploring how to use a trigger to indicate when an air sample should be collected and taken to the laboratory for analysis . use of a wet or liquid filter system rather than the current dry filter system . collecting samples directly into a liquid could also increase the odds that any microorganisms would remain alive for subsequent testing . increased frequency of manual filter collection and testing , which would likely increase costs . other options for hand - held or portable detection devices . while oha officials determine the next steps with s&t for the biowatch program to try and address the capability gap that gen - 3 intended to fill , there are other considerations for the currently deployed system , such as maintainability of the current technology and equipment and the costs associated with any upgrades to extend the life of the existing system . for example , biowatch program officials indicated they will need to replace the laboratory equipment for the currently deployed system , as early as 2015 , and readjust life cycle costs . further , while gen - 2 has been used in the field for over a decade , information about the technical capabilities for the gen - 2 system , including the limits of detection , is limited . in 2011 , the national academy of sciences stated that the rapid initial deployment of biowatch did not allow for sufficient testing , validation , and evaluation of the system and its components .