ii ) . in assessing the need for additional bankruptcy judgeships in a bankruptcy court , the judicial conference first considers the court's weighted case filings . the judicial conference has established 1,500 annual weighted case filings per authorized judgeship as an indicator of a bankruptcy court's potential need for additional judgeships . this represents about 1,500 annual hours of case - related judge time . the conference's policy for assessing bankruptcy judgeship needs recognizes that judges' workloads may be affected by factors not captured in the bankruptcy - weighted case filings . examples of such factors include historical caseload data and filing trends ; geographic , economic , and demographic factors in the bankruptcy district ; and the availability of alternative solutions and resources for handling a court's workload , such as assistance from judges outside the district . however , our analysis focused solely on the weighted case filings workload measure . each case filed in a bankruptcy court is assigned a case weight . the case weight statistically represents the national average amount of judicial time , in hours , each type of bankruptcy case would be expected to require . the case weights are based on a 1988-1989 study in which bankruptcy judges completed diaries on how many hours they spent on specific types of cases and noncase - related work . total annual weighted case filings for any specific bankruptcy court is the sum of the weights associated with each of the cases filed in the court in a year . total annual weighted case filings per judgeship represent the estimated average amount of judge time that would be required to complete the cases filed in a specific bankruptcy court in a year . weighted case filings per judgeship is the total weighted filings divided by the number of authorized judgeships . for example , if a bankruptcy court had 5,100 weighted case filings and three authorized judgeships , the weighted case filings per judgeship would be 1,700 . because this exceeds the 1,500 threshold , the judicial conference would consider this court for an additional judgeship . however , it should be noted that the judicial conference's policy is to consider additional judgeships only for those courts that request them . thus , if a court would otherwise be eligible for an additional judgeship , but did not request one , the judicial conference would not request a judgeship for that court . the federal judicial center ( fjc ) developed the weights , adopted by the judicial conference in 1991 , based on a 1988-1989 time study in which 272 bankruptcy judges ( 97 percent of all bankruptcy judges in those years ) recorded the time they spent on specific cases for a 10-week period . unlike the district court time study , whose goal was to follow each sample case from filing to disposition — a “case tracking” study — this study was a “diary study” in which judges recorded in a time diary the hours spent on each case in the study and for other judicial work for the 10-week period . this period of time may or may not have covered the entire life of the case from filing through disposition .