see figure 1 . disposal is facilitated by gsa's disposal system , known as gsaxcess . once an agency has determined that it no longer has an internal agency need for its property during agency internal screening , it generally declares and reports the property as excess . subsequently , the agency places information on the property in gsaxcess and then other federal agencies can screen , request , and , if approved by gsa , obtain the excess property for their own use or can then provide it to an authorized non - federal recipient free of charge , minus transportation costs . if no federal agency ( for its own use or use by its eligible non - federal recipient ) requests the excess property from gsaxcess , it then becomes surplus to the federal government , and a state agency for surplus property can request it and provide it to eligible non - federal entities in their state , such as local governments and non - profits . property not claimed by a state agency for surplus property can then be sold to the general public typically through a gsa auction or an approved sales center . finally , unsold property may be abandoned and destroyed by the reporting agency . agencies can provide property to non - federal recipients in various ways . some agencies , such as usda and doe , have been granted their own independent authorities that allow them to provide their unneeded or excess property to eligible non - federal recipients , such as public entities and colleges or universities . eligible recipients are determined by program requirements . other agencies , such as dol , predominately provide excess property to non - federal recipients through a grant , contract , or cooperative agreement . for our three selected agencies , we focused on how usda and doe provided property to non - federal recipients using their independent authorities and how dol provided property to non - federal recipients through contracts . table 1 describes these agencies' programs that provide property to eligible non - federal recipients . more detail on the independent authorities used by usda and doe can be found in appendix ii . additional information about excess property previously provided by dol through cooperative agreements to apprenticeship programs can be found in appendix iii . agencies with independent authorities and programs differ in when they are able to provide property to non - federal recipients . such agencies can allow eligible non - federal recipients , as determined by their agency's independent authority , to screen for and request unneeded property during agency internal screening ; in other words , before the property is declared excess and available to other agencies and entities . for example , usda is authorized to provide certain equipment to its contractors or recipients when doing so would further agricultural research or teaching objectives . currently , usda allows eligible non - federal recipients to screen for all usda unneeded property through an usda internal module in gsaxcess at the same time as its sub - agencies , and before the property is made available to federal agencies in gsaxcess .