dod did not concur with our recommendation . dod viewed modernization as a continuation of the existing program and the existing oversight mechanisms , including regularly scheduled high - level acquisition reviews , would be used to manage the effort . the dod f - 35 program office was considering contracts for economic order quantity of 2 years' worth of aircraft parts followed by a separate annual contract for procurement of lot - 12 aircraft with annual options for lot - 13 and lot - 14 aircraft . however , as of january 2017 , contractors stated they were still negotiating the terms of this contract ; therefore , the specific costs and benefits remained uncertain . program officials projected that the program would only need $576.2 million in fiscal year 2018 to complete baseline development . at the same time , program officials expected that more than $1.2 billion could be needed to commit to block 4 and economic order quantity in fiscal year 2018 . this is our fourth report under that provision . in this report , we ( 1 ) provide information on the program's progress toward completing testing of the baseline aircraft ; ( 2 ) assess the aircraft's current reliability and maintainability ( r&m ) status ; ( 3 ) assess the program's modernization efforts ( to add new aircraft capabilities ) , known as block 4 ; and ( 4 ) provide information on the program's production costs and efficiency initiatives . to provide information on what progress the program has made in testing , we reviewed test event status and schedules , program briefings , and internal dod briefings . we discussed key aspects of the f - 35's test progress with dod officials , contractor representatives , and pilots . to assess the f - 35's r&m , we analyzed monthly contractor r&m reports and compared these to program requirements . we also interviewed dod officials and contractor representatives . to assess the program's modernization efforts , we reviewed documents that should be completed prior to awarding a development contract , according to weapon acquisition best practices identified by gao . we interviewed dod officials and contractor representatives regarding the program's modernization activities and future plans . to provide information on production progress , we collected and analyzed production performance data from the program office , the prime aircraft contractor , and the prime engine contractor . we determined that all the data we used were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . for example , we collected and analyzed the program's r&m monthly data for calendar year 2018 and corroborated these reports by interviewing contractor representatives and dod oversight offices such as the director , operational test and evaluation ( dot&e ) . in addition , we reviewed official program documentation on the block 4 efforts and corroborated these with information officials across dod involved in the effort , conveyed , such as the air force integration office and the naval air warfare division regarding block 4 . appendix ii contains a detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from june 2018 to april 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .