appendix i discusses our scope and methodology in more detail . as reflected by federal statutes and a number of executive orders , it is the policy of the federal government to encourage the participation of small businesses , including businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals , in the performance of federal procurement contracts . the small business act established sba as an independent agency of the federal government to aid , counsel , assist , and protect the interests of small business concerns ; preserve free competitive enterprise ; and maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation . among other things , the act sets a minimum governmentwide goal for small business participation of not less than 23 percent of the total value of all prime contract awards for each fiscal year and makes sba responsible for reporting annually on agencies' achievements on their procurement goals . the act authorizes the president to establish the annual governmentwide goals . to meet its responsibilities under the act , sba negotiates annual procurement goals with each federal executive agency with the intent to ultimately achieve the 23 percent governmentwide goal . some agencies have goals higher than 23 percent , while others may have goals that are lower than or equal to 23 percent — sba negotiates all of them with the intent that the governmentwide small business participation rate will not be less than the goal of 23 percent . among the agencies we reviewed for this report , annual small business procurement goals for fiscal year 2005 ranged from 16 percent ( nasa ) to 56 percent ( interior ) . dod's goal was set at 23 percent , treasury's at 24 percent , and hhs's at 30 percent . the small business act also sets annual prime contract dollar goals for participation by certain types of small businesses that agencies strive to meet as part of their efforts to meet their overall small business participation goal . specifically , these include goals for participation by sdbs ( 5 percent ) , businesses owned and controlled by women or service - disabled veterans ( 5 and 3 percent , respectively ) , and , businesses located in historically underutilized business zones ( hubzones , 3 percent ) . “each department or agency that contracts with businesses to develop advertising for the department or agency or to broadcast federal advertising shall take an aggressive role in ensuring substantial minority - owned entities' participation , including 8 ( a ) , sdb , and minority business enterprise ( mbe ) in federal advertising - related procurements.” the criteria for determining a firm's status as an 8 ( a ) or sdb are set forth in section 8 of the small business act and related regulations , while the definition of mbe is set forth in executive order 11625 . specifically , the 8 ( a ) program , authorized by section 8 ( a ) of the small business act , was created to help small disadvantaged businesses compete in and access the federal procurement market .