however , this assumption is not valid . specifically , the report makes clear that dod is managing tc - aims ii in accordance with some key practices and has efforts under way , such as those previously cited , intended to bring the program into compliance with other key practices . however , the report also points out noncompliance in areas intended to provide sufficient information to determine how the tc - aims ii program should proceed . accordingly , it contains recommendations to ensure that the economic analysis is updated to ( among other things ) reflect current operating assumptions , and that the program is adequately aligned with the department's evolving enterprise architectures . it is precisely because the program does not have this information that , despite having invested $751 million over 11 years , the department does not know whether the program as defined is the right solution to meet dod - wide asset deployment needs . dod offered five detailed comments on our four recommendations . to accomplish this , we focused on the program's ( 1 ) economic justification ; ( 2 ) architectural alignment ; ( 3 ) risk management ; ( 4 ) requirements development and management ; ( 5 ) commercial components ; and ( 6 ) contract management , including contractor oversight and performance - based contracting . to determine whether the department of the army had economically justified its investment in tc - aims ii , we reviewed the latest economic analysis to determine the basis for the cost and benefit estimates and net present value calculations . this included evaluating the analysis against dod policies and guidance as well as other relevant best practices guidance . it also included interviewing responsible program officials , including the program and deputy program managers , regarding their respective roles , responsibilities , and actual efforts in developing and / or reviewing the economic analysis . in addition , we also interviewed the program and deputy program manager and the office of the assistant secretary of defense for network information and integration about the purpose and use of the analysis for managing the army's investment in the tc - aims ii program , including the extent to which measures and metrics showed that benefits projected in the economic analysis were actually being realized . to determine whether the army had aligned tc - aims ii to the dod business enterprise architecture , we relied on our prior reports addressing dod and army architecture development and implementation efforts and documents on the army's efforts to align tc - aims ii with its logistics architecture ( the single army logistics enterprise ) , as well as documents on the army's efforts to align the logistics architecture with dod's business enterprise architecture . we also interviewed officials from the tc - aims ii joint program management office , the office of the assistant secretary of defense for networks and information integration / chief information officer , and the office of the army's chief information officer about dod and army architecture efforts and tc - aims ii's alignment to them .