compensation and benefits . according to the commission , it has no direct control over the amount that cnas pay their executives and other employees , an important driver of cna expenditures . in november 2004 , the commission proposed to exert more control through proposed regulations that included , among other things , standards regarding the reasonableness of executive and other employee compensation at the cnas . the commission eventually withdrew the entire regulatory proposal citing the number and nature of issues raised by commenters . what processes does the abilityone program follow when pricing projects ? to answer these questions , we reviewed the policies and procedures of the abilityone commission and the cnas , as well as their relevant reports , including annual business plans , annual financial statements and budget justifications , strategic plans , compensation studies , irs form 990s , as well as relevant federal laws and regulations . we also interviewed officials from the abilityone commission ( members of the presidentially appointed commission and senior staff ) as well as officials from both cnas ( members of their boards of directors , senior executives , and senior staff ) . these interviews focused on: ( 1 ) how projects are added to the program , assigned to affiliates , and priced ; ( 2 ) how the commission oversees the cnas ; ( 3 ) concerns about project assignment , pricing , and oversight ; and ( 4 ) how these concerns could be addressed . in addition , we spoke with 10 directors or managers of nish affiliates about their perspectives on the abilityone program and used this input in part to develop and conduct five focus groups . we conducted the focus groups with both nish and nib affiliates . to ensure that we obtained a range of viewpoints from the focus groups , four groups that we convened included affiliates that varied by size as well as their affiliated - cna . the fifth focus group included affiliate directors who had appealed project assignment decisions . we spoke with 35 affiliates in all , in groups of 5 to 10 . these group discussions focused on obtaining perspectives regarding the program in general and processes and practices associated with assigning and pricing projects in particular . to review the distribution of projects , we analyzed abilityone data on what projects were produced within the program and which affiliates produced them as of the end of fiscal year 2012 . we assessed the reliability of these data and determined that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . finally , we analyzed information from the commission on the number and types of pricing reviews conducted between january 1 , 2012 and december 10 , 2012 ( the latest period for which the commission has data ) and the outcome of these reviews . how are products and services added to the abilityone program and how are providers of such projects assigned ? we conducted our work between february 2012 and may 2013 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .