bsaag . among its functions , the advisory group serves as a forum for industry , supervisory agencies , and law enforcement to communicate about how law enforcement uses sars and other bsa data . for example , sometimes law enforcement agencies present specific cases using bsa data or information on money laundering and terrorist financing threats . many of the industry associations and supervisory agencies with which we spoke cited bsaag as a useful feedback mechanism . as discussed previously , the advisory group is only open to those invited and not a public forum , so not all financial institutions receive or can provide feedback at these meetings . law enforcement awards . fincen officials said that annual law enforcement awards ceremonies are one of the mechanisms they use to provide financial institutions with feedback on the usefulness or effectiveness of bsa / aml information . the award ceremonies highlight successful cases utilizing bsa data . fincen officials told us that fincen also sends thank you letters to the selected financial institutions that provided the underlying financial data used in the awarded cases , publishes overviews of the cases for which law enforcement agencies received awards , and documents nominated cases . fincen issues press releases about the winning cases as another way to share information with financial institutions . outreach events . fincen representatives regularly have participated in outreach events about bsa / aml issues , such as by sharing information at bsa / aml conferences . according to fincen officials , the conferences allow fincen representatives to both formally ( speeches , presentations ) and informally ( personal interactions ) solicit and offer feedback on how financial institutions can improve bsa reporting . additionally , treasury reported that its office of terrorism and financial intelligence regularly engages public and private - sector practitioners and leaders , both domestic and international , on money laundering and terrorist financing issues . for example , the office convenes multilateral and bilateral public - private sector dialogues with key jurisdictions and regions to discuss mutual anti - money laundering and counter - terrorist financing issues of concern . representatives from nearly all of the federal law enforcement agencies we interviewed said that they conducted outreach events and developed relationships with financial institutions to solicit and provide feedback on their bsa reports including providing feedback on ways to improve bsa reporting and to enhance bsa compliance by financial institutions . conferences . law enforcement agencies have presented at conferences on bsa / aml topics and host conferences for financial institutions . for example , for more than a decade ice - hsi , fbi , secret service , irs - ci , and the drug enforcement administration jointly have hosted an annual conference that includes speakers from law enforcement , supervisory agencies , fincen , and financial institutions . according to an ice - hsi official , the intent of the conference is to educate the private financial sector . fbi officials also said they conduct outreach , such as hosting and participating in conferences , and said that this type of outreach reached more than 6,000 people in the last year ( as of august 2018 ) . briefings and financial institution - specific training .