the philippines . according to state's human rights report for the philippines , the government generally respected the human rights of its citizens . however , some elements of the country's security forces were responsible for arbitrary , unlawful and , in some cases , extrajudicial killings , disappearances , and torture , and arbitrary arrest and detention . indonesia . state's human rights report for indonesia stated that the indonesian government made progress in its transition from three decades of repressive and authoritarian rule to a more pluralistic and representative democracy . the government's human rights record remained poor , however , and it continued to commit serious abuses . for example , the report stated that “ecurity force members murdered , tortured , raped , beat , and arbitrarily detained civilians and members of separatist movements , especially in aceh and to a lesser extent in papua . some police officers occasionally used excessive and sometimes deadly force in arresting suspects and in attempting to obtain information or a confession . retired and active duty military officers known to have committed serious human rights violations occupied or were promoted to senior positions in the government and the ( military ) .” thailand . according to state's human rights report , the government of thailand generally respected the rights of its citizens , but there were significant problems in some areas . for example , separatist violence in southern thailand resulted in the deaths of more than 180 persons at the hands of security forces . in addition , no progress was reported in investigations into the extrajudicial killings of approximately 1,300 suspected drug traffickers during the thai government's 3-month “war on drugs” campaign from february through april 2003 . however , the thai government maintains that the deaths were the result of disputes between those involved in the drug trade . u.s. assistance to security forces in the philippines , indonesia , and thailand was provided through at least 12 programs and activities managed by state , dod , and justice . this assistance comprises a mix of appropriated funds used for procuring training and equipment , as well as nonappropriated assistance such as transfers of excess military equipment taken from u.s. stocks . the philippines was the largest beneficiary of this assistance from fiscal years 2001 to 2004 . u.s. assistance to security forces in the philippines largely supported the philippines defense reform — a comprehensive defense assessment to develop a multi - year defense strategy , enhance mobility , and build defense capacity . restrictions on indonesia prohibited it from receiving military equipment ; however , indonesia received funding to train its security forces . u.s. assistance to thailand is used for procuring equipment and training for such activities as counter narcotics and antiterrorism . state , dod , and justice allocated a total of approximately $265.7 million to train and equip security forces in the philippines , thailand , and indonesia in fiscal years 2001 to 2004 . this amounted to $179.6 million for the philippines , $47.5 million for indonesia , and $38.6 million for thailand .