this component contributed to test failures . specifically , although the failure investigation is ongoing , preliminary results indicate that the second interceptor failure from flight test ftm - 21 occurred in the tsrm . this failure is also related to the one that occurred in september 2011 flight test ftm - 16e2 . consequently , although design changes are considered necessary , mda does not plan to demonstrate the redesign works as intended via a flight test prior to production . according to program officials and contractor representatives that produce the sm - 3 block ib interceptors , the effort to redesign components in the rocket motor is considered to be relatively straightforward and low risk . program officials are currently planning to retrofit the interceptors that have already been produced during the four year certification process . according to program officials , they had planned to select the final redesign in early first quarter of fiscal year 2015 . however , because of developmental and test challenges with the redesigned component , the program office delayed the selection until later in the fiscal year . additionally , according to program officials , since the program has not selected the redesign , it is too early to determine the costs associated with inserting it into the interceptor and has not yet been accounted for . consequently , until the program thoroughly understands the extent of needed modifications , if any , and their effects on performance as demonstrated through testing , its production strategy is at risk of cost growth and schedule delays . additionally , different issues with that same component have contributed to previous sm - 3 block ib schedule delays and production disruptions in the past . in 2014 , we made a recommendation to delay full rate production until such testing demonstrates that the redesigned interceptor is effective and suitable . as it stands , mda noted that any changes to the sm - 3 block ib would not be included in the full production contract , and that the retrofitting may lead to unanticipated cost increases . as we have previously reported , mda had experienced these consequences in other elements when it pursued design changes concurrently with production . after the program enters into full production , mda has plans to enter into a multiyear procurement contract which is a special contracting method that allows the agency issue one contract for up to five years , which will allow the agency to procure interceptors for up to five years , even though funds for the entire five years may not be available at the time of award . see appendix vii for more detailed information . mda made progress , but did not achieve all of its planned test and asset delivery goals for fiscal year 2014 , and has not fully met its test goals since first reporting baselines in its 2010 bar . mda utilizes ground , non - intercept , and intercept tests to provide it with knowledge on the operational effectiveness , suitability , and survivability of an asset or capability . ground tests use simulations and scenarios when flight testing may be impractical or cost - prohibitive .