pub . congress intended to facilitate the ability of freight railroads and passenger rail operators to contract for the use of the freights' rights - of - way , stating that without tort reform and liability protection , “future passenger operations , whether commuter , high - speed rail , or intercity rail , will be placed in jeopardy as freight railroads resist taking on what is increasingly viewed as an unacceptable and uncompensated liability exposure.” h.r . during the course of our work , questions arose about the proper interpretation and application of the liability protections set forth in the araa and related issues . in particular , questions were raised about whether the liability provisions that are part of the araa apply to commuter rail operators and whether the statute applies to all types of rail incident damages claims . the ensuing discussion addresses the interpretation and application of the araa and the limitations of this legislation in resolving all of the concerns raised by commuter rail operators and freight railroads . our examination of section 161 of the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 leads us to conclude that all commuter rail operators , as well as amtrak , are covered by the $200 million cap on awards for any claims by or on behalf of rail passengers resulting from an individual rail accident . the act creates a $200 million cap for passenger injuries arising “in connection with any rail passenger transportation operations over or rail passenger transportation use of right - of - way or facilities owned , leased , or maintained by any high - speed railroad authority or operator , any commuter authority or operator , any rail carrier , or any state.” 49 u.s.c . 28103 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( emphasis added ) . additionally , the definitions section defines a “claim” as “against amtrak , any high - speed railroad authority or operator , any commuter authority or operator , any rail carrier , or any state.” 49 u.s.c . 28103 ( e ) ( 1 ) ( emphasis added ) . the plain language of the statute expressly provides that commuter authorities or operators are protected by this statutory cap . the statutory language that specifically authorizes freight railroads and commuter rail operators to enter into agreements allocating financial responsibility for claims , which forms the statutory underpinning for the indemnification agreements that protect freight railroads , is embodied within 49 u.s.c . § 28103 ( b ) . that subsection provides that “ provider of rail passenger transportation may enter into contracts that allocate financial responsibility for claims.” 49 u.s.c . § 28103 ( b ) . by enacting this provision , congress intended to protect commuter rail operators , as well as amtrak , by establishing a clear statutory basis for the enforceability of indemnification contracts . in this respect , the senate committee's report on the legislation states “he bill contains a provision that would help assure the enforceability of certain contracts between operators of rail passenger services — some of which are state and local governments — and owners of rights - of - way and other facilities.” s. rep. no .