this resulted in 915 contractors . ( see table 6 , which shows the number of actions entered in epls and corresponding number of contractors during the same period. ) for the purpose of selecting a sample of suspension , proposed debarment , and debarment actions and to ensure that our sample included actions from each component which also included a mix of contractors having different exclusion lengths , we stratified the population of contractors into 16 categories . these categories included the dod component that issued the exclusion , the length of the contractor's suspension and proposed debarments , and the length of the contractor's total exclusion period . the population is described in table 7 below . for further analysis we selected a stratified random sample of 75 contractors . in selecting our sample , we chose the sample size in each of the 16 strata using a three step process: 1 . we first identified the minimum sample size in each stratum needed for a nongeneralizable sample of contractors . we used the following criteria to determine the minimum sample size for each category: a minimum of 10 contractors from each dod component a minimum of 5 contractors within each dod component with exclusion length of 3 years or less . a minimum of 5 contractors within each dod component with exclusion length of more than 3 years . a minimum of 6 contractors within each dod component with a suspension / proposed debarment period of more than 1 year . we then calculated the sample size necessary for a control test so that an upper bound of the 95 percent confidence interval would not exceed 5 percent if the controls were effective for all selected contractors ( 0 percent error rate ) and proportionally allocated the sample size to the 16 category . to determine the final sample size , we chose the larger of the two sample sizes for each stratum . the resulting sample size was 75 contractors . the sample design is given in table 8 below . we assessed the reliability of epls data by performing electronic testing , reviewing system documentation , and relying on a recent assessment of the reliability of epls data in a prior gao engagement . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of this review . from the federal procurement data system — next generation we identified contractors with three or more terminations for default with one of the four dod components to determine if these contractors were considered for possible suspension or debarment . we selected a stratified random sample of 68 contractors . the sample design is given in table 9 below . we placed these 68 contractors into three strata and first selected all contractors that were issued a termination for default by the air force or had been suspended or debarred with certainty . we expected that the proportion of contractors that were reviewed for suspension and debarment as a result of a termination for default will be 100 percent for the first group and 0 percent for the other two groups .