( see fig . finally , the serious accident rate — which considers the amount of product and distance shipped — for hazardous liquids has decreased . none of these statistics show a constant pattern . in part , the lack of significant change over time and the fluctuation over time may be due to the relatively small number of serious accidents — an average of about 150 per year for both types combined . the accident rate is the number of serious accidents per billion ton - miles shipped . we have found that agencies that are successful in measuring performance strive to establish measures that demonstrate results , address important aspects of program performance , and provide useful information for decision - making . while ops's new measures may produce better information on the performance of its enforcement program than is currently available , ops has not adopted key practices for achieving these characteristics of successful performance measurement systems: measures should demonstrate results ( outcomes ) that are directly linked to program goals . measures of program results can be used to hold agencies accountable for the performance of their programs and can facilitate congressional oversight . ( a ton - mile is 1 ton of a product shipped 1 mile. ) the accident rates are based on the volume of petroleum products shipped . federal agencies and industry associations we contacted could not provide data on other hazardous liquids shipped . aggregated industry data on the amounts of products shipped through hazardous liquid pipelines for 2002 and 2003 are not available so we do not present accident rate information for those years . we are inquiring into the availability of data on natural gas shipped through interstate pipelines ; these data are needed to calculate the accident rates for this type of pipeline . a cornerstone to ops's efforts over the past several years has been the agency's development and implementation of a risk - based approach that it believes will fundamentally improve the safety of pipeline transportation . this approach , called integrity management , requires interstate pipeline operators to identify and fix safety - related threats to their pipelines in areas where an accident could have the greatest consequences . ops believes that this approach has more potential to improve safety than its traditional approach , which focused on enforcing compliance with safety standards regardless of the threat to pipeline safety . officials have emphasized that integrity management , coupled with other initiatives , such as oversight of operators' programs to qualify employees to operate their pipelines , represents a systematic approach to overseeing and improving pipeline safety that will change the safety culture of the industry and drive down the number of accidents . now that its integrity management approach and other initiatives are substantially under way , ops recognizes that it needs to turn its attention to the management of its enforcement program . accordingly , my testimony today focuses on opportunities for improving certain aspects of ops's enforcement program that should be useful to ops as it decides how to proceed and to this committee as it continues to exercise oversight . my statement is based on the preliminary results of our ongoing work for this committee and others .