we disagree . in response to the oig's comments on our report , we requested that the oig provide additional support used to determine that the medical center director did not investigate the allegation in which he was named . the additional case documentation provided by the oig further reaffirmed our assessment that the medical center director performed his own investigation and found no allegations were substantiated . additional documentation provided by the oig indicated that the oig referred the case to the veterans integrated service network ( visn ) for a response . however , documentation we examined during the course of our audit , and the documentation provided in response to our draft report , indicates that the medical center director performed the investigation of the allegations and then the results were routed through the visn back to the oig . the oig stated that routing the response through the visn should address our concerns of independence . this process does not address our concerns regarding independence because va directive 0701 states that all responses to hotline case referrals must contain evidence of an independent review by an official separate from and at a higher grade than the subject / alleged wrongdoer . in this case , the name of the medical center director who signed the facility response provided to the oig was the same individual named in the allegations . the oig stated that the report does not provide a balanced presentation of the rigor with which the oig reviews all incoming hotline contacts and case responses . we disagree with this characterization of our findings . as described above , the oig was unable to provide comprehensive data to select a sample of oig audits , evaluations , and inspections for review due to the limitations cited . we focused on misconduct involving senior officials consistently with the scope of our review and thoroughly reviewed all 23 senior - official misconduct cases that were referred to va for investigation , which were the only cases that the oig was able to provide . the oig stated that the description for one of the cases included in appendix v of the draft report was incomplete because we misunderstood the oig's process . we disagree with this characterization . in response to the oig's comments on our report , we requested additional supporting documentation . the documentation provided reaffirmed our assessment that another medical center director performed his own investigation and found no allegations were substantiated . similar to the case described above , the medical center director completed his own investigation and then routed the response through the visn back to the oig . in contrast to the previous case , however , the hotline workgroup reviewed the response to the oig and found it to be insufficient . specifically , the oig noted that the medical center director who provided the response was the subject of the complaint , despite the response being directed to the visn , and requested clarification . the visn informed the oig that it is not its policy for the complainant to have any involvement in the review and data submission on a case in which the complainant is involved .