gao - 10-296 . washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2010 . most of these initiatives have been led by doe . nist developed , and issued in august 2010 , a first version of its smart grid cybersecurity guidelines . to do this , nist established in march 2009 , the smart grid cyber security working group to , among other things , develop guidelines for entities ( eg , utilities , equipment manufacturers , and regulators ) to secure their smart grid systems . nist intended the guidelines to , among other things , provide a process for entities to follow for developing solutions to address the security of their smart grid systems . to develop the guidelines , nist planned to have the working group perform an assessment of the cybersecurity risks associated with existing and planned smart grid systems and then use the risk information , and an assessment of the privacy implications of these systems , to identify security requirements ( i.e. , controls ) essential to securing such systems . as part of this assessment , nist planned to address other key elements of cybersecurity , including the impact of coordinated cyber - physical attacks , and identifying smart grid system vulnerabilities . the working group intended to complete these efforts and issue the guidelines in june 2010 . the working group has largely completed these steps , including issuing the guidelines . specifically , during 2009 and 2010 , the working group defined and then performed a high - level risk assessment of existing and planned smart grid systems — such as for transporting and storing electricity , and for advanced metering infrastructure . the risk assessment included identifying assets , vulnerabilities , and threats as well as specifying impacts for these and other systems as a means to identify security requirements ( i.e. , controls ) — such as access control policies and procedures , employee training programs , incident response , and risk management — for securing such systems . using the results of the risk assessment and other efforts , the working group issued the smart grid cybersecurity guidelines in august 2010 . the guidelines include important elements , such as a high - level strategy that organizations can use to develop an approach to securing their smart grid systems , including identifying appropriate security requirements . in addition , the guidelines identified potential cryptography issues that entities may encounter and solutions for resolving these issues ; included a privacy impact assessment for the smart grid with a discussion of mitigating factors ; identified potential smart grid vulnerabilities , as well as the possible impacts to organizations should the vulnerabilities be exploited ; identified smart grid security problems , including how to ensure that access can be gained to critical devices and systems by personnel when ordinary authentication fails for any reason , and how to ensure that updates utilities send to smart meters are secure ; detailed cybersecurity design issues , such as for password complexity identified smart grid cybersecurity areas requiring further research and development . nist stated in the guidelines that this initial version was to be updated periodically to incorporate any emerging issues .