gao - 05-768 . washington , d.c.: july 29 , 2005 . ( see fig . while most major u.s. airports are located in metropolitan areas that have stations for nationwide transportation systems , such as greyhound or amtrak , 20 airports reported having direct connections to nationwide bus service or nationwide passenger rail service . twelve of the 20 airports reported having direct connections to nationwide bus service , and 14 airports reported having a direct connection to amtrak rail service . ( see fig . all 14 airports provide shuttle service to transport passengers to amtrak stations that serve the metropolitan area . one of the 14 airports — newark's liberty international airport — reported that passengers could also access the amtrak station by an automated people mover . in addition , the accessibility of amtrak to newark airport has allowed continental airlines to establish a code share agreement with amtrak , whereby passengers can purchase one ticket for a journey that includes travel by both air and rail . this agreement has allowed continental airlines to eliminate some short - haul flights from newark . while there is no single federal funding source for rail to airport projects , we found that local governments , airports , and transit systems were able to tap and package a variety of federal funds to pay for recent rail connections to airports . these included direct appropriations , the new starts program for fixed guideway transit systems , two federal aid highway categories — the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program and the surface transportation program — and passenger facility charges at airports . appendix i describes these programs . according to transportation research , planning officials , and our prior work , a number of financing , planning , and other challenges play important roles in shaping transportation investment decisions and the development of intermodal capabilities . significant challenges to the development of intermodal capabilities are the lack of specific national goals and funding programs . federal funding is often tied to a single transportation mode ; as a result it may be difficult to finance projects , such as intermodal projects , that do not have a source of dedicated funding . federal legislation and federal planning guidance all emphasize the goal of establishing a systemwide , intermodal approach to addressing transportation needs . however , the reality of the federal funding structure — which directs most surface transportation spending to highways and transit and is more oriented to passengers than freight — plays an important role in shaping local transportation investment choices . in addition to the focus on highways and transit over other investment choices , we found limited instances in which investment decisions involved direct trade - offs in choices between modes or users — such as railroad versus highway or passenger versus freight . a significant challenge to developing certain intermodal connections is the difficulty of securing funding within the mode - specific federal funding structure . the cost of intermodal projects can vary widely , depending on the complexity and scope of the project .