conducting investigations . dhs employees are authorized to conduct investigations on consular matters under the jurisdiction of the secretary of homeland security , as well as conduct and support investigations under other dhs authorities . 2004 mou . in 2004 , ice and state signed a mou on administrative aspects of assigning personnel overseas . among other things , this mou described administrative support , security , facilities , security awareness training , and information systems for vsp personnel . 2008 cable . in 2008 , state issued a cable in which ice and state directed vsp posts to develop standard operating procedures . the cable stated that these standard operating procedures should include , but not be limited to , clearance procedures for cables and other correspondence ; dispute resolution practices ; specific coordination procedures among the fraud prevention unit , vsp agents , and the regional security officer ; procedures for determining case selection ; specific hours of operation and other coordination issues ; stating how electronic reviews will be conducted and documented ; stating how physical reviews will be conducted and documented ; coordination of procedures for handling expedited or exceptional visa procedures for sharing and documenting applicant information constituting grounds for ineligibility ; and procedures for vsp applicant interviews and re - interviews . 2011 mou . on january 11 , 2011 , ice and state issued a mou that explains the roles , responsibilities , and collaboration of vsp agents , consular officers , and diplomatic security officers in daily operations of vsp at posts overseas . the mou outlines the following , among other things: general collaboration between ice and state for vsp operations ; roles and responsibilities of vsp agents and consular officers and routine interaction between the officers and agents ; development of formal , targeted training and briefings by vsp agents for consular officers and other u.s. government officials at post ; clarification of the dispute resolution process ; and collaboration between diplomatic security officers and vsp agents on visa and passport fraud investigations . the review of visa applications by vsp agents is incorporated into the visa process at overseas posts where the vsp is located . after consular officers interview an applicant and review the relevant supporting documentation , they make a preliminary determination about whether to issue or refuse the visa or refer the case to washington for additional security clearances . the vsp agents screen the applicant information against dhs's treasury enforcement and communications system ( tecs ) database to identify applicants that potentially match records of individuals who are known threats to the united states . in addition , data collected by ice on vsp activities prior to 2010 were limited by inconsistencies . from 2003 to 2010 , ice did not maintain comprehensive data on its identified performance measures to fully assess progress toward vsp objectives . as we reported in 2005 , ice did not maintain data on vsp activities in order to assess the program's performance since its establishment in 2003 . in the fall of 2005 , in response to gao recommendations , ice developed a database to track vsp workload and to serve as a performance management tool .