, and outlines core procedures . because of the similarities between the effects of terrorist attacks and natural or accidental disasters , much of the planning , personnel , training , and equipment that form the basis of protection , response , and recovery capabilities are similar across all emergency events , though certain mission areas are more similar than others . specifically , our analysis of dhs's detailed definitions and descriptions of the 36 target capabilities showed that only 6 of the capabilities are described as being specific to terrorist attacks . five of these 6 capabilities fall into dhs's prevention mission area , and one is in the protection mission area . how do first responders' emergency management capabilities for terrorist attacks differ from capabilities needed for natural or accidental disasters ? what emphasis has dhs placed on funding awarded to state and local first responders to enhance all - hazards emergency management capabilities ? the scope of our work was focused on the extent to which the actions taken by dhs to enhance first responder skills and abilities encompassed all hazards , whether the result of nature , accident , or terrorist action . to address these objectives , we analyzed dhs's efforts to implement hspd - 5 and hspd - 8 , including the process used to develop national preparedness policies and the plans , goals , and standards resulting from the process , as well as grant programs to enhance the preparedness of first responders . we interviewed dhs officials from the emergency preparedness and response directorate , federal emergency management agency , the office for domestic preparedness , and the office of state and local government coordination and preparedness to obtain their views regarding the process and its products , along with information on dhs assistance programs . to obtain the views of first responders , we interviewed officials from professional organizations that represent first responders on a national level and reviewed relevant reports and studies on homeland security and domestic preparedness . what actions has dhs taken to provide policies and strategies that promote the development of all - hazards emergency management capabilities of first responders ? finally , we conducted structured interviews with 69 first responder departments and state level emergency management officials in ten states , selected by non - probability sampling to include metropolitan areas that crossed state boundaries , tribal governments , states that face a variety of hazards , sparsely and densely populated states , and states with townships and city government structures , among other criteria . the results of these interviews cannot be generalized to first responders not participating in the interviews . an expanded discussion of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix iii . we conducted our work from may 2004 through may 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . these first responder departments responded to the questions in our structure interview guide and provided additional observations during the course of our interviews . historically , fema developed mitigation programs designed to minimize risk to property or individuals from natural or manmade hazards . these mitigation programs included the post - disaster hazard mitigation grant program and the pre - disaster project impact program .