, shipped in lieu of items , ordered under blanket orders . however , they do not address the intent of our recommendations to recover classified spare parts and unclassified items containing military technology shipped to foreign countries that are not eligible to receive them . if the country requested classified spare parts or unclassified items containing military technology that it is not eligible to receive under blanket orders , it will not likely submit a supply discrepancy report if it had intended to order the items . in addition , we interviewed defense security cooperation agency and army officials to determine if the procedures they cited in the agency comments are referring to items shipped in lieu of items ordered instead of shipment of items that foreign countries are not eligible to receive . according to the officials , the procedures are for items shipped in lieu of items ordered and not for the recovery of items that the foreign countries are not eligible to receive . as stated in our report , army officials told us that they had no written procedures in place to recover classified spare parts or unclassified items containing military technology , because it is not within their responsibility to recover these items . these officials stated that this responsibility belongs to the foreign military sales end - use monitoring program , which includes the department of state and the defense security cooperation agency . in following - up with officials on their written comments on the draft of this report , they agreed that they need to modify existing policies and procedures covering items , after consultation with the appropriate government officials , to cover items shipped in lieu of items ordered to also ensure the recovery of classified spare parts and unclassified items containing military technology that have been shipped to foreign countries that may not be eligible to receive them . as a result , we have modified our two recommendations accordingly . to assess and test whether the army's internal controls adequately restricted blanket orders for classified spare parts sold to foreign countries , we obtained current dod and army guidance on the foreign military sales programs . we also held discussions with key officials from the united states army security assistance command , new cumberland , pennsylvania , to discuss the officials' roles and responsibilities , as well as the criteria and guidance they used in performing their duties to restrict foreign countries from requisitioning classified spare parts and other items containing military technology under blanket orders . we also received technical comments and we incorporated them wherever appropriate . with regard to our two recommendations to consult with the appropriate agencies to determine what actions the army needs to initiate in order to recover ( 1 ) classified spare parts and ( 2 ) unclassified items containing military technology that have been shipped in error , i.e. , shipped in lieu of items ordered , under blanket orders , dod did not concur . the department said that the army already has procedures in place to recover classified spare parts and unclassified items containing military technology that have been shipped in error , i.e.