pub . 111-84 , § 1108 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( 2009 ) . gao , defense acquisition workforce: dod's training program demonstrates many attributes of effectiveness , but improvement is needed , gao - 11-22 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 28 , 2010 ) . contractor oversight personnel are known by many names , such as quality assurance evaluator , contracting officer's representative , or contracting officer's technical representative , but their duties are essentially the same . for the purposes of this report , we refer to these personnel generally as contracting officer's representatives ( cors ) . for this sample of contracts , we asked dod contracting and program officials associated with each contract to identify the personnel with roles and responsibilities related to that acquisition , including pre - and postaward responsibilities . we also met with key dod officials — service , agency , contracting , and quality assurance personnel coordinators — and reviewed relevant policies to understand the status of dod's efforts to identify non - dawia personnel with acquisition - related responsibilities and track their training . we reviewed guidance to executive branch agencies that defines the acquisition workforce to help determine the roles and responsibilities of acquisition personnel , including those that may be outside of dod's dawia definition . however , we did not review executive agencies' efforts to identify , develop , and train its acquisition workforce . to identify the extent to which non - dawia personnel with acquisition - related responsibilities are taking acquisition training , we asked dod to identify all personnel with acquisition - related responsibilities for each contract in our sample . we relied on dod officials to specify whether the personnel involved in each of the selected contracts were dawia personnel or non - dawia personnel with acquisition - related responsibilities . we also asked each military service and dla to specify any acquisition training the personnel they identified had received . we compared the reported data on training with training records and individual training certificates provided by commands , subcommands , centers , and dla as well as dau training records . to determine the extent to which recommendations from previous reviews have been implemented , we identified previous reviews , assessed which recommendations were relevant to our population of non - dawia personnel with acquisition - related responsibilities , and obtained documentation from agency officials on the status of dod's implementation of the selected recommendations . we conducted this performance audit from june 2010 to september 2011 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . see appendix i for additional details on our objectives , scope , and methodology . congress passed the defense acquisition workforce improvement act ( dawia ) in 1990 to address issues related to workforce quality , to formally establish the acquisition workforce , and to increase its professionalism by directing dod to create certification requirements for the acquisition workforce .