gao - 03-851t . to view the full testimony , click on the link above . for more information , contact derek stewart at ( 202 ) 512-5559 or stewartd@gao.gov . moving forward , gao believes it would be preferable to employ a governmentwide approach to address human capital issues and the need for certain flexibilities that have broad - based application and serious potential implications for the civil service system , in general , and the office of personnel management , in particular . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? - gao - 04-753 . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . congress should also consider establishing a governmentwide fund whereby agencies , based on a sound business case , could apply for funding to modernize their performance management systems and ensure that those systems have adequate safeguards to prevent abuse . this approach would serve as a positive step to promote high - performing organizations throughout the federal government while avoiding further human capital policy fragmentation . between 1987 and 2002 , the department of defense ( dod ) downsized the civilian workforce in 27 key industrial facilities by about 56 percent . many of the remaining 72,000 workers are nearing retirement . in recent years gao has identified shortcomings in dod's strategic planning and was asked to determine ( 1 ) whether dod has implemented our prior recommendation to develop and implement a depot maintenance strategic plan , ( 2 ) the extent to which the services have developed and implemented comprehensive strategic workforce plans , and ( 3 ) what challenges adversely affect dod's workforce planning . dod has not implemented our october 2001 recommendation to develop and implement a dod depot strategic plan that would delineate workloads to be accomplished in each of the services' depots . the dod depot system has been a key part of the department's plan to support military systems in the past , but the increased use of the private sector to perform this work has decreased the role of these activities . while title 10 of the u.s. code requires dod to retain core capability and also requires that at least 50 percent of depot maintenance funds be spent for public - sector performance , questions remain about the future role of dod depots . absent a dod depot strategic plan , the services have in varying degrees , laid out a framework for strategic depot planning , but this planning is not comprehensive . questions also remain about the future of arsenals and ammunition plants . gao reviewed workforce planning efforts for 22 maintenance depots , 3 arsenals , and 2 ammunition plants , which employed about 72,000 civilian workers in fiscal year 2002 . gao recommends that the dod complete revisions to core policy , promulgate a schedule for completing core computations , and complete depot strategic planning ; develop a plan for arsenals and ammunition plants ; develop strategic workforce plans ; and coordinate the implementation of initiatives to address various workforce challenges .