of these , 287 were pharmaceuticals . we collected information on each program through a survey , follow - up interviews , and , where appropriate , additional documentation . to describe approaches taken by other countries to reduce the extent to which pharmaceuticals occur in drinking water , we chose to describe efforts in sweden and australia . we selected sweden because it is undertaking a variety of stewardship activities . we selected australia because it has a nationwide take - back program . we obtained information on each country's efforts though interviews with knowledgeable officials and , where appropriate , additional documentation .  are there transgenerational effects ( i.e. , present in successive generations ) ? the human health effects of pharmaceuticals in drinking water have not been conclusively shown , but research showing an impact on aquatic life raises concerns about two classes of pharmaceuticals — edcs and antibiotics . some of the concern about edcs in drinking water stem from studies that have documented the abnormalities associated with aquatic life exposed to edcs in rivers and lakes . specifically , scientists have expressed concern because of both the significance of the abnormalities and the effects of contaminants on animals , which can be indicative of similar effects on humans . for example:  a 2007 study reported that 75 percent of male smallmouth bass in certain areas of the south branch of the potomac river basin had ovarian tissue in their gonads . the study concluded that a combination of edcs was likely to have caused the feminization of the male fish . although the authors note that the actual edcs responsible for the abnormalities could not be determined , they suggest that a combination of contaminants could be the cause and noted that the additive effects of many edcs have been demonstrated even when each compound present is below the threshold of detectable effects . the authors further noted that reproductive abnormalities in fish are frequently associated with human wastewater effluent , which contains synthetic estrogens found in birth control and hormone replacement medications . in another 2007 study by epa and the canadian government , researchers reported conducting a 7-year whole - lake experiment to test the effects on fathead minnows of chronic exposure to a synthetic estrogen used in some birth control pills . the researchers reported a collapse in the population of fathead minnows in the experimental that lake and concluded that the results from the study demonstrate continued introduction of estrogens and estrogen mimics to the aquatic environment through municipal wastewaters could decrease the reproductive success and sustainability of fish populations .  according to a 2004 research study , fish exposed to effluent from a cattle feedlot in nebraska experienced reproductive abnormalities , including reduced testes size in male fish and a lower level of estrogen in female fish . the study reported the use of androgens in growth implants in the feedlot as one possible cause of the abnormalities . not all edcs found in drinking water , however , are pharmaceuticals . other contaminants , such as industrial chemicals and products , as well as naturally occurring hormones found in plants and excreted by different species , can also act as edcs .