we disagree . first , va stated that our use of the va oig's 2011 report was misleading because the report examined a period when the vetbiz database included self - certified firms in addition to firms verified under the processes implemented under the 2006 act . va also claims the va oig report contains excessive extrapolations because it examined eligibility requirements beyond ownership and control . specifically , va notes that 14 of the 42 firms reviewed for the oig report had been through the verification process va used in response to the 2006 act and claims that only 3 were determined to be ineligible based on ownership and control . va's statement is incomplete and misleading . according to the oig , an additional 7 were determined to be ineligible for reasons that could be identified during a robust verification process . as a result , the oig found 10 of 14 firms verified under va's 2006 act process to be ineligible — an eligibility failure rate comparable to the overall eligibility failure rate cited in the report . with regard to the aforementioned 7 firms , the oig determined they were ineligible because they were engaged in improper subcontracting practices , such as “pass - through” contracts . pass - through contracts occur when businesses or joint venture / partnerships list veterans or service disabled veterans as majority owners of the business but , contrary to programs requirements , the non - veteran owned business either performed or managed the majority of the work and received a majority of the contracts' funds . given that the firms being reviewed by the oig already had existing contracts in place , the oig was able to identify the pass - through contracts by conducting site visits and reviewing business documentation , the same steps that va claims are taken during the verification process it implemented in response to the 2010 act . while we acknowledge that it is difficult to identify pass - through contracts for applicants to the program who don't have any preexisting contracts , va should be conducting such a review for those firms that have contracts in place . as we have noted in past reports , va's fraud prevention controls should include detection and monitoring measures to assure that firms are completing the work required of an sdvosb contract . second , va disagrees that it provided numerous conflicting statements to us regarding its verification efforts , stating that the verification process has evolved and that va faces technical limitations related to its case - management system . while we acknowledge these concerns , it is important to note that va did not provide us with any explanation as to its evolving priorities during the course of our audit and instead repeatedly sent us contradictory information without any clarification . moreover , not all of the conflicting statements va made can be attributed to inadequacies in its case - management system or to evolving priorities .