plan management . the marketplace is to provide a suite of services for state agencies and health plan issuers to facilitate activities such as submitting , monitoring , and renewing qualified health plans . financial management . the marketplace is to facilitate payments of premiums to health plan issuers and also provide additional services such as payment calculation for risk adjustment analysis and cost - sharing reductions for individual enrollments . consumer assistance . the marketplace must be designed to provide support to consumers in completing an application , obtaining eligibility determinations , comparing coverage options , and enrolling in healthcare coverage . states electing to establish their own marketplaces ( hereafter referred to as a state - based marketplace ) were required , in accordance with cms guidance and regulations , to develop their own it solutions , including a web portal for individual consumers to interact with and select healthcare coverage , as well as supporting systems that perform functions such as real - time eligibility queries , transferring application information to state medicaid / chip agencies , sending taxpayer information to the internal revenue service , and exchanging enrollment information with issuers of qualified health plans . in addition , state - based marketplace it solutions were required to interface with cms systems designed to exchange information with external partners , including other federal agencies and states , and facilitate the electronic payment of insurance premiums to plan issuers . as an alternative to their web portals , these states were also required to set up call centers through which consumers could apply for coverage . a state that operates its own marketplace can request that cms perform eligibility and enrollment functions using federal it systems . we refer to this as a state - based marketplace using the federal marketplace it solution . this type of marketplace evolved when certain states encountered it - related challenges during the development of their state marketplace solutions . further , if a state elected not to establish its own marketplace , cms assumed some or all aspects of the marketplace operations for that state using two additional marketplace types: federally facilitated marketplace: cms is responsible for all aspects of establishing and operating the marketplace including the four key functions . federally facilitated partnership: cms is responsible for establishing and operating the eligibility enrollment and financial management functions , while the state assists with plan management and / or consumer assistance . in these cases , states rely to varying degrees on the systems developed by cms to support a federally facilitated marketplace . these include healthcare.gov — the federal website that serves as the user interface for individuals to obtain information about health coverage , set up a user account , select a health plan , and apply for healthcare coverage — and several supporting systems . the supporting systems include a system for verifying an applicant's identity and establishing a login account ; a transactional database to facilitate eligibility and enrollment , plan management , financial services , and other functions ; and a data services hub that serves as a single portal for exchanging information with external partners .