accountability and effective oversight . the department established a governance structure for the fiar plan , which includes review bodies for governance and oversight . the governance structure is intended to provide the vision and oversight necessary to align financial improvement and audit readiness efforts across the department . as noted in our recent report , both dod and the components have established senior executive committees as well as designated officials at the appropriate levels to monitor and oversee their financial improvement efforts . these committees and individuals have also generally been assigned appropriate roles and responsibilities . to monitor progress and hold individuals accountable for progress , dod managers and oversight bodies need reliable , valid , meaningful metrics to measure performance and the results of corrective actions . to the degree that these business systems do not provide the intended capabilities , dod's goal of departmentwide audit readiness by the end of fiscal year 2017 could be jeopardized . over the years we have reported that the department has not effectively employed acquisition management controls to help ensure the erps deliver the promised capabilities on time and within budget . as we reported in october 2010 , dod has identified 10 erps — 1 of which had been fully implemented — as essential to its efforts to transform its business operations . we are currently reviewing the status of two of these erps — the army's general fund enterprise business system ( gfebs ) and the air force's defense enterprise accounting and management system ( deams ) . gfebs is intended to support the army's standardized financial management and accounting practices for the army's general fund , except for funds related to the army corps of engineers . the army estimates that gfebs will be used to control and account for approximately $140 billion in annual spending . deams is intended to provide the air force with the entire spectrum of financial management capabilities and is expected to maintain control and accountability for approximately $160 billion . gfebs is expected to be fully deployed during fiscal year 2012 , is currently operational at 154 locations , including dfas , and is being used by approximately 35,000 users . deams is expected to be fully deployed during fiscal year 2016 , is currently operational at scott air force base and dfas , and is being used by about 1,100 individuals . our preliminary results identified issues related to gfebs and deams providing dfas users with the expected capabilities in accounting , management information , and decision support . to compensate , dfas users have devised manual workarounds and several applications to obtain the information they need to perform their day - to - day tasks . examples of the issues in these systems that dfas users have identified include the following:  the backlog of unresolved gfebs trouble tickets has continued to increase from about 250 in september 2010 to approximately 400 in may 2011 . trouble tickets represent user questions and issues with transactions or system performance that have not been resolved .