ssns are not part of cpni . ftc is an independent agency whose mission is , in part , to prevent business practices that are anticompetitive , deceptive , or unfair to consumers . as part of its responsibilities , ftc enforces consumer privacy provisions and safeguards of fcra , facta , and glba not enforced by other federal agencies . ftc is also required to collect identity theft complaints . ftc statistics currently indicate that identity theft is growing . for 2004 , ftc reported that it received about 247,000 complaints from individuals stating that they were victims of identity fraud , which was up from just over 86,000 complaints reported in 2001 . while the reported number of victims and likely identity crimes has increased , the extent to which these statistics represent company security breaches is not well documented . however , various news reports and identity crime experts have attributed some identity thefts and credit card fraud to security breaches involving third party companies . banks , securities firms , telecommunication companies , and tax preparation companies we interviewed routinely obtain ssns from their customers for authentication and identification purposes . all the companies we interviewed contracted out various services , such as data processing , administrative , and customer service functions . although these companies may share consumer information , such as ssns , with contractors that provide services to their customers , company officials said that they only share such information with their contractors for limited purposes , generally when it is necessary or unavoidable . officials from selected banking , securities , telecommunications , and tax preparation companies told us that they obtain and use ssns primarily for authentication and identification purposes related to fraud prevention , credit verification , and complying with federal law . however , these officials told us that ssns were not distinguished from other types of customers' personally identifiable information . company officials also told us that the same safeguards applied to ssns as all other pieces of their customers' personal information . officials from banks and securities firms we interviewed said that their companies obtained ssns directly from their customers to comply with federal law when the customer opened a new account or conducted certain financial transactions . for example , the bank secrecy act , as amended by the usa patriot act mandates that , among other things , financial institutions must verify each new account holder's identity when opening an account , in an effort to curtail money laundering and terrorist financing . according to company officials we interviewed , other federal laws and regulations require both banks and securities firms to use ssns for tax - reporting and customer - identity - verification purposes . in addition , some bank and securities firm officials said that due to its uniqueness , their companies also incorporated the ssn into their fraud prevention and authentication programs . telecommunication company officials we interviewed said that their companies are not required by federal law to collect or use the ssn , but that potential customers are asked to provide their ssn before establishing an account .