all of the content from tap is also available online . how did dol implement the veterans' employment workshop pilot ? what did state officials report regarding the benefits and challenges of the workshops in the pilot states ? how does the pilot inform decisions about its possible expansion ? to address our objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations and agency documentation . gao subject matter experts in program design and evaluation assessed the extent to which those criteria were relevant to our review of the veterans' employment workshop pilot by comparing the criteria with the steps of evaluation design listed in our guide on program evaluations.employment and training service ( vets ) and dol chief evaluation office officials to identify how the pilot was designed and how it could be evaluated . because of their expertise and involvement in addressing the needs of veterans , we interviewed officials from the department of veterans affairs ( va ) and several veteran service organizations about how the pilot could have been designed and the extent to which dol collaborated with them in developing and implementing the pilot . we also interviewed dol and state workforce agency officials from each of the three pilot states: georgia , washington , and west virginia . during our interviews we asked officials about how they implemented the pilot , we interviewed dol veterans' benefits of the employment workshops for pilot participants , and any challenges the states faced . we obtained additional information on the pilot from dol participant data . through interviews with knowledgeable agency officials and reviewing agency documentation , we determined the data were sufficiently reliable to describe the populations that took the workshops and were enrolled in dol's american job centers ( ajc ) . dol collected survey responses from veterans who attended the workshops ; however , we determined that we could not present these survey data as representative of pilot participants generally because of the relatively low survey response rate . nonetheless , through interviews with knowledgeable agency officials and reviewing agency documentation , we determined that some use of survey data was sufficiently reliable for our purposes , such as presenting qualitative response information . appendix i provides a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from july 2014 to july 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis from our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dol and va oversee four employment and training programs targeted to veterans ( see table 1 ) . dol administers its programs through state workforce agencies in each state . dol oversees these programs through federal officials stationed in each region , including a director of veterans' employment and training located in each state . dol's vets administers three of the employment programs targeted to veterans . vets also funds its portion of the tap , which is a joint program with the department of defense and va. va funds the vocational rehabilitation & employment program .