lack of formal plans . while we were told that site management must submit a formal plan for addressing backlogs if those backlogs exceed 5 days , we found that such plans had not been prepared for two of the five sites we visited — bragg ( north carolina ) , which had overcome its backlogs with assigned personnel and overtime , and norfolk ( virginia ) , which has experienced backlogs and extensive customer wait times for the past several years . lack of backlog reduction process . backlogs have been addressed by deploying temporary duty personnel to specific sites and by starting to standardize some procedures , but no agency - wide process exists for reducing backlogs and maintaining those reductions . dod officials told us that standardized receiving is the agency - wide process used for reducing backlogs , increasing production efficiency , and maintaining sustainable controls over backlogs . in addition , the recent tiger teams have managed to reduce the backlogs at most disposition sites . however , according to dla disposition services officials , backlogs persist at a few of the larger sites that have a large number of customers . dla officials told us that they believed the effect of such an increase on dla disposition services' overall disposal process would not be significant . these officials cited the example of the drawdown in the army's brigade combat teams , which they asserted had not had a significant effect at any disposition site . to support this drawdown , dla disposition services officials told us they had successfully implemented mobile disposal capabilities at several army sites to expedite disposal , adding turn - in appointments and increasing operating hours and even manpower in cases where the current capabilities were not sufficient . they also said that any significant increase in the amount of excess property would become apparent as an increase in the receiving backlog at the affected sites , which is monitored on a monthly basis . dla officials also said that , if a site's backlog grows beyond the 5-day threshold , site management must submit a plan for reducing it , using local resources such as overtime or split shifts . if this plan is not effective , dla disposition services headquarters can add more personnel resources to that site or divert some of the property to be turned in to other disposition sites . these officials also said that dla disposition services coordinates with the services in advance of large amounts of property being turned in , so that the sites can plan for increased workloads . however , as noted previously , even with these assurances , backlogs continued at 17 sites as of the end of april 2015 . a key internal control of successful federal organizations is their management's ability to identify , analyze , and respond to risks that could inhibit the organization in reaching its defined objectives . dla disposition services has established an operational goal for customers to be able get an appointment to turn in their excess property within 14 days of requesting one .