staggered work shifts . in october 2014 , va created a mechanism for tracking complaints it receives from vcl callers and external parties , such as members of congress and veterans , about the performance of the vcl primary and backup call centers . according to va officials , each complaint is investigated to validate its legitimacy and determine the cause of any confirmed performance concerns . the results and disposition of each complaint are documented in va's complaint tracking database . in 2011 , va established key performance indicators to evaluate vcl primary center operations ; however , in our may 2016 review , we found these indicators did not have established measureable targets or time frames for their completion . vcl key performance indicators lacked measurable targets . we found that va's list of vcl key performance indicators did not include information on the targets the department had established to indicate their successful achievement . for example , va included a key performance indicator for the percentage of calls answered by the vcl in this list but did not include information on what results would indicate success for ( 1 ) the vcl as a whole , ( 2 ) the vcl primary center , or ( 3 ) the vcl backup call centers . as another example , va had not established targets for the percentage of calls abandoned by callers prior to speaking with vcl responders . measureable targets should include a clearly stated minimum performance target and a clearly stated ideal performance target . va implemented new call handling procedures at the vcl primary center beginning in june 2015 that provided responders with specific guidance to more efficiently handle “noncore” callers — those callers who were not seeking crisis assistance but rather seeking help with other issues , such as help with veterans' benefits questions . for example , if a caller reached the vcl with a question about va disability benefits , the vcl primary center responder would verify that the caller was not in crisis and transfer the caller to the veterans benefits administration to address the question . vcl telephone call data provided by va suggest that the average time vcl primary center responders spent handling noncore calls decreased by approximately 30 percent over a 5-month period after responder training began on these new call - handling procedures . we would expect that as the average time vcl primary center responders spent handling noncore calls decreased , these responders would have more time available to answer additional incoming calls . to determine the timeliness of the vcl's responses to online chats and text messages , we conducted a covert test in july and august 2015 using nongeneralizable samples of 15 online chats and 14 text messages . all 15 of our test online chats received responses within 60 seconds , 13 of which were within 30 seconds . this result was consistent with va data that indicated vcl responders sent responses to over 99 percent of online chat requests within 1 minute in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 . during our 2016 review , va officials told us that all online chats are expected to be answered immediately .