reform . renew . a new transportation approach for america — would reduce the local match requirement for both capital and operating expenses to 10 percent . s. 176 , 111th cong . ( 2009 ) would reduce the local match requirement for operating expenses of a jarc project as an incentive for projects that coordinate with programs serving other transportation - disadvantaged populations . reducing the local matching requirement could reduce the incidence of lapsed jarc funds . as previously discussed , some recipients told us that lack of match was a reason that their apportioned funds were allowed to lapse . other recipients said that their current matching funds are just enough to support their current grants and they expect that it will be more difficult for those match sources to sustain their jarc support in the future . lower match rates could have the disadvantage of reducing the overall spending for jarc . for example , we earlier reported that matching funds are important to maintaining recipients' level of spending for a program . thus , if project sponsors rely more heavily on federal funds then fewer local funds will likely be used to support programs , and total program expenditures may decline . safetea - lu required recipients of fta's three grant programs for the transportation - disadvantaged to develop a coordinated plan . we previously noted that jarc recipients in three areas we spoke to still indicated that coordination with human service organizations was difficult . we reported in 2009 that some recipients had suggested that federal agencies that provide and allow funds to be used for transportation services should require grantees to participate in coordinated transportation planning efforts . a reauthorization proposal , as previously noted , would provide an incentive for projects that coordinate at least two of the three fta grant programs for the transportation - disadvantaged . coordination among all federal transportation programs for the transportation - disadvantaged has been a concern noted in our prior reports . our reports in 2003 and 2004 analyzed federal spending aimed at transportation - disadvantaged populations . while the full extent of such spending could not be determined , available data showed federal expenditures of $2.4 billion , of which just $317 million , or 13 percent , was by dot programs . furthermore , we reported in 2011 that , to assure coordination benefits are realized , congress may want to consider requiring key programs to participate in coordinated planning . the american public transportation association's 2008 proposal would require changes in authorizing laws for transportation , health , and human services to assure coordination and cost - sharing between agencies for human services transportation . the community transportation association of america's 2009 proposal for streamlined urban , rural , and intercity programs would , according to the proposal , end the proliferation of stand - alone transportation programs , each with its own guidance , regulations and purposes . the community transportation association of america also proposed that these new programs would be funded partly by $3 billion in transfers from other federal programs . dot reviewed a draft of this report and provided technical corrections , which were incorporated as appropriate .