return on investment goal . onrr has had a goal for return on investment for fiscal years 2010 through 2017 that measured the efficiency of the compliance work that all of its program areas performed . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the interior , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff members who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . we reviewed and summarized recommendation closure documentation that the department of the interior ( interior ) provided for royalty compliance recommendations made to the department by the royalty policy committee's subcommittee on royalty management in 2007 and interior's office of inspector general ( oig ) in 2006 . for the subcommittee recommendations , interior officials told us that the subcommittee did not assess the implementation of its recommendations . as a result , we present information that interior provided on its decision about the status of the recommendations and a summary of actions taken . these officials also stated that while the process for selecting cases for audits and compliance reviews differs , the agency has no written procedures for either compliance activity on how cases should be selected . for audits , onrr officials we interviewed told us that cases are generally selected based on research from onrr's recently established analytics and risk management group , which includes the relocated work planning group and other offices that analyze particular aspects of the oil and gas industry , such as pricing . according to these officials , the work planners or analytics staff review a variety of royalty payment and oil and gas production information to identify trends and outliers that may indicate potential royalty noncompliance . the officials told us that they also consider other factors in their selection decisions , such as whether a company was new — and therefore may be unfamiliar with how to correctly report royalties — or had undergone a change in ownership — which can lead to reporting errors . additional factors that onrr officials told us they considered were referrals by onrr staff based on recently completed compliance activity on a specific company or property and the risk scores for the relevant companies and properties generated from the agency's compliance risk model . for compliance reviews , onrr officials we interviewed told us that the work planning group includes information from a go / no - go analysis , which they said allows onrr to make a decision early in the process to cost effectively decide whether to initiate a compliance review . according to onrr officials , the use of the go / no - go analysis began in fiscal year 2015 as means to better ensure that the compliance activities they select will identify a finding of royalty noncompliance .