pub . 109-415 , ยง 603 , 120 stat . 2767 , 2818 ( codified at 300ff - 121 ) . core hiv / aids grants awarded by hrsa under other provisions of the care act . other hhs agencies and offices , including hrsa , continue to carry out mai grant programs separate from the statutory mai program that hrsa implements under the care act . in particular , cdc , samhsa , and the office of the secretary also award mai grants to provide services for communities disproportionally affected by hiv / aids . cdc and samhsa award mai grants directly to grantees . in contrast , mai funds administered by the office of the secretary , referred to as the secretary's mai fund ( smaif ) , are distributed by the office of hiv / aids and infectious disease policy ( ohaidp ) to hrsa , cdc , samhsa , and seven other hhs agencies and offices . these agencies and offices , in turn , award smaif grants . mai and smaif funding are often provided to the same grantees that receive core hiv / aids funding . three hhs agencies , hrsa , samsha , and cdc , allocate a portion of their respective annual appropriations to carry out mai programs . in fiscal year 2011 , cdc , hrsa , and samhsa allocated approximately $363.7 million of their respective appropriations for mai programs . cdc , hrsa , and samhsa use this funding to award grants for the provision of services to racial and ethnic minorities with hiv / aids.office of the secretary receives an annual line item mai appropriation , which it calls smaif . the office of the secretary received a $52.8 million appropriation for smaif funding in fiscal year 2011 . ohaidp distributed this funding on behalf of the office of the secretary to ten hhs agencies and offices within hhs , including hrsa , cdc , and samhsa , for a in addition , the variety of activities to address hiv / aids in racial and ethnic minority communities . in turn , these agencies and offices awarded smaif grants and cooperative agreements to the same types of organizations and entities that receive other mai funding to provide services . hrsa's smaif funding is in addition to the amounts it receives in order to make mai grants under the care act . ( see table 1 for fiscal year 2011 mai funding. ) mai grantees include a wide variety of organizations . mai grantees include health departments , state and local governments , tribal governments , community health centers , hospitals and medical centers , cbos , colleges and universities , aids education and training centers , and national hiv / aids organizations such as the national minority aids council.that are awarded contracts to conduct evaluations of mai programs . some mai grantees also receive core hiv / aids funding . where this is the case , mai grants generally account for a small percentage of the grantee's funding to provide hiv / aids services . as part of the federal budget process , hhs requests core hiv / aids funding and mai funding , which congress provides under different appropriations provisions .