, defaulted loans ) . you requested that we review the 504 loan program . this report discusses ( 1 ) the lending standards and performance indicators that sba has established to help ensure that loans meet key requirements , as well as 504 loan program performance , ( 2 ) the extent to which sba has implemented procedures to help ensure that cdcs are eligible to participate in the program and that loan applications comply with program requirements , and ( 3 ) the extent to which sba has implemented procedures to monitor cdc compliance with program requirements . to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant laws and regulations ; gao and sba inspector general reports ; and sba guidance , including standard operating procedures ( sop ) . we also interviewed sba staff and officials at 10 cdcs . we selected these cdcs to ensure a range of cdcs based on factors such as size and location . due to ongoing litigation related to a subset of cdcs known as premier certified lenders , we did not assess loans made using the specific additional authority that sba may provide to these lenders . to respond to our first objective , we analyzed sba 504 loan data for fiscal years 2003 through 2013 ( as of mar . exposure to default risk is tiered in the 504 loan program . the third - party lender's loan is collateralized by a first lien on the project property . the cdc's 504 loan is subordinate to the bank's first position on the debt . a 504 loan is approved but not funded by the sale of the debenture until project - related construction is completed . prior to the sale of the debenture and funding of the 504 loan , the borrower may obtain interim financing from a third - party lender , usually the same lender that provided the loan covering 50 percent of the total 504 project financing . cdcs are generally nonprofit corporations that provide funding to small businesses in order to contribute to economic development within their communities . there are about 270 existing cdcs located throughout the united states and puerto rico . a cdc must obtain certification from sba to operate in a designated state ; however , a few cdcs offer 504 funding in contiguous states contingent upon approval from sba . the 504 loan program is intended to serve small businesses that might otherwise not have access to privately financed credit . similar to other sba loan guarantee programs , the 504 program has a “credit elsewhere” requirement , which means that small business applicants must be unable to obtain credit on reasonable terms from a nonfederal source . in 1994 , congress authorized sba to implement two programs to provide qualified cdcs with delegated authority to carry out certain functions associated with 504 loans that had previously been reserved for sba . these two programs are the accredited lenders program ( alp ) and the premier certified lenders program . the two programs allow participating cdcs , in some cases , to unilaterally make decisions related to various loan activities . as discussed previously , the scope of this review does not include issues related to the premier certified lenders program .