fpl . we constructed four percentages of fpl variables based on the four household income variables and two household composition variables defined above . a child's baseline medicaid percentage of fpl was the medicaid household income variable divided by the 2009 poverty threshold applicable to the child's state and family size contained in the medicaid household composition variable . a child's adjusted medicaid percentage of fpl was the adjusted medicaid household income variable divided by the 2009 poverty threshold applicable to the child's state and family size contained in the medicaid household composition variable . a child's adjusted chip percentage of fpl was the adjusted chip household income variable divided by the 2009 poverty threshold applicable to the child's state and family size contained in the medicaid household composition variable . a child's premium tax credit percentage of fpl was the premium tax credit household income variable divided by the 2009 poverty threshold applicable to the child's state and household size contained in the premium tax credit household composition variable . insurance status . employer - sponsored insurance was defined as insurance obtained through an individual's or a family member's employer , former employer , union , or the military . individuals were not categorized as having employer - sponsored insurance if they also had medicaid or chip coverage . we used a procedure that the census bureau has adopted for the american community survey to address under - reporting of medicaid coverage . household income . household composition . we created two household composition variables for children on the basis of final cms and proposed irs rules for determining household composition for the premium tax credit and for medicaid or chip . the premium tax credit household composition variable defined households as composed of a taxpayer and spouse , if applicable , and tax dependents . tax dependents were defined as follows: children under age 19 ( or ages 19 through 23 who were full - time students ) whose taxable income ( together with a spouse's income , if applicable ) was not more than half of household income . other family members , who ( together with a spouse , if applicable ) , earned less than the irs threshold and whose total income was not more than half of household income . taxpayers were those who did not meet the above definition of a tax dependent . this definition of a tax dependent excluded those with significant income , but did not capture tax rules about the amount of financial support a taxpayer must provide for children or other dependents in order to claim them as tax dependents . for example , most children under age 19 were defined as tax dependents . households of tax - dependent children included the child , the child's taxpayer parents or guardians , and any other tax dependents of the taxpayers , such as the child's siblings . when children lived with two unmarried parents , the parent with the higher income was designated as the taxpayer parent . this household composition variable did not account for children who may be claimed as tax dependents by a noncustodial parent or for spouses who choose to file taxes separately .