ii ) . for example , rural development officials said that in fiscal years 2012 through 2014 the agency provided at least three grants , totaling about $1.2 million , to support renewable energy development in southeast alaska . in the investment strategy , usda said the forest service would approach the southeast conference organization about sponsoring the development of a biomass energy plan for the region . the forest service has worked with the southeast conference to assess the potential for increasing the use of biomass energy in southeast alaska and , in september 2015 , published the community biomass handbook , which offers instructions on designing and planning biomass projects as well as information on where biomass systems are being used in the region . the agency's partnership with the southeast conference resulted in about 30 feasibility studies funded predominantly by the forest service and approximately 10 biomass systems in southeast alaska , according to forest service officials . also in the investment strategy , usda said the forest service would , where feasible , substitute woody biomass for diesel fuel to meet the energy needs of southeast alaska . the agency has taken some initial steps to do so . for example , officials told us that the agency was converting its facility in sitka from diesel fuel to biomass energy , a project they expect the agency to complete in summer 2016 . the forest service had previously converted a visitor center in ketchikan to a wood - fueled heating system , although the building is no longer using this system , which the agency reported was too large for the facility and had high operating costs . the agencies , however , no longer plan to implement some actions they previously identified , according to agency officials . for example , the investment strategy stated that , to help “kick start” the biomass energy industry in southeast alaska , the farm service agency would encourage the use of a nationwide program that provides financial incentives to the biomass industry . a farm service agency official in southeast alaska , however , told us the nationwide program is not being used in the region because funding is limited and national program officials had decided to target existing biomass industry businesses rather than new ones , and there were no such businesses in southeast alaska . representatives we interviewed from the 30 selected forest service stakeholder organizations identified a variety of options they said would improve the agency's management of the tongass timber program . these stakeholders also expressed strong differences of opinion regarding the overall direction of the tongass timber program . options stakeholders identified for improving the forest service's management of the tongass timber program included: improving predictability of timber available for sale . the majority of the seven timber industry stakeholders we interviewed told us the forest service does not offer a predictable amount of timber for sale from year to year . these stakeholders emphasized the importance of predictability for the timber industry to be able to make decisions about how to retool to accommodate young - growth trees — which they said is important given potential changes to the industry as a result of the planned transition .