this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee might have . see figure 1 . what are the estimated costs of airports' planned capital development ? how much funding did airports receive for planned capital development in recent years , and what were their principal sources of funding ? if past funding levels continue , will they be sufficient to meet estimates of planned capital development ? what options are available to address any potential difference between planned development and available funding ? because our information on planned airport capital development , including the information we obtained from surveying 400 smaller airports , is preliminary , it is subject to change as we finalize our ongoing work . although there is general consensus among stakeholders that maintaining the integrity of the national airport system requires continual capital investment , estimates vary as to the type and cost of planned airport capital development required to ensure a safe and efficient system . for 2001 through 2005 , faa has estimated annual planned capital development costs of about $9 billion , while the airport council international ( aci ) , a key organization representing the airport industry , has estimated annual costs of about $15 billion for 2002 through 2006 . the estimates differ primarily because faa's includes only projects that are eligible for federal funding , whereas aci's includes projects that may or may not be eligible for federal funding . neither faa's nor aci's estimate covers the airport terminal modifications needed to accommodate the new explosives detection systems required to screen checked baggage . according to aci , the total cost of these modifications could be $3 billion to $5 billion over the next 5 years . from 1999 through 2001 , airports received an average of about $12 billion a year for planned capital development . the primary source of this funding was bonds , which accounted for almost $7 billion , followed by federal grants and passenger facility charges , which accounted for $2.4 billion and $1.6 billion , respectively . while this projected shortfall could change with revisions in future funding , planned development , or both , it nevertheless indicates where funding differences may be the greatest . options are available to increase or make better use of the funding for airport development , and these options would benefit different types of airports to varying degrees . for example , raising the current cap on passenger facility charges would primarily benefit larger airports , while increasing or redistributing airport improvement program grant funds would be more likely to help smaller airports . the estimated costs of planned airport capital development vary depending on which projects are included in the estimates . according to faa's estimate , which includes only projects that are eligible for airport improvement program ( aip ) grants , the total cost of airport development will be about $46 billion , or about $9 billion per year , for 2001 through 2005 . faa's estimate is based on the agency's national plan of integrated airport systems , which faa published in august 2002 .