gao - 12-941t . washington , d.c.: july 26 , 2012 . ( see fig . according to dndo the current generation of rpms has limitations in that it can detect but cannot identify sources of radiation . because of this inability , the rpms' radiation alarms can be triggered by benign , naturally occurring radioactive material present in common items such as kitty litter and granite . cargo that has triggered an alarm during the initial ( “primary” ) screening is sent for additional inspection ( i.e. , “secondary” screening ) , first by another rpm to confirm the alarm and then by a cbp officer using a handheld radiation detector — about the size of a shoe box — that can identify the source of the radiation ( see fig . one way to reduce the rate of alarms that are triggered by benign materials — and thereby reduce the number of unnecessary secondary screenings — would be to use next - generation rpms that can both detect and identify radiation sources . in 2005 , dndo began working with cbp on a program to develop and test a type of next - generation rpm called the advanced spectroscopic portal monitor ( asp ) , which was designed to both detect radiation and identify the source as benign , suspect , or a threat . the initial concept of the program was to develop , procure , and deploy enough asps to replace many of cbp's currently deployed rpms and handheld detectors at a cost of $2 billion to $3 billion , according to dndo . throughout the asp program , dndo and cbp faced many challenges , on which we have reported and testified to congress several times . our last in - depth review of the asp program was in may 2009 , when we reported that the asp had mixed performance during testing to determine whether it could successfully be used for primary and secondary screening . challenges in the asp program were also identified by the national research council of the national academies . in 2009 , the national research council recommended in an interim report that dndo use a better approach to testing , evaluation , cost - benefit assessment , and deployment of asps . in 2010 , the national research council found in its final report that , among other things , dndo's 2008 testing had shortcomings that impaired the ability to draw conclusions about asp's likely performance , and dndo's draft cost - benefit analysis needed substantial improvement to support decision making . in july 2011 , after several years of testing , the dndo director testified that the secretary of homeland security had directed dndo and cbp to “end the asp program as originally conceived” and to instead use existing asps to help cbp officers gain operational familiarity with asp and to gather data to support a future acquisition program . in october 2011 , the secretary of homeland security wrote to key congressional committees informing them of her decision to cancel the asp program . in july 2012 , the under secretary for management stated that , in accordance with the secretary's letter , the program was considered cancelled .