but most commercial policyholders are not buying the coverage . according to insurance industry experts , purchases have been higher in areas considered to be at high risk of another terrorist attack . however , many policyholders with businesses or properties not located in perceived high – risk locations are not buying coverage because they view any price for terrorism insurance as high relative to their perceived risk exposure . further , those that have bought terrorism insurance remain exposed to significant perils because insurers have broadened longstanding policy exclusions of nuclear , biological , and chemical ( nbc ) events . congress's second objective — to give private industry a transitional period during which it could begin pricing terrorism insurance and develop ways to cover losses after tria expires — has not been achieved yet . industry sources indicated that under tria , insurance market participants have made no progress to date toward the development of reliable methods for pricing terrorism risks and little movement toward any mechanism that would enable insurers to provide terrorism insurance to businesses without government involvement . in conducting this work , we reviewed and analyzed relevant information concerning state legislation and publicly available and proprietary industry data and studies on the terrorism insurance market . we interviewed officials at treasury , the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) , and state insurance regulators from six states with high insurance sales volumes . we also interviewed representatives of insurance companies , reinsurance companies , brokers for insurance and reinsurance companies , industry associations , property owners and developers , and insurance filing services and credit rating agencies . in our discussions with these organizations , we endeavored to gain an understanding of their experience in implementing tria requirements , obtain their views on the effects of tria on the terrorism insurance market , and identify developments within the industry to address terrorism risks after tria expires . we conducted this work in chicago , new york city , and washington , d.c. , from january 2003 through april 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . while tria has improved the availability of terrorism insurance , particularly for high - risk properties in major metropolitan areas , most commercial policyholders are not buying the coverage . limited industry data suggest that 10 - 30 percent of commercial policyholders are purchasing terrorism insurance , perhaps because most policyholders perceive themselves at relatively low risk for a terrorist event . some industry experts are concerned that those most at risk from terrorism are generally the ones buying terrorism insurance . in combination with low purchase rates , these conditions could result in uninsured losses for those businesses without terrorism coverage or cause financial problems for insurers , should a terrorist event occur . moreover , even policyholders who have purchased terrorism insurance may remain uninsured for significant risks arising from certified terrorist events — that is , those meeting statutory criteria for reimbursement under tria — such as those involving nbc agents or radioactive contamination .