i would be pleased to answer any questions at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact lorelei st. james , at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or stjamesl@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include teresa spisak ( assistant director ) , lindsay bach , amy abramowitz , patrick dudley , and david hooper . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the first factor is the effect of a currency change on the private sector . our 2011 and 2012 reports considered only the fiscal effect on the government . because we found no quantitative estimates that could be evaluated or modeled , our estimate did not consider factors such as the broader societal impact of replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin or attempt to quantify the costs to the private sector . based on our interviews with stakeholders representing a variety of cash - intensive industries , we believe that the costs and benefits to the private sector should be carefully weighed since some costs could be substantial . in 2011 we reported that stakeholders identified potential shorter - and longer - term costs that would likely result from the replacement . two factors merit consideration moving forward . specifically , shorter - term costs would be those costs involved in adapting to the transition such as modifying vending machines , cash - register drawers , and night - depository equipment to accept $1 coins . such costs would also include the need to purchase or adapt the processing equipment that businesses may need , such as coin - counting and coin - wrapping machines . longer - term costs would be those costs that would permanently increase the cost of doing business , such as the increased transportation and storage costs for the heavier and more voluminous coins as compared to notes , and processing costs . these costs would likely be passed on to the customer and the public at large through , for example , higher prices or fees . most stakeholders we interviewed said , however , that they could not easily quantify the magnitude of these costs , and the majority indicated that they would need 1 to 2 years to make the transition from $1 notes to $1 coins . in contrast to the stakeholders who said that a replacement would mean higher costs for their businesses , stakeholders from the vending machine industry and public transit said that the changeover might have only a minimal impact on them .