, effectiveness ) . iii ) . fmcsa and independent evaluators have identified a need for this level of detailed information in the management and implementation of interventions . for example , an internal fmcsa working group determined that the agency needed a more detailed understanding of the effectiveness of onsite focused investigations to empower investigators to select the most appropriate intervention to change carrier behavior . additionally , in its 2014 assessment , the independent review team that dot tasked with reviewing fmcsa's compliance review processes identified a need for fmcsa to perform consistent , detailed , evaluations of effectiveness by enforcement tool , such as intervention types . without detailed evaluations , the team said that fmcsa would be unable to focus resources on using its most effective tools or to reconfigure tools that are not meeting the agency's goals . nonetheless , as discussed earlier in this report , fmcsa's ability to accurately identify specific intervention types is limited . accepted practices for designing evaluations state that quality evaluations should rely on credible data that are sufficiently free of errors that could lead to inaccurate conclusions . taking steps to reliably and accurately identify each intervention type in the data used to support its evaluations would help fmcsa conduct evaluations that produce information appropriate to the design and implementation of csa interventions . uses and characteristics of comparison groups a comparison group , in the context of typical designs for evaluating program effectiveness , represents what would have happened in the absence of a program and is used to rule out alternative explanations for changes in outcomes . in a truly randomized experiment , this w ould be the control group . in a quasi - experimental evaluation , like fmcsa's annual effectiveness evaluation , w here participants ( i.e. , carriers ) are not sorted randomly into groups , the comparison group should be constructed to be as similar as possible to the group being influenced by the program ( i.e. , carriers receiving interventions ) , in order to draw strong conclusions about the effects of the program . the groups should be similar enough that any difference in outcome can be plausibly attributed to the intervention type being evaluated . reasons for these notable decreases are discussed below . offsite investigations: division officials from each of the four pilot test states we interviewed told us they selected offsite investigations less frequently in more recent years , because the number of carriers that met efotm criteria for receiving them decreased over time . for example , officials from one division told us their use of offsite investigations decreased because motor carriers' basic percentiles were typically too high or involved too many basics to qualify to receive an offsite investigation according to current efotm criteria . fmcsa headquarters officials told us they are focused on increasing the use of offsite investigations , because they believe offsite investigations were demonstrated as both efficient and effective . for example , in march 2016 fmcsa established a working group to explore modifying policy to give division managers more discretion in assigning offsite investigations .