for both partnerships and s - corps . ( app . i describes our overall objectives , scope , and methodology. ) the benefits for irs are faster and more comprehensive information as well as cost reductions . the benefits to taxpayers are the receipt of acknowledgment notices , faster rejection notices that allow taxpayers to resolve problems faster , and more accurate information . currently irs's main challenge is the lack of complete e - filing capacity , but irs is scheduled to have this capacity by 2007 . the main challenge for taxpayers is the cost of converting from paper to e - filing . however , limited data indicate that most k - 1s are computer generated , which is a prerequisite for e - filing . also , all of the software companies that offer e - filing that disclosed their fees ( about half of those we contacted ) do so for less than a dollar per k - 1 or for no additional charge . partnerships , s - corps , and trusts are commonly referred to as flow - through entities , as they do not generally pay taxes on income . instead , they distribute net income — as well as losses — to partners , shareholders , and beneficiaries , respectively , who are subsequently required to report the net income or loss on their individual tax returns and to pay any applicable taxes . distributed income is reported to irs on a k - 1 , which is included in the annual return filed by the flow - through entity . copies of the schedule k - 1 are provided to partners , shareholders , and beneficiaries for use when filing their respective annual returns . partners receive a form 1065 schedule k - 1 , “partner's share of income , credits , deductions , etc.” ; shareholders receive a form 1120s schedule k - 1 , “shareholder's share of income , credits , deductions , etc.” ; and beneficiaries receive a form 1041 schedule k - 1 , “beneficiary's share of income , deductions , credits , etc.” as shown in figure 1 , as part of its overall underreporter program , irs has a specific k - 1 document - matching program in which selected k - 1 information reported by flow - through entities is compared to information reported by individuals on their tax returns in order to determine whether distributed income has been reported as required . in like manner , income reported to irs on a k - 1 by s - corps and trusts can be matched with income reported on tax returns by shareholders and beneficiaries , respectively . the purpose of this program is to increase voluntary reporting of flow - through income by taxpayers and to target k - 1 related underreporter notices to noncompliant taxpayers . irs identified about $4.1 billion in underreported income for tax years 2000 and 2001 via the k - 1 matching program and assessed about $110 million in additional taxes . in addition to use in the matching program , irs can also use k - 1 information to aid in selecting flow - through entity returns for examination .