there is no phase - in period . provide voucher for civilian insurance costs are based on 80,000 reservists — the approximate number mobilized in april 2002 . ( see app . ii for estimate assumptions. ) for 2003 through 2007 , the estimated cost to dod for providing reservists and their dependents continuous health care coverage , regardless of reservists' mobilization status , would range from about $4 billion to $19.7 billion for the 5-year period , depending on how the benefit was provided . cbo estimates that providing the benefit through tricare with no premium for reservists would cost dod about $10.4 billion . ( see table 2. ) dod's cost would be reduced to about $7 billion if reservists paid a premium similar to that paid by active duty retirees under age 65 or to about $4 billion if reservists paid a premium share similar to that paid by federal employees for fehbp . providing insurance through fehbp would be more expensive to dod because cbo estimated the premium would be based on the existing fehbp pool — an older population using more health care services . ( see table 3. ) while cbo estimates that the actual cost of providing health care for reservists and their dependents under fehbp would be about $10.9 billion , similar to the cost of providing the tricare benefit , it estimates the dod health insurance premium costs for fehbp to be about $19.7 billion . if reservists paid the typical fehbp employee portion of the premium , cbo estimates that dod premium costs would be reduced to about $10.2 billion . the cost for options providing health care coverage only during mobilizations or for expanding the benefit after mobilizations would be from $89 million to $1.8 billion over the 5-year period , according to cbo estimates . ( see table 4. ) for example , in lieu of a tricare benefit , dod might assume the costs of reservists' civilian coverage during mobilization . the value of this benefit would vary from reservist to reservist depending on ( 1 ) the cost of the reservist's portion of the premium , ( 2 ) the extent of employer coverage , and ( 3 ) whether the employer continued to pay the premium during the reservist's mobilization . cbo estimates that if each year 80,000 reservists , the approximate number mobilized in april 2002 , were mobilized for a 1-year period , the cost to fully pay for civilian health coverage for the 5-year period would be about $1.8 billion . the cost of dod allowing dependents with civilian insurance the choice of tricare or a monetary voucher equivalent to the estimated value of the tricare benefit would be about $1.1 billion over 5 years , according to cbo's estimate . although the amount of this voucher would be based on the average cost of the tricare benefit for which the dependent is eligible , this option would increase dod's costs because historically many dependents of mobilized reservists have relied on their civilian coverage and have not used their tricare benefit .