gao - 17-27 . washington , d.c. , november 14 , 2016 . ( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in written comments , dod concurred with both of our recommendations . dod's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and the secretaries of the military departments . in addition , the report is available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact brian lepore at ( 202 ) 512-4523 or leporeb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this appendix provides information on the nine utilities privatization contracts that we selected as case studies to review . each of seven contracts privatized one utility system , and each of two contracts privatized two utility systems , for a total of 11 utility systems covered by the nine contracts . table 2 lists selected characteristics of each contract . in addition to the contact named above , kristy williams ( assistant director ) , michael armes , john bauckman , emily biskup , vincent buquicchio , cаrolyṇn cаvanаugh , desiree cunningham , michael gilmore , simon hirschfeld , gina hoover , kush malhotra , richard powelson , and jack wang made key contributions to this report . defense infrastructure: actions needed to strengthen utility resilience planning . defense infrastructure: improvements in dod reporting and cybersecurity implementation needed to enhance utility resilience planning . gao - 15-749 . air force and navy officials stated they did not estimate commodity cost savings . system reliability: military department officials stated that they have perceived improvements in utility system reliability since utilities privatization and have access to contractor - provided data to assess reliability ; however , the military departments have not used the contractor - provided data to determine reliability trends over time . for example , army officials at arlington national cemetery , virginia , stated that they could not recall an unscheduled outage since the privatization of the electric system in 2015 . in addition , officials at tyndall air force base , florida , stated that there was a significant drop in outages after the electric system was privatized in 2010 . however , we found that none of the military departments have formally measured improvements in reliability due to utilities privatization , because , according to military installation officials , they did not track reliability statistics prior to utilities privatization nor were they required to do so . in addition , we found that not all installations in our sample of cases have analyzed contractor - provided outage data , which includes information on the number of scheduled and unscheduled outages and the causes of the outages , to verify perceived reliability improvements .