gao - 07-1156 . washington , d.c.: september 24 , 2007 . state and local governments: persistent fiscal challenges will likely emerge within the next decade . gao - 07-1080sp . washington , d.c.: july 18 , 2007 . this situation poses difficult issues of fairness . it has also been a source of confusion and frustration for the workers these provisions affect . thus , some have proposed eliminating these provisions . alternatively , as part of social security reform , others have proposed extending mandatory coverage to all state and local government employees who are not currently covered ; under mandatory coverage , the need for these provisions would be phased out over time . i hope i can help clarify and provide some perspective on the complex relationship between social security and public employees . today , i will discuss social security's coverage of public employees , social security's current provisions affecting noncovered public employees , and proposals to modify those provisions or make coverage mandatory for all public employees . my testimony is based on a body of work we have published over the past several years . in summary , about one - fourth of public employees are not covered by social security for various historical reasons . as a result , these employees do not pay social security taxes on earnings from their noncovered jobs . nevertheless , these employees can still be eligible for social security benefits based on their spouses' or their own earnings from covered employment . currently , social security has two provisions in place that attempt to ensure these workers' noncovered employment is taken into consideration when calculating their social security benefits: ( 1 ) the government pension offset ( gpo ) , which affects spouse and survivor benefits , and ( 2 ) the windfall elimination provision ( wep ) , which affects retired worker benefits . both provisions reduce social security benefits for those who receive noncovered pension benefits . however , the social security administration ( ssa ) cannot effectively and fairly apply these provisions because it does not have access to complete and accurate information on noncovered earnings and receipt of noncovered pensions . implementation of some of our recommendations has improved the availability and tracking of key information for federal retirees , and we have estimated that this tracking will save hundreds of millions of dollars . however , congressional action is still needed to improve access to information on state and local government pensions . in recent years , various social security reforms that would affect public employees have been proposed . some proposals specifically address the gpo and the wep and would either revise or eliminate them . while we have not analyzed these proposals , we believe it is important to consider both the costs and the fairness issues they raise . other proposals would make social security coverage mandatory for all state and local government employees . in 2005 , social security actuaries estimated that mandating coverage for all newly hired state and local government employees would reduce the 75-year actuarial deficit by about 11 percent . it could also enhance inflation protection , pension portability , and dependent benefits for the affected beneficiaries , in many cases .