isor . in addition to the contract provisions , in december 2008 frbny asked its revolving credit facility advisors to disclose potential and actual conflicts arising from their duties and to provide a comprehensive plan to mitigate such conflicts . the mitigation plan was to include implementation steps , conflict issues that were reasonably foreseeable , and identification of how the advisor would notify frbny of conflicts identified in the course of their duties . frbny requested this information to assist it in developing an approach to managing conflicts related to aig assistance and other federal reserve system emergency facilities created to address the financial crisis . in response , the advisors provided general information on their conflict - of - interest policies and procedures , according to frbny officials . officials told us that frbny did not make the same request of one of its ml iii advisors because frbny had been working with the advisor on a frequent basis for some time and the officials felt they understood the advisor's conflict issues and policies . over the course of frbny assistance to aig , frbny's advisors have disclosed a number of conflict situations , both when first engaged and subsequently while performing their duties . these have involved several kinds of conflicts , which frbny has waived or permitted to be mitigated . when signing their agreements with frbny , one advisor disclosed two buy - side advisory engagements that were underway . frbny permitted the arrangements , provided that employee separation and information barriers be created and that the advisor not provide frbny with advisory services related to certain potential aig divestitures . however , frbny's consent still allowed some potential sharing of information between separate employee teams at the advisor . two advisors had teams providing advisory services to aigfp when frbny engaged them . both frbny and aig agreed to waive the potential conflicts . one advisor was working on a broad range of advisory and tax services for aig . another was involved in analysis of certain aig cdos and the rmbs portfolio associated with aig's securities lending program . one ml iii advisor reported that it was a collateral manager for certain cdos in which ml iii was an investor , and it was allowed to continue subject to conditions . frbny officials told us their general approach to conflict issues such as these was to rely on information barriers , which are intended to prevent sensitive information from being shared among people or teams , and to avoid having the same people work in potentially conflicting roles , such as both buy - side and sell - side engagements . we note , however , that such precautions involve a trade - off: all else equal , these measures may protect against conflicts , but they can also preclude application of skills or resources that would otherwise be available . frbny and its advisors also set up regular communications for addressing conflicts . for example , one advisor would provide frbny with a weekly list of projects requested by aig subsidiaries or potential acquirers of aig assets . after considering whether it could accept the project , the advisor would seek waivers from frbny when necessary .