complexity of the request . requests for a non - standard system , integration with foreign components , or a complex system may cause program offices to spend additional resources and time to develop price and availability data . for example , in response to a request for a complex weapon system to be integrated into a foreign customer's ship , navy program officials said that they needed several months to develop price and availability data due to the complexity of this request , which required program officials to work with multiple contractors and dod entities to develop price and availability data . in contrast , army security assistance officials said that they generally aim to conserve resources and time by developing price and availability data based on standard items , even in instances when customers may request non - standard or complex systems . existing workload . the volume of requests and competing priorities can also affect the timeliness and the level of effort applied to the response . for example , army security assistance officials stated that they may prioritize a customer's request for a letter of offer and acceptance , which initiates an executable fms case , over a request for price and availability data because there are not resources available to do both at the same time . availability of requested item or service . when obtaining the items from defense contractors , for example , military department officials consider production schedule and quantity — both of which require additional assumptions to estimate unknown costs . for items that are in dod's inventory and will not be replaced , officials are to take into account the item's actual value when developing price and availability data , according to a dsca publication . external factors . in cases where a customer is requesting price and availability data to decide whether to purchase defense items or services from the united states or another foreign government , military departments may expend additional resources to develop detailed price and availability data . for example , a navy security assistance official stated that when officials are aware the customer plans to hold competitions between u.s. and foreign defense contractors , they solicit more detailed technical and cost information from defense contractors to present a competitive estimate . individually and combined , these factors , as well as the overall process , can influence response times . we provided a draft of this report to the department of defense ( dod ) for comment . dod's response letter is reproduced in appendix ii . dod separately provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in this report , we ( 1 ) described foreign military sales ( fms ) price and availability requests department of defense ( dod ) received from fiscal years 2014 through 2018 , ( 2 ) assessed dod's guidance on developing price and availability data , ( 3 ) described how dod develops price and availability data for the requested capability , and ( 4 ) identified factors that can influence the timeliness for dod to provide price and availability data to the customer .