we plan to report on the program later this month . while this program is a positive step , we have reported that the cpo lacks the authority needed to ensure the department's components comply with its procurement policies and procedures such as the acquisition oversight program . we reported in september 2006 that the cpo's ability to effectively oversee the department's acquisitions and manage risks is limited , and we continue to believe that the cpo's lack of authority to achieve the department's acquisition goals is of concern . in 2003 , dhs put in place an investment review process to help protect its major , complex investments . the investment review process is intended to reduce risk associated with these investments and increase the chances for successful outcomes in terms of cost , schedule , and performance . in march 2005 , we reported that in establishing this process , dhs has adopted a number of acquisition best practices that , if applied consistently , could help increase the chance for successful outcomes . however , we noted that incorporating additional program reviews and knowledge deliverables into the process could better position dhs to make well - informed decisions on its major , complex investments . specifically , we noted that the process did not include two critical management reviews that would help ensure that ( 1 ) resources match customer needs prior to beginning a major acquisition and ( 2 ) program designs perform as expected before moving to production . we also noted that the review process did not fully address how program managers are to conduct effective contractor tracking and oversight . the investment review process is still under revision , and the department's performance and accountability report for fiscal year 2006 stated that dhs will incorporate changes to the process by the first quarter of fiscal year 2008 . our best practices work shows that successful investments reduce risk by ensuring that high levels of knowledge are achieved at these key points of development . we have found that investments that were not reviewed at the appropriate points faced problems — such as redesign — that resulted in cost increases and schedule delays . concerns have been raised about the effectiveness of the review process for large investments at dhs . for example , in november 2006 , the dhs inspector general reported on the customs and border protection's secure border initiative program , noting that the department's existing investment oversight processes were sidelined in the urgent pursuit of sbinet's aggressive schedule . the department's investment review board and joint requirements council provide for deliberative processes to obtain the counsel of functional stakeholders . however , the dhs inspector general reported that for sbinet , these prescribed processes were bypassed and key decisions about the scope of the program and the acquisition strategy were made without rigorous review and analysis or transparency . the department has since announced plans to complete these reviews to ensure the program is on the right track . to quickly get the department up and running and to obtain necessary expertise , dhs has relied extensively on other agencies' and its own contracts for a broad range of mission - related services and complex acquisitions .