mrs . chairwoman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . at this time , i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . gao exists to support the congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and ensure the accountability of the federal government for the benefit of the american people . provide timely , quality service to the congress and the provide timely , quality service to the congress and the federal government to . federal government to . address current and emerging challenges to the well - being address current and emerging challenges to the well - being and financial security of the american people related to . and financial security of the american peoplerelated to . natural resources use and environmental protection . respond to changing security threats and the challenges of respond to changing security threats and the challenges of global interdependence involving . global interdependence involving . key management challenges and program risks fiscal position and financing of the government maximize the value of gao by being a model federal agency and maximize the value of gao by being a model federal agency and a world - class professional services organization in the areas of . a world - class professional services organization in the areas of . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . legislative authority . we are requesting legislation to establish a board of contract appeals at gao to adjudicate contract claims involving contracts awarded by legislative branch agencies . gao has performed this function on an ad hoc basis over the years for appeals of claims from decisions of the architect of the capitol on contracts that it awards . recently we have agreed to handle claims arising under government printing office contracts . the legislative proposal would promote efficiency and predictability in the resolution of contractor and agency claims by consolidating such work in an established and experienced adjudicative component of gao and would permit gao to recover its costs of providing such adjudicative services from legislative branch users of such services . we also plan to request legislation that will assist gao in performing its mission work and enhance our human capital policies , including addressing certain compensation and benefits issues of interest to our employees . while there are a number of important provisions , today i will only discuss several of the significant ones . regarding provisions concerned with mission work , we have identified a number of legislative mandates that are either no longer meeting the purpose intended or should be performed by an entity other than gao . we are working with the cognizant entities and the appropriate authorization and oversight committees to discuss the potential impact of legislative relief for these issues .