( app . ii lists each state's reported dsh payments during fiscal year 2010 , the federal share of those payments , the state's total medicaid payments , and each state's total reported dsh payment as a percentage of the state's total medicaid payments and of total nationwide dsh payments. ) the majority of dsh payments were to hospitals for traditional inpatient and outpatient services . during fiscal year 2010 , 83 percent of the nationwide total of reported dsh payments ( $14.7 billion ) was paid to hospitals for traditional inpatient and outpatient services and 17 percent of the total ( $2.9 billion ) was paid to mental health facilities for inpatient and outpatient mental health services . how much did states report paying in supplemental medicaid payments during fiscal year 2010 ? how did non - dsh supplemental payments reported during 2010 compare with those payments reported during 2006 , and what were reasons for differences ? to determine how much states reported paying for supplemental medicaid payments during 2010 , we analyzed medicaid expenditure data that cms had finalized for federal fiscal year 2010 . these are data that states reported to cms during fiscal year 2010 using a standardized form , the cms - 64 , to claim federal matching funds . to understand medicaid supplemental payments and processes for reporting these payments , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance and interviewed cms officials . we examined the amount of dsh and non - dsh supplemental payments reported by individual states and the nationwide totals , and we analyzed the amounts reported for different categories of service . in addition , to better understand the contribution of supplemental payments to state medicaid spending , we examined the share of state spending attributed to supplemental payments . to determine how non - dsh supplemental payments reported during 2010 compared with those payments reported during 2006 , we analyzed 2006 and 2010 expenditures for non - dsh supplemental payments that states reported to cms separately from their other payments . to examine reasons for differences between 2006 and 2010 in reported non - dsh supplemental payments , and to obtain additional information about states' reports of these payments , we obtained information from cms and public sources about non - dsh supplemental payments in a judgmental sample of 11 states selected to include a mix of relevant characteristics . our selections included some states that separately reported such payments in only 1 of the 2 years , and states that differed in absolute and relative changes in reported non - dsh supplemental payments and changes in categories of payment . the information we used to select states included published information , as well as preliminary information from cms . for each of these states , we examined information that could help explain net changes from 2006 to 2010 in the state's reported non - dsh supplemental payment amounts , such as establishment of new non - dsh supplemental payments , modification of existing non - dsh supplemental payments , or a change in reporting that would result in an increase or decrease in the state's reported payments . the information we reviewed included information that states submitted to cms prior to changing their supplemental payments .