okay . and how much do you all charge for these services ? you're saying it's free ? i mean , you're not , i gotta think , you're not doing it for free . do the payments go to you or something , and then — — en representative: well , this is a government - funded program , so i don't — you , when you come in , you don't have to pay no fee . this is not a temp agency where you have to pay a fee . gao investigator: okay . en representative: so this is a service where it's funded by the government , and it's services of — you know — to the community where they help people with disability find part - time work . because if they — if you get any full - time work , then you know , they're gonna cut you off . so we're not offering you full - time work . we're helping you find part - time work . gao investigator: mmm , okay . all right , yeah . because that way he avoids getting his payment cut off ? en representative: no , that's not going to happen . gao investigator: okay , okay . well , that's good . and , and what kinds of jobs are you talking about here ? en representative: well , they have maintenance , um , janitorial . they have , um , a list of jobs . um , and like i was , right , like i was saying you to before , if he worked before , then they can help him on the jobs that he has on his resume . gao investigator: okay . en representative: so if he did any kind of security or maintenance , whatever he would have on his resume , that's the type of job that he would — that they would find for him . and also , he would have to let them know what he's looking for , too . because they're here to help him — gao investigator: oh , okay . en representative: so they — he has to give him an idea , or whoever comes with him would have to give the job developers an idea of what kind of work he's looking for . gao investigator: okay . all right . and how does it — how do we get this started ? does he have to come in there , or can he just — you know he's — i'm trying to help him here a little bit , but — en representative: yes . yes . gao investigator: what's next ? en representative: okay . yes . he can come in . the days for that is . gao investigator: okay . and , and what happens at that time ? en representative: when he comes in , he has to bring a resume if he has one . if he doesn't , it's not a problem . his social and birth certificate , and that's it . gao investigator: okay , okay . all right . and um — all right .