both agencies concurred with the report . in oral comments , omb officials acknowledged that issuance of the share - in - savings implementing regulations and omb guidance has been delayed longer than anticipated . a baseline cost is the cost of current operations . without an accurate baseline , agreed to by the agency as well as the contractor , savings cannot be correctly measured , leaving both the agency and the contractor at risk of not receiving their fair share of savings , if any are generated . the contractor cannot determine with any certainty that the savings would cover its costs , let alone result in a profit . our past work on commercial use of share - in - savings contracts suggests that the business process and administrative cost information necessary to calculate a baseline may not be available in some cases . agency officials told us that in the information technology area , calculating a baseline can be very complicated . it can be difficult , for example , to isolate the direct savings from a reduction in the time an employee spends on a new task as a result of a new , automated information system replacing one or more old tasks . further , in our past financial reporting , we have described the type of systemic challenges agencies face in accurately determining the baseline costs of programs , which could impede agencies' use of share - in - savings contracting . for example , we reported in the 2004 financial report of the united states government that the federal government's ability to reliably measure the full costs of certain programs is hampered by a significant number of material weaknesses related to financial systems , fundamental recordkeeping , financial reporting , and incomplete documentation . even if a baseline could be established , most agency officials we interviewed said an obstacle to using share - in - savings contracting would be not having a potential savings pool large enough to provide contractors an appealing return on investment . the gsa share - in - savings program office and the office of the secretary of defense's business initiative council determined that a successful share - in - savings business case requires a savings - to - investment ratio of at least 3 to 1 . however , a business case review in 2004 by the defense commissary agency illustrates the potential difficulty in meeting that target . last year , that agency determined that an inadequate return on investment was a primary reason a share - in - savings contract would not be used to buy a replacement retail transaction system for its hundreds of commissaries . on two occasions , the agency requested information from contractors on installing a replacement retail transaction system under a share - in - savings contract . concerns about fewer commissaries in the future , as a result of anticipated military base closures , and other cost uncertainties led contractors to request a guaranteed minimum number of system replacements to protect profit margins associated with their initial investments . the agency did not provide minimum guarantees , and a share - in - savings contract was not awarded .