( see fig . patients come to the emergency department with illnesses or injuries of varying severity , referred to as acuity level . hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services and other interested parties . the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or crossem@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . additional information about our methodology can be found in appendix i . a complete bibliography for the literature review can be viewed at gao - 09-348sp . in our 2003 report on emergency department crowding , we reported on the extent of crowding in metropolitan areas . we analyzed wait time data by patient acuity level and hospital characteristics , such as hospital ownership , metropolitan or nonmetropolitan area location , and geographic region . we analyzed wait times in the emergency department using nchs's data on recommended time for a patient to see a physician based on patient acuity levels . further , to determine the average length of stay in the emergency department for patients who presented with a psychological or mental disorder , we analyzed emergency department length of stay by the type of patient complaint at time of the visit . we also analyzed nchs data on emergency department utilization by payer source , including medicare , medicaid , and the state children's health insurance program , self pay , no charge or charity care ; and by hospital characteristics , such as whether the hospital was located in a metropolitan or nonmetroplitan area , to provide context for our work . we also reviewed and analyzed data from the agency for healthcare research and quality's ( ahrq ) healthcare cost and utilization project to determine the diagnosis - related groups ( drg ) most commonly associated with hospital admissions from the emergency department and most commonly associated with non - emergency department admissions — information we determined was related to factors that contribute to crowding . we obtained nchs and ahrq data beginning with 2001 because these data became publicly available in 2003 or later , meeting the criterion for inclusion in our analysis . some data were not available from nchs for all years between 2001 and 2006 because of revisions made by nchs to questions on surveys used to collect information and because of low response rates to certain questions on these surveys . at the time we conducted our analysis , the most recent year for which data were available from nchs and ahrq was 2006 . in this report , we present nchs estimates ; for those cases in which we report an increase or other comparison of these estimates , nchs tested the differences and found them statistically significant .