planning for spouses . our previous illustration assumes the money is drawn down for an individual's lifetime . acceptance of a lump sum over $5,000 for married or formerly married individuals requires spousal consent to waive the right to a future annuity based on the combined lifetime of participant and spouse , known as a joint and survivor annuity . however , this does not preclude the participant from including a spouse or beneficiary in his retirement planning . if the participant wishes to account for his spouse's lifetime as well , he may need to add more years of spend - down , either by lowering the amount paid out per month or taking on additional investment risk in an attempt to achieve greater returns . participants assuming responsibility for managing their funds may find dealing with all these challenges difficult and may seek out professional advice to assist them . as with the development of these factors for analyzing the information packets , the process for implementing the factors was vetted and reviewed by gao's chief actuary and a research methodologist . according to a dol official , many participants are unlikely to understand the full complexity of accepting a lump sum and may not be well - equipped to manage the lump sum assets on their own . diminished capacity . managing assets through retirement may be particularly challenging for retirees who experience diminished physical or mental capacity as they age . for example , a retiree with dementia may find it more difficult to manage the many decisions involved with investing and drawing down an ira compared to the relative simplicity of receiving a monthly pension check . as one scholar has noted , if the retiree misuses a monthly pension check , another check will arrive the following month . however , if the retiree makes investments that result in significant losses for their ira , there may be no additional funds for future withdrawal . ideally , a financial planner should be able to help people navigate the myriad decisions required to accept and manage a lump sum payment . however , participants could face additional challenges finding trusted advice in managing their assets if they do not feel comfortable managing investment and drawdown decisions on their own . others might find it challenging to afford a financial planner . in previous work , we have found that participants can receive conflicted advice because the financial interests of those giving advice may not be aligned with the best interests of the participant . those offering investment advice to participants may be motivated by financial gain through sales of preferred financial products , commissions , or other fees for services . that their advisor might have benefited more financially had they elected the lump sum , noting that the advisor was interested in managing a large sum of money . the specific investment products held in 401 ( k ) plans and iras , as well as the various financial professionals who service them , are subject to oversight from applicable securities , banking , or insurance regulators , which can include both federal and state regulators .