( recommendation 7 ) . dod and dcaa generally agreed with the recommendations . as a result , dcaa required more testing and stricter compliance with government auditing standards that added staff time to complete audits . additionally , as dcaa's workload increased and resources remained relatively constant , auditors prioritized time - sensitive activities , such as audits to support new awards , and incurred cost audits were not completed , creating a backlog . see figure 1 for the contract closeout process . federal acquisition regulations require contractors to submit proposals that include information on all of their flexibly - priced contracts in a fiscal year . dcaa uses a checklist to determine whether a proposal is adequate , which , among other items , includes various cost schedules , subcontract information , and information on contracts that would be ready for closeout . dcaa may determine that a contractor's incurred cost proposal is inadequate for a variety of reasons , such as incomplete or inaccurate information , and request that the contractor revise and resubmit the incurred cost proposal . this process may take several iterations before the proposal is deemed adequate . dcaa categorizes the proposals based on the total value of the proposal , called the auditable dollar value ( adv ) , which is the sum of all of the costs on flexibly - priced contracts for that contractor during the fiscal year . figure 2 depicts key steps in the incurred cost audit process . there is not a one - to - one relationship between an incurred cost audit and an individual contract . in a single fiscal year , a contractor may incur costs on multiple flexibly - priced contracts , and all of these contracts would be included in the contractor's proposal . further , since the period of performance on an individual contract may span several years , an audit of each of the contractor's incurred cost proposals for those years needs to be conducted to provide the information necessary to close one flexibly - priced contract . for example , the foreign affairs handbook was updated to include procedures on how to address common difficulties in closing contracts ; and in july 2015 , the inspector general at the department of transportation found that the agency had not implemented oversight procedures or performance measures on contract closeout to assess whether the components were complying with closeout requirements . the five agencies and selected components we reviewed varied widely in ensuring that contracts were closed within the time frames prescribed by federal acquisition regulations . none of the five agencies we reviewed had all of the following: ( 1 ) centralized data on the number of contracts needed to be closed out ; ( 2 ) information on where the contracts were in the closeout process ; ( 3 ) established agency - wide contract closeout - related goals ; and ( 4 ) established performance measures to assess progress toward achieving these goals . most agencies delegated responsibility for contract administration , including closing out contracts , to their components . we found that some components within these agencies had at least three of these elements .