this must change . today , i will discuss three broad human capital reform opportunities that are instrumental to agency transformation efforts and that the commission may want to consider as its work moves forward . these broad opportunities include: first , aligning individual and organizational performance ; second and directly related to that , implementing results - oriented pay reform ; and third , sustaining agency transformation efforts . i will conclude with some comments on how we in gao are playing a constructive role in helping the government address its human capital challenges , including our efforts to “lead by example” in this critically important area . leading organizations use their performance management systems as a key tool for aligning institutional , unit , and employee performance ; achieving results ; accelerating change ; managing the organization on a day - to - day basis ; and facilitating communication throughout the year so that discussions about individual and organizational performance are integrated and ongoing . performance management systems in these leading organizations typically seek to achieve three key objectives . first , they strive to provide candid and constructive feedback to help individual employees maximize their potential in understanding and realizing the goals and objectives of the agency . second , they seek to provide management with the objective and fact - based information it needs to reward top performers . therefore , the key question today is how do we best seize the opportunity and build on the current momentum ? i have often noted that the first step toward meeting the government's human capital challenges is for agency leaders to identify and make use of all the appropriate administrative authorities available to them to manage their people for results both effectively and equitably . much of the authority agency leaders need to manage human capital strategically is already available under current laws and regulations . agency leaders should not wait for comprehensive human capital legislative reforms to happen . the use of these authorities often needs to be undertaken as part of , and consistent with , proven change management practices . the second step is for policymakers to pursue incremental legislative reforms to give agencies additional tools and flexibilities to hire , manage , and retain the human capital they need , particularly in critical occupations . key provisions of legislative proposals under consideration in congress represent an important step to helping agencies address their human capital management challenges . many of the provisions contained in the bills are consistent with authorities we have been urging for other federal agencies . the third step toward meeting the federal government's human capital challenges is for all interested parties to work together to identify the kinds of comprehensive legislative reforms in the human capital area that should be enacted over time . these reforms should place greater emphasis on knowledge , skills , and performance in connection with federal employment , promotion , and compensation decisions , rather than on the passage of time , the rate of inflation , or geographic location , as is often the case today . shockingly , over 80 percent of the cost associated with the annual increases in federal salaries is due to cost - of - living and locality pay adjustment .