depopulation . four of the 19 plans did not address depopulation . depopulating birds is the fundamental strategy usda and states employ for controlling outbreaks , as identified in usda's highly pathogenic ai response plan . disposal . two of the 19 plans did not address the disposal of ai infected poultry and materials . usda's highly pathogenic ai response plan states that effective disposal is a key component of highly pathogenic ai response and includes issues such as disposal options and the biosecure transportation of infected materials . response among backyard birds . three of the 19 plans did not include a discussion about response activities for backyard birds . usda officials told us that the development of some state plans was heavily influenced by the poultry industry , which may be the reason this response component was omitted . this is troublesome because an outbreak must be contained among backyard birds , as well as in commercial operations . in addition , a recent usda survey estimates that about 40 percent of backyard birds are located within 1 mile of at least four commercial poultry facilities . this close proximity could allow the virus , if not quickly contained , to spread from backyard birds to commercial operations — as has occurred in previous poultry disease outbreaks . biosecurity . we found that one state plan had no discussion about biosecurity . usda recommends implementing biosecurity measures to keep flocks free from disease during an outbreak . in addition , our site visits to commercial and backyard facilities found varying levels of biosecurity — from very stringent to very lax . further , a recent usda survey found that backyard bird owners do not always implement basic biosecurity measures . for example , 89 percent do not require visitors to wash their hands before handling birds , and only 40 percent require hand washing after handling birds . public communications . four of 19 state plans did not address public communications . federal and state officials told us that clear public communications are essential during an outbreak to manage the media , avoid public confusion , and disseminate a clear public health message . in addition , the required incident command system calls for a joint information center and a public information officer ( who is responsible for media outreach ) to ensure clear and accurate public information , none of which were mentioned in these four plans . public health . five of the 19 plans did not address the role of local , state , or federal public health authorities during an outbreak . usda's draft summary plan recommends that public health authorities initiate appropriate health measures ( eg , identify those potentially exposed and in need of antiviral medication ) and help ensure accurate public communications . usda and state officials told us there are several reasons why planning at the state level is not more complete . first , although usda officials review state response plans , the agency does not have the authority to do more than offer comments and recommendations . state and usda officials told us they were surprised by and unprepared for the large number of backyard birds that existed in such areas .