funding . tepslf loan forgiveness is temporarily available to borrowers on a first - come , first - served basis until the $700 million is expended . the pslf program will continue unless repealed by congress . specific payment requirements . for tepslf , the following two payments generally must be at least as much as the borrower would have paid under an income - driven repayment plan: ( 1 ) the payment made immediately prior to applying for tepslf , and ( 2 ) the payment made 12 months prior to applying for tepslf . in the context of high denial rates in the pslf program and evidence that some borrowers were being misinformed by loan servicers about which repayment plans would qualify for pslf , congress appropriated $4.6 million for education to conduct outreach on pslf and tepslf . the legislation called for this outreach to be targeted to , among others , borrowers who would qualify for pslf loan forgiveness except that they have made some or all of their payments through plans that do not qualify . congress directed education to implement a simple method for borrowers to apply for tepslf within 60 days after the legislation funding the program was enacted . in response , education established a process in which borrowers send an email to the tepslf loan servicer with their name and date of birth to initiate their tepslf review and establish their place in line for tepslf funds . in addition to sending an email to initiate a tepslf request , education requires that a borrower has submitted a pslf application before they can be considered for tepslf ( see fig . while a plsf application is not explicitly required by statute for a borrower to be considered for tepslf loan forgiveness , education officials said that the department added this step to the process because the pslf application form captures information the tepslf loan servicer needs to determine a borrower's eligibility for tepslf . education officials said that they added this step in order to roll out the tepslf program within the required 60 days . education's tepslf website states that borrowers interested in this temporary expanded loan forgiveness option must submit a pslf application in order to be considered for tepslf . even with this information , our review of tepslf loan servicer data found that 71 percent of denied tepslf requests were denied because the borrower had not submitted a pslf application . education officials said that they believed that many borrowers send a tepslf request without submitting a pslf application because tepslf funding is temporary and borrowers know that sending the email request will hold their place in line for the limited funds . however , borrowers who have not submitted the pslf application are sent a denial letter from the tepslf loan servicer . according to education officials , these borrowers would lose their place in line and have to reapply if they want to be reconsidered for tepslf . officials from education , the tepslf loan servicer , and representatives from selected organizations representing student borrowers all said that the requirement to submit a pslf application to be eligible for tepslf loan forgiveness can confuse borrowers .