vol . fertility of fish was significantly reduced by hormones and female fish developed male sex characteristics . clark , clifford g. , lawrence price , rafiq ahmed , david l. woodward , pasquale l. melito , frank g. rodgers , frances jamieson , bruce ciebin , aimin li , and andrea ellis . “characterization of waterborne outbreak – associated campylobacter jejuni , walkerton , ontario.” emerging infectious diseases . vol . gray , jr. “in vitro and in vivo effects of 17β - trenbolone: a feedlot effluent contaminant.” toxicological sciences . vol . emissions of ammonia , hydrogen sulfide , and odor had large increases during slurry removal . a slurry removal even will result in acute exposure for animals and workers . o'connor , rod , mark o'connor , kurt irgolic , justin sabrsula , hakan gurleyuk , robert brunette , crystal howard , jennifer garcia , john brien , june brien , and jessica brien . “transformations , air transport , and human impact of arsenic from poultry litter.” environmental forensics . vol . levels of arsenic found in homes . this could represent a significant health risk . radon , katja , brigitta danuser , martin iversen , eduard monso , christoph weber , jorg hartung , kelley j. donham , urban palmgren , and dennis nowak . “air contaminants in different european farming environments.” annals of agriculture and environmental medicine . vol . ludwig - maximilians - university ( germany ) , swiss federal institute of technology , aarhus university hospital ( denmark ) , hospital germans trial i pujol ( spain ) , school of veterinary medicine ( germany ) , university of iowa , pegasus labor gmbh ( germany ) the exposure level found in this study might put the farmers at risk from respiratory diseases . razote , e.b. maghirang , b.z . predicala , j.p. murphy , b.w . auvermann , j.p. harner iii , and w.l . hargrove . “laboratory evaluation of the dust - emission potential of cattle feedlot surfaces.” transactions of the asabe . vol . robarge , wayne p. , john t. walker , ronald b. mcculloch , and george murray . “atmospheric concentrations of ammonia and ammonium at an agricultural site in the southeast united states.” atmospheric environment . vol . elevated ambient ammonia concentrations near an agricultural site . united state environmental protection agency . national emission inventory – ammonia emissions from animal husbandry operations , draft report . washington , d.c. ( 2004 ) . pollutant ( s ) walker , j.t. robarge , y. wu , and t.p . meyers . “measurement of bi - directional ammonia fluxes over soybean using themodified bowen - ratio technique.” agricultural and forest meteorology . vol . in general , the net deposition flux was lower than expected . walker , john t. , wayne p. robarge , arun shendrikar , and hoke kimball . “inorganic pm2.5 at a u.s . agricultural site.” environmental pollution . vol . model results show that reductions in atmospheric ammonia will have minimal effect on organic pm2.5 during summer and a moderate effect during winter . walker , j.t. , dave r. whitall , wayne p. robarge , and hans w. pearl .