step 4 u.s . competent authority information results are sent to irs revenue agent or examiner incoming requests step 1 foreign competent authority a request for information is sent to the u.s. competent authority . incoming foreign requests must contain: - specific identification of the taxpayer - itemized list of specific information requested - a detailed narrative identifying the tax nexus of the relevance of the information sought to the taxpayer and the issues examined - an explanation of how the request for transactions , facts , or documents pertains to a tax or a tax liability covered by a tax treaty or a tiea step 2 u.s . competent authority a request is evaluated and the case is assigned to the appropriate division . step 3 irs revenue agent or examiner if feasible , the requested information is obtained within 60 days and sent to the u.s. competent authority . information results may consist of partial or complete information , or an explanation of why material cannot be obtained . if necessary , a status update is provided every 60 days until resolved . step 4 u.s . competent authority a formal response is sent to the foreign competent authority . see kingdom of the netherlands mlat , which covers aruba . it may not be used for assistance related to fiscal offenses requested of aruba . potential mlata 2009 n.a . income tax treaty 1980 1984 yes potential tax treaty 2010 n.a . income tax treaty 2001 2003 yes income tax treaty 1973 1976 no income tax treaty 1999 1999 yes *jurisdiction is not currently a tax information exchange partner . year most recent protocol with information exchange signed ( 1 ) y o y o o o y y aa y obb n y y ( 6 ) o n o n n n o y o y o n o n n n o y n n o n n n o n o y y y ( 7 ) . n under the treaty , information may be disclosed in public court proceedings or judicial decisions unless the requested state raises an objection . treaty provides that information to be exchanged must be of a class that can be obtained under the laws and administrative practices of each state with respect to its own taxes .