tribal governments are an example of such external entities . however , in our 2018 report , we found that fcc had not consistently collected data related to tribal access to spectrum or communicated important information to tribes . in particular: fcc did not collect data on whether spectrum license - holders or auction applicants are tribal entities . without this information , fcc did not have a comprehensive understanding of the extent that tribal entities are attempting to obtain or access licensed spectrum or have been successful at obtaining and accessing it . fcc did not analyze the extent that unused licensed spectrum exists over tribal lands , even though fcc had the information — broadband availability data from providers and information on geographic areas covered by spectrum licenses — needed for such an analysis . although fcc officials told us evaluating the effectiveness of fcc's secondary market policies is a way to increase the use of unused spectrum , fcc's approach did not include an analysis of unused spectrum licenses on tribal lands . as a result , fcc's evaluations of the secondary market may not have accurately reflected how its policies affect tribal entities . because the secondary market is one of few ways for tribal entities to access licensed spectrum , such an assessment would enable fcc to better promote a robust secondary market that provides opportunities for tribes to access spectrum . fcc did not communicate information to tribes that could benefit them in their efforts to obtain spectrum in the secondary market . as described earlier , the secondary market is a significant mechanism for tribal entities to obtain spectrum licenses , but representatives from the tribal entities we interviewed reported challenges related to participating in the secondary market , such as not knowing whom to contact should they wish to engage in a secondary market transaction to obtain a spectrum license . further details on our scope and methodology are included in our report . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . wireless broadband connects users to the internet using spectrum to transmit data between the customer's location and the service provider's facility , and can be transmitted using fixed wireless and mobile technologies , as shown in figure 1 . fixed wireless broadband technologies establish an internet connection between fixed points — such as from a radio or antenna that may be mounted on a tower , to a stationary wireless device located at a home — and generally requires a direct line of sight . mobile wireless broadband technologies also establish an internet connection that requires the installation of antennas , but this technology provides connectivity to customers wherever they are covered by service , including while on the move , such as with a cell phone . spectrum is the resource that makes wireless broadband connections possible .