gao - 08-936 . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2008 . 2010 census: plans for decennial census operations and technology have progressed , but much uncertainty remains . gao - 08-886t . washington , d.c.: june 11 , 2008 . these operations include partnerships with the u.s . postal service and other federal agencies ; state , local , and tribal governments ; and local planning organizations . three operations that can help include the hard - to - count are the bureau's local update of census addresses ( luca ) program , address canvassing , and group quarters validation . the luca program gives state , local , and tribal governments the opportunity to review and update the list of addresses and maps that the bureau will use to deliver questionnaires within those communities . according to bureau officials , luca helps identify hard - to - count populations and “hidden” housing units such as converted basements because local governments might know where such dwellings exist and have access to local data and records . in october 2008 , the bureau is scheduled to complete its reviews of participants' luca submissions and update the maf and a related geographic database used for maps . in the address canvassing operation , thousands of temporary bureau employees known as listers verify the addresses of all housing units — including those addresses provided by localities in luca — by going door to door across the country . as part of this effort , listers add addresses that might not be in the bureau's database . to help find hidden housing units it might otherwise miss , listers ask if there is more than one residence at a particular address , or to look for clues such as an outbuilding or two mailboxes or utility meters that could indicate additional households . indeed , as shown in the picture on the left in figure 3 , someone could be living in what appears to be a storage shed . likewise , in the picture on the right , what appears to be a small , single - family house could contain another apartment as suggested by its two doorbells . such as single - family houses , apartments and mobile homes , the 2000 decennial enumerated over seven million people living in group situations such as college dormitories , nursing homes , migrant labor camps , prisons , and group homes , collectively known as “group quarters” . some group quarters , such as seasonal and migrant labor camps , can be difficult to locate because they are sometimes fenced - in or in remote locations away from main roads . the bureau encountered a number of problems when enumerating group quarters during the 2000 census . for example , in 2000 , communities reported instances where students in college dormitories were counted twice and prison inmates were counted in the wrong county . additionally , group homes are sometimes difficult for census workers to spot because , as shown in figure 4 , they can look the same as conventional housing units . since 1970 , the bureau has conducted a separate operation to enumerate the group quarters population .