did not report competition information . most of the 801 contracts reported to us by the three agencies as not competed had relatively small obligations during our review period . approximately 78 percent of these contracts had obligations less than $25,000 . in contrast , only 13 of the 801 contracts had over $1 million in obligations , accounting for 63 percent of obligations for the noncompeted contracts . competition requirements generally do not apply to the issuance of task orders . however , where there are multiple awardees under the underlying contract , the far requires the contracting officer in most instances to provide each awardee a fair opportunity to be considered for each order exceeding $3,000 . the agencies reported that 99 percent of the task and delivery orders issued during our review period were competed — either the underlying contract was awarded competitively or multiple awardees were given a fair opportunity to be considered for each order . state and usaid reported obligations of $1.8 billion on 668 grants and cooperative agreements with performance in iraq and afghanistan during fiscal year 2009 and the first half of fiscal year 2010 . some contracts also included work in both countries . for example , dod provided us with data on seven active task orders under a construction contract with total obligations of approximately $152 million and indicated that there was performance in both iraq and afghanistan . we used the following methodologies to develop our findings . spot program officials identified five job titles that they include in counts of security personnel . these officials acknowledged there is a risk that an employee providing security services may have a job title other than one of those five and , therefore , would not be included in the count . the weapon authorization data field in spot identifies personnel who have been authorized to carry a firearm . employers of armed security contractors are required to enter this information into spot as part of dod's process to register and account for such personnel in each country . however , usaid officials in iraq explained that security personnel working under the agency's contracts and assistance instruments receive authorization to carry firearms from the iraqi government , not dod , and are not identified in spot as having a weapons authorization . further , some contractors performing security functions are not authorized to carry weapons and would , therefore , not be included in a count using this method . conversely , some personnel who are not performing security functions have been authorized to carry weapons for personal protection and would be included in the count . regardless of the method employed to identify personnel in spot , it appears that not all personnel performing security functions are being captured in the system . for example , based on an analysis of spot data , no more than 4,309 contractor personnel were performing security functions for dod in afghanistan during the second quarter of fiscal year 2010 . in contrast , dod officials overseeing armed contractors in afghanistan estimated the total number of dod security contractors in afghanistan for the same time period was closer to 17,500 .