gao - 05-429 . washington , d.c.: august 5 , 2005 . what are the advantages and disadvantages of these options ? because musc contracting officials do not have the authority to legally bind the va , how would contracting for the services and equipment be handled ? the legal workgroup is currently identifying va's and musc's legal authorities , or lack thereof , on numerous issues relating to entering into a joint venture . should va decide to participate in the joint venture , it may need to seek additional authority from the congress . involving stakeholders in the decisionmaking process: participating in a joint venture medical center , particularly if it includes significant service sharing between va and musc , has significant implications for the medical center's stakeholders , including va patients , va employees , and the community . these stakeholders have various perspectives and expectations — some of which are common to the different groups , while others are unique . for example , union representatives and va officials whom we spoke to indicated that va patients and employees would likely be concerned about maintaining the quality of patient care at a new facility and access to the current facility during construction . union representatives also said the employees would be concerned about the potential for the loss of jobs if va participated in the joint venture and purchased additional services from musc . as va and musc move forward in negotiations , it will be important for all stakeholders' concerns to be addressed . developing a system to measure performance and results: if va and musc decide to jointly build and operate a new facility in charleston , it will become , as noted in the cares commission report , a possible framework for future partnerships between va and other medical universities . as a result , a system for measuring whether the new joint venture facility is achieving the intended results would be useful . in our previous work on managing for results , we have emphasized the importance of establishing meaningful , outcome - oriented performance goals . in this case , potential goals could be operational cost savings and improved health care for veterans . if the goals are not stated in measurable terms , performance measures should be established that translate those goals into concrete , observable conditions . such measures would enable va and other stakeholders to determine whether progress is being made toward achieving the goals . this information could not only shed light on the results of a joint venture in charleston , but it could also enable va to identify criteria for evaluating other possible joint ventures with its medical affiliates in the future . it would also help congress to hold va accountable for results . in conclusion , mr. chairman , we have stated over the past few years that federal agencies , including va , need to reexamine the way they do business in order to meet the challenges of the 21st century . to address future health care needs of veterans , va's challenge is to explore alternative ways to fulfill its mission of providing veterans with quality health care .