the borrower pays all interest costs . consolidation loans — borrowers may combine multiple federal student loans into a single , fixed rate loan . the interest rate is based on the weighted average of the interest rates in effect on the loans being consolidated or a fixed percentage . education finances fdlp through a combination of appropriations and borrowing from treasury . education receives permanent , indefinite budget authority for estimated subsidy costs — the amount expected not to be repaid by borrowers — of its loans . these costs are generally updated , or reestimated , annually . the portion of direct loans that education predicts will ultimately be repaid by borrowers is financed by borrowing from treasury and is not considered a cost to the government because it is expected to be returned to the government in future years . based on a 5-year average , estimated outlays for direct student loans differed from actual outlays by about $2.6 billion per year , or 702 percent , in absolute value terms . however , the actual annual differences varied between an overestimate of $2.8 billion and an underestimate of $5.3 billion . a large component of these differences reflects the fact that initial estimates do not include reestimates of prior year costs , which are reflected in actual outlays . in addition , initial estimates reflect proposed policies , many of which were not enacted and so were not reflected in subsequent actual outlays . table 5 presents the estimated and actual outlays associated with the federal direct student loan program , by fiscal year . because fdlp is a relatively new program , it has a short history of repayment activity and little historical data are available . accordingly , education initially relied heavily on data from the guaranteed student loan program to develop estimates for most key cash flow assumptions in its fdlp cash flow model , which is used to estimate the subsidy cost of the program . over the past few years , education has incorporated fdlp data into many cash flow assumptions ; as more data become available , education plans to completely phase out the use of guaranteed loan data for fdlp assumptions . drops in interest rates have been a key driver behind differences in estimated versus actual outlays . not only are loans being paid off at lower rates than anticipated but the drop in rates has also led to a dramatic increase in consolidations ( which are prepayments ) . detailed explanations are shown in table 6. other things , increasing the amount of fees borrowers must pay to obtain a loan or increasing borrowers' interest rate . for example , continued differences between estimated and actual outlays could be used as a trigger , resulting in higher origination fees or interest rates for new fdlp loans . in implementing such a trigger and response , congress would need to consider whether ffelp borrowers should similarly be affected . under current law , loans made to borrowers , unless otherwise specified , are to have the same terms , conditions , and benefits and be made available in the same amounts under both fdlp and ffelp .