intelligence . vets parties to the application through the intelligence community . once commerce's internal review has been completed , applications are reviewed by an end - user review committee ( erc ) , which is comprised of representatives from the departments of defense , energy , and state ( generally the same agencies that review export license applications ) , and other agencies as appropriate . in reviewing an end - user for eligibility , the erc considers a range of factors , such as the entity's exclusive engagement in civil end - use activities , its record of compliance with u.s. export controls , its ability to meet the veu program's recordkeeping requirements , its relationship with u.s. and foreign companies , and its willingness to host on - site reviews by u.s. government personnel to ensure program compliance . according to a commerce official , applicants need to demonstrate that they either have or will have the requisite controls and data collection systems in place to ensure compliance with the terms of the veu program . such controls would provide commerce with a high degree of confidence that on - site reviews will yield useful information . validated end - users should also have systems in place to demonstrate that items imported under the veu program are used for civilian purposes . for example , validated end - users may have systems in place that are capable of tracking customer orders so that commerce can verify customer lists during on - site reviews . commerce allows veu applicants the flexibility to determine how they will demonstrate that they are capable of meeting these internal control and recordkeeping requirements . if necessary , the erc also may request a preapproval visit to assess an entity's suitability for validated end - user status . according to officials from commerce , no preapproval visits were conducted for the first five chinese entities approved for validated end - user status because members of the erc were already familiar with the companies through their extensive licensing history . a unanimous vote is required by the erc to approve validated end - user status or add items to an existing authorization . revocation of an authorization or removal of items from an existing authorization is by majority rule . disagreements among agencies on the erc are managed through a dispute resolution process similar to the procedures used for export license applications . for a comparison of the similarities and differences between a license and the veu authorization , see appendix iv . the individual licensing system and veu program employ different approaches to ensure that u.s. exports of semiconductor equipment and materials to china are used as intended . under the individual licensing system , commerce scrutinizes each individual application for the appropriateness of the item and the end - user , often attaches conditions to the license stipulating how an item may be used , and conducts postshipment verification ( psv ) checks . under the veu program , commerce ensures that items are used as intended by vetting validated end - users , stipulating conditions to approved entities , and confirming compliance with these conditions through periodic records checks and discretionary on - site reviews .