what is the goal of the reserve ? regardless of the authority under which a reserve is created , setting clear goals for the reserve and clarifying how the reserve will be implemented helps ensure accountability and transparency both to congress and users of fee - based programs . for example , some agencies may wish to use a reserve to help ensure the long‐term financial stability of the agency or to position the agency to respond to varying economic conditions . others may seek a reserve to smooth expected fluctuations in costs or collections , or to build capital for necessary infrastructure improvements . still other programs may seek a reserve as a means to mitigate unforeseen and unavoidable revenue shortfalls . historical data can demonstrate to congress , to stakeholders , and to fee payers why a reserve is needed . for example , based on uspto's experience with a rapid decline in collections during the recession in 2009 , and to address other sources of revenue instability , officials told us they are building an operating reserve to avoid a slowdown in operations should collections suddenly decline . according to officials , the agency used risk assessments of spending levels and revenue streams to explain to stakeholders why fees were being increased to build an operating reserve . ( see also: what is the risk that revenue instability will affect this program ? ) who should review and approve the reserve policy ? in addition to notifying congress as part of a transparent communication strategy , reserve policies could be published and reviewed by stakeholders via the federal register notice and comment process or alternatively , by existing fee advisory boards or committees . internal agency policies may also require review by cognizant financial officers . what level of reserves should be maintained ? to ensure accountability and adherence to the reserve's goals , establishing minimum and maximum reserve levels may be advisable . these numbers should be justified with program data and risk management considerations . when established reserve goals have been achieved , such as to fund planned capital investments , the level of reserve should be assessed for reasonableness . how should the reserve fund be built and at what pace ? data analysis and communication with users should inform the rate at which funds are applied to the reserve , and what actions are taken when the desired level is reached . for example , uspto estimated in january 2013 that the patent operating reserve would reach its target of 3 months of operating expenses in fiscal year 2018 , after accumulating a proportion of patent fees over 5 years . as the operating reserve approaches its target , uspto plans to consider the level of reserve in its biennial fee review . uspto sought input from patent users and stakeholders in creating a reasonable timeline for building its reserve . in 2012 , the president's budget reported collections of nearly $300 billion in federal user fees , funding a wide variety of programs integral to our nation's security , to the security of our financial system , and to the protection of our natural resources .