inaccuracy of clinically indicated dates . we found that clinically indicated dates ( used to measure the timeliness of care ) are sometimes changed by va medical facility staff before they send choice program referrals to the tpas , which could mask veterans' true wait times . we found that va medical facility staff entered later clinically indicated dates on referrals for about 23 percent of the 196 authorizations we reviewed . it is unclear if va medical facility staff mistakenly entered incorrect dates manually , or if they inappropriately entered later dates when the va medical facility was delayed in contacting the veteran , compiling relevant clinical information , and sending the referral to the tpa . unreliable data on the timeliness of urgent care . we found that va medical facilities and tpas do not always categorize choice program referrals and authorizations in accordance with the contractual definition for urgent care . according to the contracts , a referral is to be marked as “urgent,” and an appointment is to take place within 2 business days of the tpa accepting it , when a va clinician has determined that the needed care is ( 1 ) essential to evaluate and stabilize the veteran's condition , and ( 2 ) if delayed would likely result in unacceptable morbidity or pain . we reviewed a sample of 53 urgent care authorizations and determined that about 28 percent of the authorizations were originally marked as routine care authorizations but were changed to urgent by va medical facility or tpa staff , in an effort to administratively expedite appointment scheduling . we made five recommendations to va on improving the completeness and accuracy of data on veterans' wait times for care . va agreed with four of the five recommendations . our recommendations and the steps va has taken in response to these recommendations are described in table 3 . in september 2018 , we reported that three key factors affected timeliness of payments to community providers under the choice program and that if unaddressed could affect provider payment timeliness for the vccp . these factors included the following: ( 1 ) va's untimely payments to tpas , which in turn extended the length of time tpas took to pay community providers' claims ; ( 2 ) choice program reimbursement requirements , which led to claim denials ; and ( 3 ) inadequate provider education on filing claims . we reported that va has taken some actions to address these factors . for example , va updated its payment system and related processes to pay tpas more quickly . according to va data , as of july 2018 , va was paying at least 90 percent of the tpas' invoices within 7 days , a significant increase from the 50 percent timely payments va made to tpas between november 2014 and september 2016 . in addition , va and the tpas had taken steps to amend certain reimbursement requirements and improve provider education to help providers resolve claims processing issues . however , we found that va has not fully addressed two of these factors .