aspr also posted the guidance on its website . hhs's aspr has developed processes for hhs agencies and offices to review and approve states' and tribes' requests to temporarily reassign federally funded personnel in public health emergencies and to review the after - action reports these entities are required to submit on the effect of the personnel reassignment . aspr's initial efforts to communicate information about these processes to states , tribes , and hhs agencies and offices were limited , though the office has begun to improve communication efforts to state and tribal public health officials . in addition , rather than conducting its own evaluations , aspr plans to assign responsibility for reviewing after - action reports to the hhs agencies and offices that administer the programs from which personnel were reassigned , but which are generally not responsible for assessing the impact of the reassignment authority on public health emergency response . aspr , as the designated hhs coordinator for the reassignment authority , has developed processes for implementing the reassignment authority and reviewing the after - action reports states and tribes are to submit . more recently , aspr officials noted that they included information on personnel reassignment during an exercise at a 2015 preparedness summit convened by the national association of county and city health officials , and presented information about the reassignment authority during a 2015 homeland security conference . aspr's initial communication efforts , however , may have not reached a broad audience of states and tribes , or contained up - to - date information . when states and tribes request to use the reassignment authority , aspr will coordinate with the relevant hhs agencies and offices that administer the funding programs from which personnel are requested to be reassigned to review and approve requests and communicate decisions back to states and tribes . in september 2016 , aspr finalized a written procedure to supplement the april 2016 reassignment guidance . this procedure provides additional information on hhs's roles , responsibilities , and time frames for reviewing and approving reassignment requests . according to the procedure , aspr anticipates that hhs's review and approval process will take as many as four business days: one day for aspr to forward the request to the relevant hhs agencies and offices , two days for these agencies and offices to review the request and communicate the decision back to aspr , and one day for aspr to communicate that decision to the requesting state or tribe . aspr noted that the review and approval process could be expedited as necessary . for the after - action reports , officials told us that aspr plans to assign responsibility for their review to the hhs agencies and offices from which personnel are reassigned . from the time the reassignment authority was established in 2013 through early 2016 , aspr provided limited information about states' and tribes' requirements for submitting reassignment requests and hhs's processes and anticipated time frames for reviewing and approving them . aspr's initial communications provided general information only on the availability of the reassignment authority .