dod concurred with our recommendations . senate report 114-255 and house report 114-537 , to accompany bills for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 , include provisions for us to evaluate dla's overhead costs to provide commodities and distribution services funded using the defense - wide working capital fund . we examined material costs of commodities and operating costs — including direct and indirect costs — to provide commodities and distribution services . we also examined the relationship between costs , estimated revenue , and the prices that dla has charged for its commodities and distribution services . specifically , we identified any trends since fiscal year 2009 in ( 1 ) the costs and the annual prices that dla has charged for commodities and ( 2 ) the costs and the annual prices that dla has charged for distribution services ; and we ( 3 ) evaluated the extent to which dod has taken steps to more efficiently use its network of u.s. distribution centers . for objectives one and two , we reviewed the process that dla used to set prices for commodities and distribution services . specifically , we reviewed cost data , estimated and actual revenue , and prices that dla ultimately charged for commodities and for distribution services . in addition , we reviewed sections in dod's financial management regulation specific to working capital funds . a direct cost is associated with direct support to a specific mission ( eg , labor to process uniform orders ) while an indirect cost is associated with support provided to multiple missions or agency - wide operational activities ( eg , information technology ) . both direct and indirect costs can include labor and non - labor costs . price adjustments: there are four types of price adjustments that can be used to increase or decrease cash balances with the fund . these include responses to revenue gains or losses as well as cash surcharges , capital surcharges , and depreciations . dla adjusts prices for both commodities and distribution services based on revenue gains or losses to remain revenue - neutral over time . in addition , dla may use cash surcharges , capital surcharges , and depreciation to adjust prices for commodities . cash surcharges are used to recover unplanned investments in inventory to ensure that the appropriate cash balance is maintained . capital surcharges or depreciations are used to cover the costs associated with capital or infrastructure - related investments , depending on the number of years needed to recover the cost to prevent steep increases in the year - to - year price . estimated workload: dla's estimation of its customers' requirements for a future budget year is based on input from the military departments on their budget planning decisions and execution data from prior years . these estimates may be made as early as 18 months before the budget year . the sum of the costs and all price adjustments represents the amount of revenue that is required to break even . this total is divided by the estimated workload to determine a price , as shown in figure 1 .