, and wyo . experimental designs . these are characterized by the use of random selection and control groups . all individuals have an equal chance of being assigned to either the intervention group or the control group . the intervention group contains individuals who will receive the intervention , or program's services , while the control group does not receive the intervention or services . this research design produces findings that allow conclusions about the effectiveness , or impact , of the intervention to be made . however , conducting experimental designs may be problematic because of the need to treat intervention and control groups differently . for example , to determine the impact of a training program on workers' wages , a program would need to randomly provide services to some and randomly deny services to others , and track subsequent earnings for both groups of people . this approach requires services to be denied to some workers who qualify for training . due to these difficulties , as well as the amount of time and money it takes to conduct experimental designs , quasi - experimental research designs are often preferable for their practicality . quasi - experimental designs . these designs are characterized by comparison groups that are not randomly selected . for training programs , a quasi - experimental design would compare a group of people who have elected to take the training courses with nonparticipants who may have characteristics , such as wage or education levels , that are comparable to the group receiving services . comparing the two groups allows researchers to account for other factors , such as the local economy , that may have influenced outcomes . the department of labor's employment and training administration ( eta ) office of policy development , evaluation and research has valuable resources related to designing and implementing evaluations . labor has established evaluation coordination liaisons in each state to help with evaluations of federal programs . these liaisons can help states access logistical support and technical assistance for program evaluations . such resources include eta's recent review of alternative research methodologies , which contains guidance on conducting experimental and quasi - experimental evaluations of workforce programs to determine the social and economic values of the programs . twenty - three states reported using employer tax revenues in 2002 from a variety of employer taxes to fund their own employment placement and training programs . states most often provided job - specific training for workers . states reported spending a total of $278 million to provide these training and employment placement services . some states established their programs as a way to address a variety of specific workforce and economic issues , such as chronic shortages of skilled workers . twenty - three states reported using a variety of employer taxes in 2002 to fund employment placement and training services to address specific workforce issues ( see fig 2 ) . these states reported spending a total of $278 million on their workforce programs . expenditures in 2002 varied dramatically from state to state , ranging from $100,000 in kansas to over $84 million in california ( see fig .