data . consider approaches for the collection , disaggregation , and analysis of education data on military dependent students . communication and outreach . devise joint communication strategies to reach parents , educators , students , and military leaders about resources available from dod and education . resources . support school districts affected by military growth through the dod and education impact aid programs , as well as other programs . to address these five areas , dod and education outlined 13 specific objectives in the mou , including coordinating the dod and education impact aid programs . ( see appendix iii for a complete list of the objectives. ) dod and education have carried out a number of collaborative activities within the five focus areas . for example , to address the area of resources , dod and education have collaborated to respond to the challenges from the 2005 military base closure and realignment actions that the brac commission reported will result in 55 major closures and realignments by september 2011 . these actions , once completed , would relocate large numbers of military families , which in turn will affect an increasing number of school districts . officials from both agencies have made eight joint site visits , beginning in 2008 , to high - growth military installations to better understand the specific education issues arising from mission changes and growth . the officials shared their findings with cognizant federal agencies , affected state and local governments and school districts , and made recommendations for how the districts can best prepare for influxes of military dependent students . these recommendations included improving coordination between districts and federal agencies to better estimate military dependent student growth in a district . dod and education are also collaborating on a study mandated in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 that required dod , in consultation with education , to examine , among other things , the educational options available to military dependent children who attend schools in need of improvement as defined under esea . the study was also required to address the challenges military parents face in securing quality schooling for their children when the schools they attend are identified as needing improvement . to address student transitions and parental deployment , dod and education issued guidance to school districts about best practices to minimize the impact on military dependent students' attendance records and academics when they are absent upon a parent's return from deployment . further , dod , in cooperation with education , published a book for military families and military and school leaders called “students at the center,” which provides information on resources and best practices for meeting the needs of military dependent children . dod and education have also taken steps to improve interagency communication and develop compatible operating procedures and responsibilities — key elements of effective collaboration identified in our prior work . an mou working group meets monthly and is in the process of writing protocols for communication between the agencies . in addition , a military liaison position was established at education in 2008 to serve as the primary contact between the agencies for coordinating program development , management , and outreach related to improving the academic condition of military dependent children .