our prior work . we provided a draft of the new information contained in this statement to the department of transportation ( dot ) for technical review and addressed its views in the body of our statement where appropriate . the work upon which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . faa indicated that the government shutdown in october 2013 delayed some of the actions that the agency had planned to move this effort into the rulemaking process , including submission of the application for rulemaking . according to faa , however , this delay will have no effect on completion of the final rule , which is planned for 2017 . according to faa's may 2014 update , 1 of the 14 initiatives was at risk of not meeting planned milestones , which increases the risk that faa will miss its established implementation time frames for the initiative for addressing its associated recommendation . improve consistency of regulatory interpretations: the may 2014 interim update also indicated that the initiative for improving the consistency of regulatory interpretation is at risk of getting off track or off schedule . this initiative responds to the regulatory consistency committee's recommendations for improving the consistency of regulatory interpretation within both aircraft certification and flight standards . however , aircraft certification is relying on flight standards to complete the implementation plan for addressing the recommendations . therefore , aircraft certification has placed this initiative on hold . ( the next section of this statement discusses in more detail faa's response to the regulatory consistency committee's recommendations. ) as of may 2014 , faa had not developed metrics for measuring the effectiveness of 9 of the 14 initiatives it has undertaken , nor has it determined metrics to measure the effectiveness of its actions as a whole . according to faa officials , they plan to develop these metrics in three phases . for the first phase , to be included in the july 2014 update of its implementation plan , faa will include metrics to measure the progress of the implementation of the initiatives . for the second phase , faa plans to subsequently develop metrics for measuring the outcomes of each initiative . for the third phase , working with the aerospace industries association , faa plans to develop metrics for measuring the global return on investment in implementing all of the initiatives , to the extent that such measurement is possible . we believe that this plan for establishing performance measures is reasonable . unlike faa's efforts to improve the certification process , although faa has made some progress towards addressing the regulatory consistency recommendations , the details remain unclear about how faa will structure its efforts . in november 2012 , the regulatory consistency committee made six recommendations to aircraft certification and flight standards to improve ( 1 ) the consistency in how regulations are applied and ( 2 ) communications between faa and industry stakeholders . in july 2013 , faa reported to congress on its plans for addressing the regulatory consistency recommendations , and included its preliminary plan for determining the feasibility of implementing these recommendations .