fda regulates the production of vaccines . it licenses all vaccines sold in the united states , requiring clinical trials to demonstrate that vaccines are safe and effective , and reviews the manufacturing process to ensure that vaccines are made consistently in compliance with current good manufacturing practices . once vaccines are licensed , fda also conducts periodic inspections of production facilities to ensure that manufacturers maintain compliance with fda manufacturing requirements . states also have an important role in immunization efforts . my statement today highlights some of the key aspects of our report . the recent incidents of vaccine shortages began in november 2000 when supplies of the tetanus and diphtheria booster ( td ) fell short . by october 2001 , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) reported shortages of five vaccines that , because some are combination vaccines , protect against eight childhood diseases . in addition to diphtheria and tetanus vaccines , vaccines to protect against pertussis , invasive pneumococcal disease , measles , mumps , rubella , and varicella were in short supply . in july 2002 , updated cdc data indicated supplies were returning to normal for most vaccines . multiple factors , including production problems and unanticipated demand for newly approved vaccines , contributed to recent vaccine shortages . while problems leading to the shortages have largely been resolved , the potential exists for shortages to recur . the complex nature and often year - long production schedule of manufacturing a vaccine will continue to make it difficult for the supply system to respond rapidly to sudden changes in supply or demand . however , the shortage of vaccine to protect against invasive pneumococcal disease was expected to continue through at least late 2002 . one development that may increase the supply of vaccines is that a number of new vaccine products that could be used to meet the existing childhood immunization schedule are in varying stages of development . however , completing clinical testing and review by the food and drug administration ( fda ) will likely take several years , as these products generally do not qualify for expedited review under fda policies . concerned about the impact of and reasons for these shortages , you asked that we examine the following questions: 1 . approaches under consideration include strengthening manufacturers' protection against liability for injuries related to childhood vaccines and streamlining the regulatory process . to what extent have recent childhood vaccine shortages affected immunization policies and programs ? what factors have contributed to the recent shortages , and have they been resolved ? what strategies are federal agencies considering to help mitigate disruptions in the vaccine supply ? in brief , shortages have prompted federal authorities to recommend deferring some vaccinations and have caused the majority of states to reduce or suspend immunization requirements for school and day care programs so that children who had received fewer than the previously mandatory immunizations could enroll . states are concerned that failure to be vaccinated at a later date may reduce the share of the population protected and increase the potential for disease to spread ; however , data are not currently available to measure these effects .