state . state's primary role with regard to food security is to coordinate international communication , negotiations , and u.s. government policy formulation . the president has asked the secretary of state to lead the global hunger and food security initiative . a number of state's bureaus and offices perform duties specific to their expertise that help promote global food security . for example , state's bureau of economic , energy , and business affairs , with assistance from the office of policy planning and others , is involved in the effort to develop a whole - of - government strategy to promote global food security . the bureau's office of multilateral trade and agriculture affairs assists with food security policy coordination , works toward a successful conclusion of the doha round of trade talks in the world trade organization , and promotes the removal of export restrictions on agricultural products and the reduction in trade barriers to agricultural biotechnology . the bureau of international organizations coordinates u.s. policy towards and participation in fao and the world food program . the bureau for population , refugees , and migration coordinates with the world food program and usaid regarding food assistance and food security for refugees and other populations of concern . the bureau of oceans , environment , and science works bilaterally and multilaterally to advance u.s. foreign policy objectives in such areas as the sustainable use of natural resources , protection of biodiversity and wildlife , adaptation to climate change , harnessing of science and technology , and improvements to human health . state's office of the director of u.s. foreign assistance ( state / f ) coordinates state and usaid budgets , while the office of conflict prevention acts as the secretariat for the funding of reconstruction and stabilization projects through the use of dod section 1207 funds . state reported providing about $168 million for food security programs and activities in fiscal year 2008 . the other five agencies that responded to our data collection instrument are involved in supporting global food security initiatives in different ways . ustda and dod provide some food security - related monetary assistance . for fiscal year 2008 , ustda reported providing more than $9 million for agriculture , rural development , and other types of food security assistance , and dod's defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) reported more than $8 million in funding for global food security - related activities that were part of disaster relief and humanitarian assistance efforts . the peace corps estimates that many of its volunteers serving in developing countries address the issues of hunger , malnutrition , and food insecurity , but did not report any funding data . while ustr does not support any food security programming , it is engaged in interagency consultations and has recently created an interagency subcommittee at the trade policy staff committee to coordinate trade policy elements of the administration's global food security initiative . the 10th agency , omb , participates in the interagency process as part of its mission to help formulate the administration's budget and to advise the white house and other components of the executive office of the president on the resources available to support the development of new food security initiatives .