dcps officials told us they plan to do so in the summer of 2009 . the state superintendent's office also implemented a new performance management system , effective october 2008 , to hold its employees accountable and improve the office's performance . the office is converting to a single electronic management system to track and evaluate employee performance by december 2009 . according to an official from the state superintendent's office , this system links individual employee evaluations to overall performance goals and the office's strategic plan . ( 2 ) what actions has the district taken to strengthen the quality of teachers and principals ? ( 3 ) to what extent have the district's education offices developed and implemented long - term plans and how has dcps used stakeholder input in key initiatives ? ( 4 ) what steps have dcps and the state superintendent's office taken to improve their accountability and performance ? to answer these questions , we reviewed and analyzed relevant documents and research and interviewed officials from the district's education offices . we also interviewed representatives of education and research associations , and various organizations based in the washington , d.c. community . across all our objectives , we measured the progress of ongoing reform efforts against any implementation time frames established by dcps or the state superintendent's office . we based our evaluation of completed initiatives on relevant recognized standards , such as those established by gao in past reports . to provide a broader national context for our work , we visited four urban school districts with mayoral governance: boston , chicago , cleveland , and new york city . we based our selection of these districts on how long the school district had been under mayoral control and student demographic information . we interviewed high - level officials — such as superintendents and former superintendents , school board presidents and members , officials from majors' offices — as well as union leaders , and representatives from various community and research organizations in these cities . in summary , dcps's early efforts to improve student achievement focused on implementing initiatives to improve student performance , including implementing a new staffing model ; restructuring underperforming schools ; and creating and enhancing data systems . dcps is refocusing or revising its approach to many of these initiatives as it continues to implement them . dcps is also attempting to improve the quality of its teacher and principal workforce by hiring new teachers and principals and by providing professional development , but it has encountered challenges in effectively implementing these changes . dcps officials told us that the 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 teacher evaluation process did not allow them to assess whether the teacher workforce improved between these 2 school years and that they are working to develop a new teacher evaluation system . the state superintendent's office and dcps each developed 5-year strategic plans and involved stakeholders in developing these plans . while dcps has recently increased efforts to involve stakeholders such as parents and the d.c. council in key initiatives , past stakeholder involvement was inconsistent . dcps and the state superintendent's office also have taken steps to improve accountability and performance of their offices .