gao - 16-616 . washington , d.c.: september 2016 . ( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report to nsf and interior for review and comment . in its comments , reproduced in appendix i , nsf concurred with our recommendations and described actions it would take to address them . these actions include updating and adding details and procedures to its internal guidance for setting icrs , reviewing and updating the tracking database on a quarterly basis , and working with interior to establish procedures for monitoring icrs set by interior on nsf's behalf . nsf stated that these actions will improve nsf's protocols for negotiating icrs . interior stated that it did not have comments on our draft report . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the director of the national science foundation ; secretary of the department of the interior ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact john neumann at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or neumannj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contacts named above , key contributors to this report were joseph cook , assistant director ; kim mcgatlin , assistant director ; rathi bose ; ellen fried ; cindy gilbert ; ruben gzirian ; terrance horner , jr. ; diana lee ; david messman ; kathryn smith ; and sara sullivan . nih biomedical research: agencies involved in the indirect cost rate - setting process need to improve controls . federal research grants: opportunities remain for agencies to streamline administrative requirements . gao - 16-573 . washington , d.c.: june 2016 . grants management: programs at hhs and hud collect administrative cost information but differences in cost caps and definitions create challenges . gao - 15-118 . washington , d.c.: december 2014 . biomedical research: nih should assess the impact of growth in indirect costs on its mission . gao - 13-760 . washington , d.c.: september 2013 . university research: policies for the reimbursement of indirect costs need to be updated . gao - 10-937 . washington , d.c.: september 2010 . national institutes of health extramural research grants: oversight of cost reimbursements to universities . gao - 07-294r . washington , d.c.: january 2007 . we then selected three rate agreement case files from each of the populations . to understand the extent to which nsf applied its internal guidance , we reviewed documentation contained in the rate agreement case files , such as icr proposals , rate agreements , and trend analysis . the uniform guidance establishes the principles for defining , calculating , and negotiating icrs for federally funded research . the guidance describes the classification and types of allowable indirect costs ; methods of allocating such costs ; reasonableness of claimed costs ; and exclusions and descriptions of unallowable cost elements , such as alcohol and bad debt .