award . epa prepares the grant documents and instructs the grantee on technical requirements , and the grantee signs an agreement to comply with all requirements . postaward . after awarding the grant , epa provides technical assistance , oversees the work , and provides payments to the grantee ; the grantee completes the work , and the project ends . closeout of the award . epa ensures that all technical work and administrative requirements have been completed ; epa prepares closeout documents and notifies the grantee that the grant is completed . epa's grantees are subject to the same type of financial management oversight as the recipients of other federal assistance . specifically , the single audit act requires grantees to have an audit of their financial statements and federal awards or program - specific audit if they spend $300,000 or more in federal awards in a fiscal year. , grantees submit these audits to a central clearinghouse operated by the bureau of the census , which then forwards the audit findings to the appropriate agency for any necessary action . however , the act does not cover all grants and all aspects of grants management and , therefore , agencies must take additional steps to ensure that federal funds are spent appropriately . in addition , epa conducts in - depth reviews to analyze grantees' compliance with grant regulations and specific grant requirements . furthermore , to determine how well offices and regions oversee grantees , epa conducts internal management reviews that address grants management . the office of management and budget , as authorized by the act , increased this amount to $500,000 in federal awards as of june 23 , 2003. closeouts , as a material weakness — an accounting and internal control system weakness that the epa administrator must report to the president and congress . epa's fiscal year 1999 federal managers' financial integrity act report indicated that this oversight material weakness had been corrected , but the inspector general testified that the weakness continued . in 2002 , the inspector general again recommended that epa designate grants management as a material weakness . the office of management and budget ( omb ) also recommended in 2002 that epa designate grants management as a material weakness . in its fiscal year 2002 annual report , epa ultimately decided to maintain this issue as an agency - level weakness , which is a lower level of risk than a material weakness . epa reached this decision because it believes its ongoing corrective action efforts will help to resolve outstanding grants management challenges . however , in adding epa's grants management to our list of epa's major management challenges in january 2003 , we signaled our concern that epa has not yet taken sufficient action to ensure that it can manage its grants effectively . we identified four key challenges that epa continues to face in managing its grants . these challenges are ( 1 ) selecting the most qualified grant applicants , ( 2 ) effectively overseeing grantees , ( 3 ) measuring the results of grants , and ( 4 ) effectively managing grant staff and resources .