generally , these efforts are still in the planning phase . faa has not yet made the organizational changes called for by the act or clearly defined the relationships among the deputy administrator , chief nextgen officer , and jpdo director . according to faa , no organizational changes will be made until the agency has a permanent faa administrator in place . faa also reorganized its nextgen efforts around its “ideas to in - service management” ( i2i ) process . according to faa , the i2i will support enterprise - level , cross - program management in bringing capabilities into the national airspace system and will formalize collaboration among nextgen program offices , ato , and other relevant faa organizations such as aviation safety . within ato , a new program management office has been established to improve oversight of ato's nextgen implementation efforts . according to faa , by combining acquisition program managers into one organization , ato will ensure more coordinated program management throughout the full life cycle of nextgen acquisitions . while an increased focus on accountability for nextgen implementation is a positive step , it remains to be seen whether this latest reorganization will produce the desired results without a clarification of nextgen leadership roles and the fulfillment of all the necessary leadership positions . as we have previously reported , leadership is a critical element of success for large - scale systems integration efforts like nextgen . particularly in light of constrained budget resources , faa will have to balance its priorities to help ensure that nextgen implementation stays on course . sustaining the current legacy infrastructure remains critical , as it will continue to be the core of the national airspace system for a number of years , and some of its components will be part of nextgen . for example , while faa transitions to satellite - based surveillance through the deployment of automatic dependent surveillance - broadcast ( ads - b ) technology , the agency expects to continue to operate and maintain current radar technology through at least 2020 . at that time , faa is scheduled to make decisions about which radars the agency will decommission and which will be maintained as the back - up system for ads - b . if either ads - b's deployment or airlines' efforts to equip with this technology should slip , then faa may have to maintain and operate some of its radars longer than expected . we have ongoing work for this committee that is further exploring how faa is preparing for the transition to nextgen and balancing the demands of the legacy and nextgen systems , including potential implications for the legacy systems and faa budgets if nextgen implementation is delayed . in addition , to fully realize nextgen's capabilities , reconfiguring facilities that handle air traffic control will be required . faa recently approved an initial plan to consolidate en route centers and terminal radar approach - control facilities ( tracons ) into large , integrated facilities over the next two decades . beginning in 2011 , faa made additional changes to its nextgen organizational structure to address these long - standing issues .