reg . 22879 ( may 19 , 2017 ) . fhwa plans to publish another notice of proposed rulemaking regarding the greenhouse gas measure at a later date . in addition to the individual named above , steve cohen ( assistant director ) ; maria wallace ( analyst in charge ) ; delwen jones ; alex lawrence ; crystal wesco ; sarah wilson ; and elizabeth wood made key contributions to this report . 82 fed . we provided a draft of this report to dot for review and comment . in its comments , reproduced in appendix ii , the agency concurred with our recommendation . dot also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of transportation and the administrator of the federal highway administration . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or flemings@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . system performance rule national goal congestion reduction: to achieve a significant reduction in congestion on the national highway system system reliability: to improve the efficiency of the surface transportation system freight movement and economic vitality: to improve the national highway freight network , strengthen the ability of rural communities to access national and international trade markets , and support regional economic development environmental sustainability: to enhance the performance of the transportation system while protecting and enhancing the natural environment . performance of the interstate system performance of the non - interstate nhs freight movement on the interstate system traffic congestion 3 . truck travel time reliability index 4 . this process is particularly challenging because it requires advanced technical expertise . some state dots also emphasized that they have limited experience using the data , which will necessitate significant additional work to perform the required calculations . data quality — some states expressed concerns with the quality and completeness of the npmrds data . for example , michigan dot officials expressed concerns about the amount of missing travel time data . more recently , the agency has begun hosting webinars focused on data use and target setting . the basic rulemaking process is spelled out in the administrative procedures act . among other things , the act establishes procedures and broadly applicable federal requirements for informal rulemaking . in addition , the act generally requires agencies to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register . after giving interested persons an opportunity to comment on the proposed rule by providing “written data , views , or arguments,” and considering those comments , the agency may then publish the final rule . in our prior work , we found that rulemakings can range from 1 to nearly 14 years to complete , depending on a number of factors .