such an examination may be to the benefit of the company . all states perform some type of market analysis . in many states , however , it consists largely of monitoring complaints and complaint trends ; and reacting to significant issues that arise . three states that we visited — missouri , ohio , and oregon — have established a proactive market analysis program . these programs for market analysis have established processes for monitoring company behavior to identify trends , companies that vary from the norm ( outliers ) , and potential market conduct problems . in general , an established program would have dedicated staff and protocols for gathering data and conducting analysis at the department offices . attempts to do so are neither efficient nor effective . moreover , since many states do not coordinate their examinations with other states , some large multistate insurance companies reported being examined by multiple states , while other companies were examined infrequently or never . we also found that since the mid 1970s , naic has taken a variety of steps to improve the consistency and quality of market conduct examinations . however , despite the naic's long - standing efforts and some limited successes , progress toward a more effective process has been slow . recently , naic has increased the emphasis it places on market analysis and market conduct examinations as regulatory tools that could improve states' ability to oversee market conduct . with more consistent implementation of routine market analysis , states should be better able to use the resources they already have available to target companies requiring immediate attention . also , by consistently applying common standards for market conduct examinations , states should be able to rely on regulators in other states for assessments of an insurance company's operations . these improvements should in turn increase the efficiency of the examination process and improve consumer protection by reducing existing overlaps and gaps in regulatory oversight . however , if naic cannot convince the various states to adopt and implement common standards for market analysis and examinations , current efforts to strengthen these consumer protection tools are unlikely to result in any fundamental improvement . while we focus on the states' use of market analysis and market conduct examinations , market regulation includes several other important regulatory tools , including complaint handling and investigation , policy rate and form review , agent and company licensing , and consumer education . most states have functioning programs addressing each of these four regulatory areas . ideally , all regulatory tools , including market analysis and market conduct examinations , should work together in an integrated and interrelated way . in the absence of generally accepted standards , individual states decide how they will do market analysis and perform market conduct examinations . while all states do market analysis in some form , few have established formal programs that look at companies in a consistent and routine manner . states also have no generally agreed upon standards for how many examinations to perform , which companies to examine and how often , and what the scope of the examination should be .