developing the ea . agency is aware of ea . the fbi has acknowledged the need for an ea , and the director has made its development a management priority . adequate resources exist . according to fbi officials , they have identified the financial and human capital resources needed to effectively manage the bureau's architecture program . while bureau officials stated they have adequate financial resources to fund the program , including sufficient contractor assistance , four of five core architect positions identified as being needed to staff the program office have not yet been filled . committee or group representing the enterprise is responsible for directing , overseeing , or approving ea . the fbi has established an enterprise architecture board to direct , oversee , and approve the ea . the board includes upper - level management from all the operating units , including the counterterrorism , counterintelligence , and finance divisions . technical representatives , such as the chief technology officer and chief architect , also serve on this board . program office responsible for ea development and maintenance exists . the fbi has established a program office , called the enterprise architecture unit , which is located in the cio's office . the program office is responsible for the development , implementation , and maintenance of the ea . chief architect exists . the fbi has designated a chief architect . ea is being developed using a framework , methodology , and automated tool . the fbi initially used the federal enterprise architecture framework and has since switched to omb's five federal enterprise architecture reference models . the bureau is using the popkin system architect tool . however , the bureau does not have a documented methodology that defines how ea products are to be developed . instead of a defined methodology , the bureau is relying on a combination of its chief architect's knowledge and certain documentation , such as an ea alignment plan that describes , among other things , the products to be developed , the order in which they are to be developed , the relationships among products , and analyses that are to be performed to help identify gaps and redundancies in the contents of these products . however , this documentation does not include either the specific steps or methods that explain how the content of products is to be developed and documented . satisfied ? ea plans call for describing the “as is” and “to be” environments , and a sequencing plan . the ea program management plan ( dated october 2004 ) calls for the development of “as is” and “to be” environments as well as a sequencing plan . ea plans call for describing the enterprise in terms of business , performance , information / data , application / service , and technology . the fbi's ea baseline report ( dated march 2005 ) and other plans call for the development of business , performance , data , applications , and technology descriptions . ea plans call for business , performance , information / data , application / service , and technology descriptions to address security .