the projected completion of the study is november 2008 . in light of these problems , wasa is now considering whether its current lead line replacement program should be restructured , particularly given its high cost and the competing demands on its budget . as a water utility serving a large metropolitan area , the lead problem has posed only one of several major infrastructure challenges for the utility and its customers . for example , approximately one - third of the district ( by acreage ) is served by combined sewers , which carry both sanitary waste from homes and businesses and storm water drainage . during storms this untreated sewage is discharged directly into the anacostia and potomac rivers , adversely impacting the quality of these waters . to meet federal water quality standards , wasa will need to spend considerable sums of money to deal with the problem . specifically , a march 2005 consent decree between wasa and epa requires wasa , by 2025 , to implement wasa's long - term control plan , including construction of large underground tunnels to temporarily store excess flows until they can be treated at the blue plains wastewater treatment plant and other measures , to significantly reduce combined sever overflows into the anacostia river and other area waterways . wasa has estimated the cost of this effort to reach $2.2 billion dollars . wasa's challenges are mirrored across the country , where projected needs for investment in drinking water and wastewater infrastructure range from $485 billion to nearly $1.2 trillion over 20 years . the variation in these estimates reflects alternative assumptions about the nature of existing capital stock , replacement rates , and financing costs . epa reported in its most recent drinking water infrastructure needs survey ( issued in june 2005 ) that drinking water utilities alone will need an estimated $276.8 billion for the 20-year period ending in december 2022 . epa's new estimate exceeds those from prior surveys by more than 60 percent , largely as a result of an increased emphasis on capturing previously underreported needs for infrastructure rehabilitation and replacement . according to epa's report , current needs increased by about 50 percent , but future needs rose by over 100 percent . epa attributes the difference to a more complete assessment of the longer - term needs for addressing “aging infrastructure that is currently adequate , but will require replacement or significant rehabilitation over the next 20 years.” pipeline rehabilitation and replacement represents a significant portion of the projected infrastructure needs for water utilities . epa estimates that underground pipelines account for about 75 percent of the nation's existing capital investment in drinking water and wastewater infrastructure . according to the american society of civil engineers , u.s. drinking water and wastewater utilities are responsible for an estimated 800,000 miles of water delivery pipelines and between 600,000 and 800,000 miles of sewer pipelines , respectively . however , several recent studies have raised concerns about the condition of the existing pipeline network .