contractors operate each site for ese . the ese program offices that oversee these sites — em , ne , and sc — have requested about $397 million in fiscal year 2005 for security . two other organizations are important contributors to doe's security program . the office of security in doe's office of security and safety performance assurance develops and promulgates orders and policies , such as the dbt , to guide the department's safeguards and security programs . the office of independent oversight and performance assurance in doe's office of security and safety performance assurance supports the department by , among other things , independently evaluating the effectiveness of contractors' performance in safeguards and security . it also performs follow - up reviews to ensure that contractors have taken effective corrective actions and appropriately addressed weaknesses in safeguards and security . the risks associated with category i special nuclear materials vary but include the creation of improvised nuclear devices capable of producing a nuclear yield , theft for use in an illegal nuclear weapon , and the potential for sabotage in the form of radioactive dispersal . because of these risks , doe has long employed risk - based security practices . the key component of doe's well - established , risk - based security practices is the dbt , a classified document that identifies the characteristics of the potential threats to doe assets . the dbt traditionally has been based on a classified , multiagency intelligence community assessment of potential terrorist threats , known as the postulated threat . the dbt considers a variety of threats in addition to the terrorist threat . addressed the potential for improvised nuclear device concerns . the may 2003 dbt established a special team to report to the secretary of energy on each site's potential for improvised nuclear devices . based on the team's advice , in april 2004 the deputy secretary of energy designated whether a site had such a concern . this official designation was intended to help address the general dissatisfaction with previous doe policies for improvised nuclear devices , knowledge of which was carefully controlled and not shared widely with security officials . for example , some em sites had no information at all on their potential for this risk . when we testified before this subcommittee in april 2004 , we stated that while doe had issued the final dbt in may 2003 , it had only recently begun to resolve a number of significant issues that could affect the ability of its sites to fully meet the threat in the new dbt in a timely fashion . these issues involved issuing additional dbt implementation guidance , developing dbt implementation plans , and developing budgets to support these plans . we noted that fully resolving all of these issues might take several years , and the total cost of meeting the new threats was currently unknown . consequently , we stated , full dbt implementation could occur anywhere from fiscal year 2005 to fiscal year 2008 , well beyond the department's goal of the end of fiscal year 2006 .