we disagree with this assertion . our first finding discusses at length the reasons the air force considered a waiver necessary and outlines the waiver's rationale based on the air force's supporting documentation . while we agree that it was necessary for the air force to promptly address berry amendment compliance issues , this should not have precluded the air force from conducting a thorough analysis on how to achieve compliance on a system - by - system basis , especially during the 6-month period that the temporary waiver was in force . in addition , the air force indicated that the report did not clearly articulate the scope of the current waiver . although the draft report correctly described the scope of the waiver , we made changes throughout the report to specify and emphasize that the scope of the waiver covers future aircraft deliveries under current acquisition contracts and current and future support contracts . the waiver does not apply to commercial derivative aircraft systems not listed on the waiver or future contracts for systems on the waiver entered into after the waiver's effective date . we are sending copies of this report to the honorable donald h. rumsfeld , secretary of defense ; the honorable preston m. geren , acting secretary of the air force ; and interested congressional committees . we will also provide copies to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or calvaresibarra@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in addition to the contact named above , john neumann , assistant director ; noah bleicher ; greg campbell ; jeffrey hartnett ; robert lee ; lillian slodkowski ; and adam vodraska made key contributions to this report . the specialty metals requirement was added to the berry amendment in 1972 . dod implemented the specialty metals requirement by applying it to all contracts where the specialty metal is purchased directly by the government or the prime contractor and to all subcontract tiers for six major classes of programs — aircraft , missiles , ships , tank - automotive , weapons , and ammunition . for these programs , the prime contractor must include a clause that requires all subcontractors to comply with the berry amendment's specialty metals requirement . in addition , the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) identifies those metals considered to be specialty metals , to include titanium , certain types of steel , and other assorted metals and alloys . in 1996 , congress made clear that the berry amendment does apply to all commercial item purchases . the berry amendment includes a number of exceptions to the requirement to buy certain domestically produced articles .