see figure 2 below . gsa headquarters officials have used this data as an indication of the nbc program's success , because they say the data show that the use of brokers has not driven up the rental rates . the officials also noted that they consider this an indication that brokers are not driving up lease rates to obtain higher commissions . gsa is reportedly meeting its overall rental goals , but it is not clear that the nbc program results in rental rates lower than those negotiated by in - house staff . in 2012 , gsa officials attempted to determine if brokers negotiated lower rental rates than in - house staff using data from fiscal years 2011 and 2012 . gsa's own analysis did not show that brokers were negotiating significantly lower rental rates , and in fact overall it showed that brokers were negotiating rental rates that were similar to in - house staff . furthermore , gsa officials cautioned us that they found this available data insufficient to determine if brokers were negotiating lower rental rates than in - house staff . officials stated that the market rate data they were using were not specific enough to provide the level of detail necessary to discern the potential difference between the rates . they said that the current market data do not take into account the unique circumstances for each individual lease , and how these circumstances affect the rental rate . for example , a lease for a law enforcement agency , with higher security requirements and unique types of space ( eg , a shooting range ) , may have to be negotiated in the higher end of the market rate . however , the market rate data gsa has does not consider these requirements , and therefore may underestimate the value of the rental rate negotiated . the converse is also true , and it is possible that the market rate data can overstate a rental rate negotiated for an office space with few special requirements . the officials said that this makes comparison of negotiated rental rates difficult because even if both of the example leases were in the same market , one rate may be overvalued while the other is undervalued based on its unique requirements . this limitation notwithstanding , officials told us they still believe it is probable that brokers are negotiating lower rates . in april 2013 , gsa began requiring regional officials to use different market rental - rate data , which they expect will allow them to better compare the rental rates achieved by brokers to market rates in the future . for all broker projects greater than 10,000 square feet , regional officials are to obtain an in - house research report at the beginning of the leasing process referred to as “bullseye.” a bullseye report is specifically tailored for each lease transaction and includes market information , analysis , and insight regarding the local submarket . the officials stated that the new reports would provide more specific data to gauge the effectiveness of the broker program by comparing negotiated rental rates to the average for the submarket rate at the time of lease award .