gao - 13-309 . washington , d.c.: march 11 , 2013 . defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs . gao - 13-294sp . washington , d.c.: march 28 , 2013 . dod concurred with all three of the recommendations . dod lifted stovl probation , citing improved performance . subsequently , dod further reduced procurement quantities , decreasing funding requirements through 2016 . the initial independent software assessment began in and ongoing reviews are planned through 2012 . the program established a new acquisition program baseline and approved the continuation of system development , increasing costs for development and procurements and extending the period of planned procurements by 2 years . primary gao message extensive restructuring places the program on a more achievable course . most of the program's instability continues to be concurrency of development , test , and production . we recommend the cost assessment program evaluation office conduct an analysis on the impact of lower annual funding levels ; jsf program office conducts an assessment of the supply chain and transportation network . dod response and actions dod partially concurred with conducting an analysis on the impact of lower annual funding levels and concurred with assessing the supply chain and transportation network . f - 35 joint strike fighter: current outlook is improved , but long - term affordability is a major concern . start of system development and demonstration approved . primary gao message critical technologies needed for key aircraft performance elements not mature . program should delay start of system development until critical technologies mature to acceptable levels . dod response and actions dod did not delay start of system development and demonstration stating technologies were at acceptable maturity levels and will manage risks in development . the program undergoes re - plan to address higher than expected design weight , which added $7 billion and 18 months to development schedule . we recommended that the program reduce risks and establish executable business case that is knowledge - based with an evolutionary acquisition strategy . dod partially concurred but did not adjust strategy , believing that its approach is balanced between cost , schedule and technical risk . program sets in motion plan to enter production in 2007 shortly after first flight of the non - production representative aircraft . the program planned to enter production with less than 1 percent of testing complete . we recommended program delay investing in production until flight testing shows that jsf performs as expected . dod partially concurred but did not delay start of production because it believed the risk level was appropriate . congress reduced funding for first two low - rate production buys thereby slowing the ramp up of production . flight testing of the redesigned system is slated for late 2013 . structural durability — over time , testing has discovered bulkhead and rib cracks on the aircraft . structural and durability testing to verify that all three variants can achieve their expected life and identify life - limited parts was completed in 2012 . the program is testing some redesigned structures and planning other modifications . officials plan to retrofit and test a production aircraft already built and make changes to the production line for subsequent aircraft .