we did not make recommendations to cms in this report . icd codes are used in a variety of ways by medicare . they also had to have an active , valid national provider identifier number . for each claim that was improperly rejected because of the system error , cms would then determine whether to re - submit the claim for processing by the shared systems . the plan describes other actions to be taken if the shared systems and common working file encounter errors in utilizing icd - 10 codes by prepayment edits . in such cases , the emergency response team would determine whether the errors could be fixed quickly , in which case systems would “hold” the claims until the errors were corrected and processing could be completed , or if additional actions would be required prior to the errors being corrected . corrective actions are also described for another scenario that would occur if the icd - 10 compliance date were delayed until later than october 1 , 2015 . in this scenario , the contingency plan identifies the system changes that would have to be made , along with the time needed to make them , to the front - end processing systems , the shared systems , and the macs' local systems to continue to process icd - 9 codes after october 1 , 2015 . although cms has taken such actions to mitigate risks and minimize the impact of errors occurring in its own and its stakeholders' systems , the implementation of new or modified software always introduces risks that unforeseen errors will be encountered when the software is released into a live production environment . such errors may occur if the systems encounter unanticipated conditions related to icd - 10 that had not been considered during system testing . further , unidentified risks related to the icd - 10 transition could cause disruptions for which the need for corrective actions or contingency plans had not been recognized . therefore , while it can be expected that system errors will occur , the extent to which any such errors will disrupt the agency's ability to properly process claims cannot be determined until cms's systems begin processing icd - 10 codes . cms has taken various steps to help providers , clearinghouses , and insurers that participate in the medicare fee - for - service program implement the systems changes they need to make for transitioning their systems to icd - 10 . for example , cms developed a website for publishing technical support and other information to help stakeholders identify , test , and implement system changes needed to process icd - 10 codes . cms also provided enhanced technical capabilities that allowed stakeholders to test the integration of their updated systems with cms's claims processing systems environment . further , cms officials informed stakeholders of alternative ways to file claims that include icd - 10 codes in case any stakeholders have not completed their systems changes by october 1 , 2015 . as early as 2008 , cms had developed and published a website that includes information related to the implementation of systems changes needed to process and submit icd - 10 codes for medicare claims processing .