t requir information . ecurity acquisit d and sen ion regulation ( h sitive information within sar ) 48 c.f.r . 3004 ) , states that contracting officers shall insert the n in figure 1 , or one substantially the se shall not be used unless contractor employees wi e recurring access to government facilitie s or access to sen sitive the “confidentiality of information” contract clause shown in figure 3 was to be used in solicitations and resultant contracts whenever the need existed to keep information confidential , for example in contracts that involve the use of proprietary plans or processes or confid information of organizations other than the contractors . in addition , any solicitation or contract including this clause was to indicate , as specifically as possible , the types of data that would be covered and the requirements for handling the data . ( see app . iii for the standard contract provisions we identified in dhs , dod , and hhs far supplements. ) as shown in table 2 , our analysis of agency guidance included in the dhs far supplement found that it contained five of six effective management control practices consistent with key attributes for establishing safeguards for sensitive information . for example , the dhs far supplement and related guidance aims to ( 1 ) make contractors aware of their responsibilities for maintaining confidentiality of sensitive information ; ( 2 ) address conflicts of interest and potential misuse by prohibiting use of agency information processed , stored , or transmitted by the contractor for any purpose other than contract performance ; and ( 3 ) deter noncompliance with these requirements and ensure accountability by explaining consequences related to violations . according to agency acquisition policy officials , recognition within dhs of the need for contractor safeguards for homeland security – sensitive information likely led to the establishment of extensive requirements when the agency updated its interim far supplement and related guidance in 2006 . on the other hand , dhs acquisition policy and security officials acknowledge that the agency's far supplement and contract clause do not directly specify contractor responsibilities for promptly notifying contracting officers of unauthorized use or disclosure of sensitive information . prompt contractor notification to key government officials is critical to avoid internal delays that would prevent officials from being aware of the unauthorized use or disclosure ; delay agency decisions about how to respond ; and deny the opportunity for affected parties to take precautions . dhs's guidance establishes stronger safeguards for sensitive information than what we found at dod and hhs in their far supplements . in contrast with the dhs guidance , the analysis in table 2 shows that dod's far supplement does not include the same amount of detail as to how contractors are to safeguard sensitive information . at present , dod's far supplement is limited to requiring the use of a disclosure of information clause in solicitations and contracts when contractors have access to unclassified information that may be sensitive and inappropriate for release to the public — for example , dod officials said the clause authorizes use in a contractor's press and marketing materials .