and nsf . to identify the entities and programs for we conducted this performance audit from october 2012 to july 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in response to a congressional request in 2005 , the national academies gathered a group of business , government , and academic leaders to identify steps the leaders thought would ensure that the united states is a leader in science and engineering and can compete , prosper , and be secure in the twenty - first century . the resulting 2007 report , entitled rising above the gathering storm: energizing and employing america for a brighter economic future , recommended a number of specific actions to address these goals.increasing federal investment in long - term basic and cross - disciplinary scientific research , creating an agency within doe to support transformational energy research that might be high risk but could also provide dramatic benefits for the nation , increasing the number and skills of science and mathematics teachers in primary and secondary schools , and investing in higher education with the goal of increasing the number of undergraduate and graduate students with degrees in science , engineering , and mathematics fields . the competes acts addressed some of the actions in these areas . for example , competes 2007 authorized creation of the advanced research projects agency - energy in doe to overcome long - term and high - risk technological barriers in developing energy technologies , and it authorized programs in education and nsf to train teachers in stem fields . among other things , the report advocated investments in scientific research have led to significant advances such as the development of the internet , satellites , aircraft , and the mapping of the human genome , while investments in stem education have provided multiple forms of support for developing a highly qualified stem workforce . however , evaluations of such investments face inherent challenges , such as those related to the long - term nature of many scientific research projects , an inability to predict certain outcomes , and difficulty tying specific investments to direct outcomes . as we reported in 2012 , evaluations of stem education programs may be hindered by inconsistent collection of output data , such as the number of institutions or students directly served by programs.effectiveness of investments in scientific research and stem education in improving u.s. competitiveness — the overall goal of the competes acts — are complicated by a number of factors . for example , it is difficult to measure competitiveness .