dod did not have any comments on the report . usda has not implemented this recommendation . while usda has set up a web site that includes links to online copies of the commodity program's purchasing specifications and related documents , usda has not made clear that its purchasing specifications related to microbial contamination for seven commodity foods are more stringent than federal regulatory requirements for the same foods in the commercial marketplace . although factors such as cost , nutrition , and quality also influence their purchasing decisions , officials for several school districts we interviewed limit the kinds of meat and produce they buy because of concerns about microbial contamination and food safety , including concerns about their own staff's training and the adequacy of their facilities . specifically , 9 of the 18 school districts in our sample have discontinued buying raw meat — such as ground beef , chicken , or turkey — for their school meals . each of these districts said they purchase only precooked or processed meat products , whether through the commodity program or in the commercial marketplace . for example , 3 large urban school districts do not purchase raw meat because they cannot ensure that the kitchen staff at the many sites in their districts can handle raw meat safely and cook it to an internal temperature that would kill pathogens . all of the school districts we interviewed reported that they trained food service staff on food safety . nevertheless , officials in 8 of the 9 districts that no longer purchase raw meat attributed that decision , at least in part , to concerns about their staff , including staff turnover and qualifications . in addition to factors related to staff , officials in 5 districts cited concerns about the adequacy of kitchen facilities as a reason to eliminate the purchase of raw meat . for example , officials in a large urban district said that some of its schools were over 100 years old and therefore lacked modern cooking facilities ; in some of its schools , the “kitchen” may be an old ball closet with ovens in it . without adequate staff and facilities , officials in these districts said it was safer to purchase cooked or processed meat . although half the districts we interviewed do not buy raw meat , the other half do . officials in many of these nine school districts told us they buy raw meat because it costs less than precooked products , and their staff and facilities are adequate and able to handle it . for example , the director of one midsize urban school district's food service department indicated that the district has tended to buy more raw meat in recent years , because it is less expensive than precooked products , and the district has the facilities to cook and cool these products safely . while these nine districts buy raw meat , four of them limit its handling in some way , such as handling it only in a small number of appropriately equipped facilities .