for example , at the u.s . information reported by the 57 federal agencies illustrated various ways in which agencies carry out activities within the six safety program components — management commitment , employee involvement , training , identification of hazards , correction of hazards , and medical management . however , agency officials we surveyed and interviewed reported they face a number of implementation challenges that cut across the components , particularly in using automated systems , holding managers accountable for maintaining an effective safety program , and making the best use of their limited resources . osha's oversight of federal agencies' safety programs is not as effective as it could be because it does not use its enforcement and compliance assistance resources in a strategic manner . in responding to our final two recommendations , osha reported that it would begin evaluations and a more rigorous review of agencies' annual reports once staffing had increased . the departments of homeland security and interior noted that labor could provide more assistance to agencies in addressing the challenges we identified . ( 2 ) how well does osha oversee and assist federal agencies' efforts to develop and administer their safety programs ? to respond to your request , we focused on the executive branch because osha has more oversight responsibilities with respect to these agencies than it does for judicial and legislative branch agencies . we obtained information using a data collection instrument from 57 safety managers for agencies in the eight largest executive branch departments , which represent about 80 percent of the federal workforce . the instrument requested information and documentation on six components of sound safety programs we identified from previous gao work: ( 1 ) management commitment , ( 2 ) employee involvement , ( 3 ) education and training , ( 4 ) identification of hazards , ( 5 ) following up and correcting hazards , and ( 6 ) medical management . we reviewed the information in the data collection instrument and documentation that the agencies provided , assessing whether the documentation supported the agency's responses and identifying the types of activities the agency conducted for each program component . in addition , we conducted more detailed follow - up interviews with safety officials from 12 of the 57 agencies surveyed . we also interviewed employee representatives from 8 agencies and visited 5 federal worksites , most of which were identified by osha as having strong safety programs . in addition , we obtained information on workers' compensation claims from the department of labor's office of workers' compensation programs ( owcp ) . we also interviewed all 10 of osha's regional administrators and federal agency program officers and officials in 10 area offices including the area director , a compliance safety and health officer , and , in many cases , a compliance assistance specialist . in addition , we examined osha's inspection data from fiscal year 1995 to 2004 and reviewed , when available , the annual reports that the eight largest federal departments provided to osha from 2000 to 2004 . finally , we reviewed the reports on federal safety programs that osha provided to the president during this time frame . for a more detailed explanation of our methodology , see appendix i .