ii ) . we did not independently test or validate the accuracy of the data reported in these inventory systems . we adjusted department data to account for inflation as part of our analysis of component performance in realizing inventory reductions over time . we conducted our work between may 1999 and january 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . , not having to reorder an item . the model also includes the probability of obsolescence . the army model allows for the possibility of obsolescence to vary depending on the age of the item . they also have not annually reviewed their approaches . however , the department is currently conducting a mandated study of secondary inventory and spare parts shortages . because the ceilings lack analytical support , and the model factors and assumptions vary without explanation and are out of date , the department cannot provide reasonable assurance that inventories held in economic retention are the right amount . the air force computation of economic retention limits is based on an item's usage history . the current air force model distinguishes between inactive items that have experienced zero demand over a 5-year span , and have no foreseeable demand , and demand items — those with a demand history over the past 5 years . if an item has been categorized as inactive , the retention limit is based on a non - demand amount — called either an insurance or numeric stock objective limit . a maximum of five items is held for numeric stock objective items and a maximum of two items is held for insurance items . according to component officials and other experts , most air force items are in these categories . for items that are categorized as demand items , the economic retention limit is determined through several steps . the system computes gross retention levels first by adding 9 years of demand to peak requirements ( the highest quarterly demand level for the item from the prior 25 quarters ) . second , the minimum retention level for stock needing repairs ( unserviceable items ) is computed by adding ( 1 ) condemned stock for the past 9 years , ( 2 ) stock held at supply facilities and ( 3 ) peak requirements identical to the factors computed for the gross retention level . third , these two levels are then adjusted to establish maximum ( gross ) and minimum inventory levels , which are compared to the number of assets in inventory . unserviceable items are retained only when the number of serviceable assets falls below the minimum retention level . table 2 summarizes the factors and assumptions used in component economic retention models . economic retention models and ceilings are to be applied only to items with predictable and steady annual demand . limited - demand items — those with no or infrequent demand in a year — are also held in economic retention status . they are retained even though the probability of demand is low because the lack of the items would seriously hamper the operational readiness of a weapon system . none of these inventory items would be considered for disposal unless they exceeded department inventory requirements for limited - demand items .