receiving and processing the request at state . ocs / l receives the package from the clerk of the court where the suit was filed , verifies that the package is complete and the check is written for the proper fee amount , works with plaintiff's attorney or the clerk of court to resolve any errors or issues with the package , prepares language for the diplomatic note and instructions for the embassy staff , and circulates the diplomatic note and instructions for clearances from relevant department of state offices . ocs / l sends , via diplomatic pouch , this package to the appropriate embassy depending on the defendant . in cases involving the assistance of a protecting power for the united states to serve documents under the fsia , ocs / l sends the package via diplomatic pouch to the u.s. embassy in the country that serves as the protecting power for u.s. interests in the defendant country . in the case of suits against the government of syria , for example , the protecting power is the czech republic . in cases involving countries where the united states has diplomatic relations and an embassy the package goes to the u.s. embassy in the defendant country . receiving and processing a request at u.s. embassies and working with protecting powers . at the u.s. embassy , an american consular officer prepares a diplomatic note in accordance with ocs / l guidance that is added to the package and sends the package to the ministry of foreign affairs . in cases involving the assistance of a protecting power for the united states to serve documents under the fsia , the ministry of foreign affairs prepares instructions for the consular officer at the foreign interest section of the embassy in the defendant country and sends him the package . a consular officer in the u.s. interest section of the protecting power's embassy in the defendant country prepares a diplomatic note to add to the package and delivers the package , or arranges for its delivery , to the ministry of foreign affairs of the defendant country . notifying the court that service has been completed . once service has been completed , the package is sent back to ocs / l for delivery to the clerk of court . in the instance of protecting power assistance , the package will include certifications from the foreign interest section of the protecting power that process was served on a specific date as well as other certifications by the protecting power's ministry of foreign affairs and the u.s. embassy . our analysis of state and court data shows that for the 229 service requests that we analyzed , the average ( mean ) time for state to complete the requests over the past 11 years was about 158 days — or about 5 months . ( recommendation 2 ) the secretary of state should ensure that the assistant secretary of state for consular affairs requires ocs / l to monitor the status of service requests .