ii ) . the administrator agreed to take our recommendations under advisement when the office modifies its fisma reporting instructions . in addition , the administrator pointed out that the certification and accreditation process provides a systemic approach for determining whether appropriate security controls are in place , functioning properly , and producing the desired outcome . she further noted that omb's current instructions for igs to evaluate the quality of agencies' certification and accreditation process provide the flexibility for igs to tailor their evaluations based on documented weaknesses and plans for improvement . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking members of the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and the house committee on oversight and government reform and to the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or by e - mail at wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . in accordance with the federal information security management act of 2002 ( fisma ) requirement that the comptroller general report periodically to congress , our objectives were to evaluate ( 1 ) the adequacy and effectiveness of agencies' information security policies and practices and ( 2 ) federal agency implementation of fisma requirements . to assess the adequacy and effectiveness of agency information security policies and practices , we analyzed our related reports issued from may 2005 through may 2007 . we also reviewed and analyzed the information security work and products of the agency inspectors general . both our reports and the inspector ( s ) general products generally used the methodology contained in the federal information system controls audit manual . further , we reviewed and analyzed data on information security in federal agencies' performance and accountability reports . to assess implementation of fisma requirements , we reviewed and analyzed the act ( title iii , pub . 107-347 ) and the 24 major federal agencies' chief information officer and ig fisma reports for fiscal years 2004 to 2006 , as well as the performance and accountability reports for those agencies ; the office of management and budget's fisma reporting instructions , mandated annual reports to congress , and other guidance ; and the national institute of standards and technology's standards , guidance , and annual reports . we also held discussions with agency officials and the agency inspectors general to further assess the implementation of fisma requirements . we did not include systems categorized as national security systems in our review , nor did we review the adequacy or effectiveness of the security policies and practices for those systems . our work was conducted in washington , d.c. from february 2007 through june 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .