no class i merger transactions . ( see app . i for a chronology of class i railroad mergers since august 1995. ) this report responds to your request that we review the board's oversight of railroad mergers . in particular , this report discusses ( 1 ) the role the board plays in reviewing proposed railroad mergers and overseeing mergers that have been approved and how postmerger oversight is conducted , ( 2 ) how the board mitigates potential harm to competition , and ( 3 ) how the union pacific / southern pacific merger affected rail rates in selected geographic areas . this report primarily focuses on mergers of class i railroads since the board was created in 1996 . however , information on prior mergers is included to show how merger oversight has changed over time . moreover , this report primarily focuses on issues pertaining to competition and not other issues that might arise from a merger . to accomplish our objectives , we reviewed applicable laws , regulations , and decisions and met with board officials , representatives of shippers' trade associations , and railroad officials . we also developed an econometric model to analyze selected merger - related rail rates using data from the board's carload waybill sample for the period 1994 through 1999 . we focused our analysis on selected geographic areas associated with the 1996 merger of the union pacific railroad ( up ) with the southern pacific transportation company ( sp ) because of the significant competition issues pertaining to this merger . ( see app . ii for a more detailed discussion of how we carried out our work. ) in 1995 , the congress passed the icc termination act , which abolished the interstate commerce commission ( icc ) and created the board . the basis for making decisions is the merger and postmerger oversight record and board officials said they encourage parties such as shippers , railroads , and others to submit information into the record so that the board can act with as much information as possible . however , board officials acknowledged that parties sometimes reargue issues during oversight that were not decided in their favor in the merger decision . for example , in its november 2000 oversight decision in the canadian national / illinois central merger , the board refused to require that canadian national sell its share of the detroit river tunnel as requested by various parties . the parties were concerned that canadian national would competitively disadvantage the detroit river tunnel by not allowing needed capital investments to be made and favoring another nearby tunnel it owned . the board found that this issue was not directly related to the merger and was a matter being privately negotiated between the parties . finally , board officials have said the oversight process has evolved over time and the board has incorporated additional reporting and other requirements to provide more information on actual and potential problems experienced during merger implementation . moreover , the board has focused on preserving , not enhancing , competition and does not seek to restructure the competitive balance of the railroad industry during postmerger oversight .