provide resources for carrying out its responsibilities . only two agencies — the u.s. geological survey and the south florida water management district — have allocated some staff time for sct duties . in comparison , leaders of other large ecosystem restoration efforts — the san francisco bay and chesapeake bay area efforts — have recognized that significant resources are required to coordinate science for such efforts . these scientists and managers stated that their coordination groups have full - time leadership ( an executive director or chief scientist ) , several full - time staff to coordinate agencies' science efforts and develop plans and reports , and administrative staff to support functions . to improve the coordination of scientific activities for the south florida ecosystem restoration initiative , we recommended in our report — released today — that the secretary of the interior , as chair of the task force , take several actions to strengthen the sct . first , the plans and documents to be produced by the sct should be specified , along with time frames for completing them . second , a process should be established to provide task force input into planning for scientific activities . third , a process — such as independent advisory board review — should be established to prioritize the issues requiring synthesis of scientific information . finally , an assessment of the sct's resource needs should be made and sufficient staff resources should be allocated to sct efforts . in commenting on a draft of our report , the department of the interior agreed with the premises of our report that scientific activities for restoration need to be better coordinated and the sct's responsibilities need to be clarified . however , interior noted that the task force itself will ultimately need to agree on the actions necessary to strengthen the sct . although interior agreed to coordinate the comments of the task force agencies , it could not do so because this would require the public disclosure of the draft report . these groups and a more detailed discussion of their individual purposes appear in appendix i . although the task force created the sct as a science coordination group , it established the group with several organizational limitations , contributing to the sct's inability to accomplish several important functions . specifically , the task force did not: provide specific planning requirements , including requirements for a science plan or comprehensive monitoring plan . a science plan would ( 1 ) facilitate coordination of the multiple agency science plans and programs , ( 2 ) identify key gaps in scientific information and tools , ( 3 ) prioritize scientific activities needed to fill such gaps , and ( 4 ) recommend agencies with expertise to fund and conduct work to fill these gaps . in addition , a comprehensive monitoring plan would support the evaluation of restoration activities . one of these teams — the science coordination team ( sct ) created by the task force — is the only group responsible for coordinating restoration science activities that relate to all three of the task force's restoration goals ( see fig .