detect . controls that detect an intruder could include video cameras and alarm systems . they could also include roving guard patrols . delay . controls that delay an intruder increase the opportunity for a successful security response . these controls include barriers such as perimeter fences . deny . controls that can deny an intruder include visitor screening that only permits authorized individuals to access the building housing the lab . furthermore , a lack of windows or other obvious means of accessing a lab is an effective denial mechanism . some security controls serve multiple purposes . for example , a perimeter fence is a basic security feature that can deter , delay , and deny intruders . however , a perimeter fence on its own will not stop a determined intruder . this is why , in practice , layers of security must be integrated in order to provide the strongest protection . thus , a perimeter fence should be combined with an intrusion detection system that would alert security officials if the perimeter has been breached . a strong system would then tie the intrusion detection alarm to the closed - circuit television ( cctv ) network , allowing security officers to immediately identify intruders . a central command center is a key element for an integrated , active system . it allows security officers to monitor alarm and camera activity — and plan the security response — from a single location . table 3 shows 15 physical security controls we focused on during our assessment work . gregory d. kutz , ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , the following individuals made contributions to this report: andy o'connell , assistant director ; matt valenta , assistant director ; christopher w. backley ; randall cole ; john cooney ; craig fischer ; vicki mcclure ; anthony paras ; and verginie tarpinian . armed guards are present on the campus . cdc's stated intent to study our prior recommendation in improving laboratory security is an important response to the security issues that have been identified . we also provided officials from lab c and lab e with the pertinent sections of a draft of this report that covered the results of our most recent perimeter security assessment of their labs , to which they responded with comments . lab c officials provided additional details about several changes they made or plan to make to the lab's perimeter security controls , including changes to its cctv , camera coverage , loading dock , barriers , and blast stand - off area . for example , lab c officials said they are extending the sidewalks and installing landscaping features around the lab building to increase the size of the blast stand - off area . according to officials from lab e , they plan to submit a grant application for additional perimeter security improvements , including an intrusion detection system at the perimeter fence and expanded cctv coverage of key perimeter areas . we did not verify the perimeter security enhancements from lab c and lab e because these changes were made or planned subsequent to our most recent assessment .