, cash ) . this is also the case governmentwide . for example , opm data show that about 75 percent of executives received the highest performance ratings possible for fiscal year 2003 ( the most current data available ) . opm will need to carefully monitor the implementation of the agencies' performance management systems , especially those that have provisional certification , to ensure that agencies are driving organizational performance by making meaningful distinctions in executive performance ratings and appropriately paying their senior executives at the higher level . a number of executive agencies will be challenged in the short term to provide the necessary performance data on their senior executives in order to receive full certification or maintain their certification . agencies must provide 2 years of performance rating and bonus data showing that meaningful distinctions in ses performance were made to qualify . the recent data on ses ratings suggest that some agencies' data will not comply . in addition , several agencies' provisional certifications for calendar year 2004 expired and have not yet been renewed . the acting director of opm noted in a march 2005 memorandum to agency heads that the ses performance results for fiscal year 2003 do not reflect the requirements of the new ses performance - based pay system and that opm is analyzing the results of the 2004 rating cycle to determine the degree to which agencies have met the requirements . depending on the outcome , some agencies may lose their certification , and others may not qualify for this new flexibility . the key , of course , is not just determining whether distinctions are made in ratings , but whether those distinctions are meaningful . that is , the distinctions should reflect real differences in individual executives' contributions to results . the success agencies have in implementing new human capital flexibilities will depend in large measure on their agency leadership , the existence of high quality chief human capital officers ( chcos ) , and a strategic and effective chco council . the homeland security act of 2002 established the roles and responsibilities for the chco position and the council . we have reported that similar interagency councils , such as those of the chief financial officers' ( cfo ) and chief information officers' , have emerged as important leadership strategies in both developing policies that are sensitive to implementation concerns and gaining consensus and consistent follow - through within the executive branch . the chco council can fulfill an equally important role . with the new market - based pay system , employee compensation will now consider current salary and allocate individual performance - based compensation amounts between a merit increase ( i.e. , salary increase ) and a performance bonus ( i.e. gao is in the early stages of conducting a similar study of market - based pay for the remainder of gao's workforce who began the transition to performance - based compensation in 2004 with the introduction of pay banding and a new competency - based performance appraisal system . we also have work under way to identify the extent to which agencies are implementing these tools . we plan to report on the results of our research later this year .