gao - 02-996 . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2002 . ( see app . ii for a discussion of all five criteria and examples of information to be considered for each. ) for example , one criterion decision makers must consider is whether the proposed transfer is consistent with u.s. military and security objectives . in examining this criterion , decision makers must address multiple factors , including how technological advantage would be protected if the weapon or technology were sold or transferred . according to ndpc members , the broad criteria allow for a certain level of flexibility that is needed in determining whether an advanced weapon should be released to a foreign country . some ndpc members further pointed out that this flexibility is especially critical in the current foreign policy environment in which many different countries are working with the united states in the war on terrorism . one criterion ndpc must consider when determining the releasability of advanced weapons and technologies is that the transfer must be consistent with u.s. military and security objectives . in satisfying this criterion , military experts involved in the ndp coordination and review process told us they consider the effect the transfer could have on u.s. technological advantage , along with various safeguards — both case - specific and general — to protect this advantage . the effectiveness of individual safeguards may be limited ; however , a variety of safeguards may be considered . in considering technological advantage , military experts said that they first review relevant military department documents and policies to determine if the requested weapon or technology exceeds the technology thresholds specified for the country making the request . if the requested weapon or technology exceeds this threshold , the experts may consult and coordinate with military engineers , the contractor that manufactures the weapon or technology , the system program office , and other operational experts to incorporate appropriate safeguards — typically in the form of case - specific limitations and conditions — to protect u.s. technological advantage . these include ( 1 ) sanitized or export variants , where the released weapon or technology has a lower operational capability or less advanced technology than what the united states has in its inventory ; ( 2 ) anti - tamper measures , where features are built into the weapon to prevent reverse engineering such as code encryption , and protective coatings on internal weapon components ; ( 3 ) time - phased release , where the advanced weapon or technology is not released until the united states has fielded a better capability ; and ( 4 ) withheld information and data , where the transfer does not include information such as software source codes . military experts said that program offices , in some cases , conduct verification tests and the defense contract management agency works with contractors to ensure that limitations and conditions are implemented before the weapon is transferred . military department officials told us that in addition to case - specific limitations and conditions , they also consider other general safeguards to preserve u.s. military superiority .