106-107 initiatives . in an update to its charter , the grants executive board ( previously the grants.gov executive board ) expanded its oversight to include both the grants.gov initiative and the p.l . 106-107 initiative . the grants executive board has 13 members , one representative from each of the 11 larger grant - making agencies and two seats that rotate among the other 15 grant - making agencies . the grants executive board meets monthly and , with the assistance of the hhs - led grant streamlining program management office , oversees the work of the interagency grant streamlining work groups . the board's oversight duties include reviewing work group recommendations to determine if they should be referred to omb for governmentwide implementation , defining accountability and reporting requirements to be met by the work groups , and preparing the annual progress reports for congress . the grants executive board also oversees the grants.gov initiative , which is charged with implementing the grant - streamlining policies in the preaward phase of grants administration . 106-107 planning and oversight committee is the coordinating body for the grant - streamlining work groups and advises the grants executive board . its membership consists of the chairs of each of the work groups , a representative of the grants.gov program management office , the p.l . 106-107 program manager , and an omb representative . agency volunteers staff the work groups . volunteer staffing is a challenge for the work groups because the volunteers maintain their regular agency responsibilities . according to work group chairs , the volunteer staff members are dedicated , knowledgeable , and experienced in grants policy and processes . hhs selects the chair of each work group , but does not limit the size of the work groups so that all interested agencies may participate . according to the p.l . 106-107 program manager , not all agencies are participating in the work groups . agencies that do not participate will not have input into the design of governmentwide grant policies , increasing the risk that the new policies will not meet the needs of all grant - making agencies . interagency efforts toward a second key element of coordination — maintaining collaborative relationships — have been mixed . the major elements of maintaining collaborative relationships include a shared vision among participants and formal agreements with a clear purpose , common performance outputs , and realistic performance measures . the agencies helped to establish a cooperative , shared vision by jointly developing the initial implementation plan , which establishes goals and objectives to meet the requirements of p.l . however , while the plan outlines preliminary steps toward achieving its objectives , it does not outline a comprehensive plan beyond those first steps . furthermore , the time targets in the plan are primarily short - term targets related to preliminary steps . the annual cross - agency progress report can be a tool to maintain the shared vision established in the initial plan . according to work group leaders , the work group volunteers from the agencies are committed to the goals of grant streamlining and simplification . in addition to the cross - agency progress report , each agency is required to submit an annual agency progress report .