we identified over $140,000 of improper purchases . for example , one employee made improper charges totaling $11,700 for herself and a coworker to attend college classes that were unrelated to their jobs at the department . we also identified improper purchases totaling $4,427 from a restaurant in san juan , puerto rico . these restaurant charges were incurred during a year 2000 focus group meeting , and included breakfasts and lunches for federal employees and nonfederal guests . education , however , could not provide us with any evidence that the nonfederal attendees provided a direct service to the government , which is required by federal statute in order to use federal appropriated funds to pay for the costs of nonfederal individuals at such meetings . we have referred this matter to education's oig . other examples of improper purchases we identified include 28 purchases totaling $123,985 where education employees made multiple purchases from a vendor on the same day . these purchases appear to violate the federal acquisition regulation provision that prohibits splitting purchases into more than one segment to circumvent single purchase limits . the focus of cod is to improve program and data integrity . if properly implemented , a byproduct of this new system should be improved controls over grant and loan disbursements . according to education officials , they will be able to use cod to identify schools with characteristics like those we identified . however , until there is a mechanism in place to investigate schools once unusual patterns are identified , education will continue to be vulnerable to the types of improper pell grant payments we identified during our review . we identified over $32 million of other potentially improper grant and loan payments . based on supporting documentation provided to us by education , we determined that over $21 million of these payments were proper . however , because education did not provide adequate supporting documentation , we were unable to determine the validity of about $12 million of these transactions or conclude on the effectiveness of the related edit checks . while the amount of improper and potentially improper grant and loan payments we identified is relatively insignificant compared to the billions of dollars disbursed for these programs annually , it represents a control risk that could easily be exploited to a greater extent . during our investigation of potentially improper transactions , we found that two students submitted counterfeit social security cards and fraudulent birth certificates along with their applications for federal education aid , and they received almost $55,000 in direct loans and pell grants . the u.s. attorney's office is considering prosecuting these individuals . during our tests to determine the effectiveness of education's edit checks , we also found data errors , such as incorrect social security numbers ( ssn ) of borrowers , in the loan origination system ( los ) , which processes all loan origination data received from schools . such errors could negatively affect the collection of student loans because without correct identifying information , education may not be able to locate and collect from borrowers when their loans become due .