we included in our data only those patents issued . the data on trademarks resulted from our search of the uspto's trademark database to identify trademarks owned by those institutions identified as state - supported institutions of higher education . this process was similar to the process used to identify patents . we received 99 completed surveys . these 99 completed surveys represented a total of 113 of the 140 institutions and associations since some of these entities pooled their responses . because those survey responses covering more than one institution and / or association provided summary information for all institutions and / or associations being reported on , the results in this report are based on the 99 survey responses we received . we also received some information in the survey responses for institutions that were not in our universe . our response rate was 81 percent of those who received our survey in the mail or 75 percent of the universe . we also gathered information on accusations of intellectual property infringement against the states during site visits to three states — california , florida , and texas . we judgmentally selected these states because they are among the largest owners and users of intellectual property , have significant case activity and legal precedents regarding intellectual property infringement or eleventh amendment immunity , and were known to have varying state laws on waiver of state governmental immunity and access to state courts . we interviewed assistant attorneys general and intellectual property attorneys , including members of the intellectual property sections of the state bar associations in texas and california . the florida bar does not have a separate intellectual property section . in addition , we interviewed general counsels at the university of texas , texas a&m university , the university of houston , the university of florida , florida state university , the university of south florida , and the university of california . the act did not contain a saving clause . thus , all clarifying provisions — including those expressing the congress' intent that states are subject to being infringers of federally protected intellectual property — may have been lost . although the state officials and representatives of the intellectual property community did not raise this issue , allowing infringement lawsuits against states would seem to be of little value if the states are not capable of committing infringement . it is too early to determine what impact the florida prepaid decision will have on the federal intellectual property system . relatively few accusations of infringement against states appear to have been made in the past , and there is no way to ascertain whether the states will be less diligent now that they know they cannot be sued for damages in federal court . at the same time , however , the incidence of overall infringements has little meaning to an intellectual property owner concerned that his or her individual property is at risk . two attorneys general saw no impediments . not all of the attorneys general responded to the question on impediments ( see app . iii , table 20 ) . the state bar representatives also saw state governmental immunity as a problem in suing a state for infringement in its own courts .