what are the priorities of the embassy ? does each agency's mission reinforce embassy priorities ? to what extent are mission priorities not being sufficiently addressed due to staffing limitations or other impediments ? to what extent are workload requirements validated and prioritized and is the embassy able to balance them with core functions ? do the activities of any agencies overlap ? given embassy priorities and the staffing profile , are increases in the number of existing staff or additional agency representation needed ? to what extent is it necessary for each agency to maintain its current presence in country , given the scope of its responsibilities and its mission ? - could an agency's mission be pursued in other ways ? - does an agency have regional responsibilities or is its mission entirely focused on the host country ? what is the embassy's total annual operating cost ? what are the operating costs for each agency at the embassy ? do new technologies and transportation links offer greater opportunities for operational support from other locations ? do the host country and regional environments suggest there are options for doing business differently , that is , are there adequate transportation and communications links and a vibrant private sector ? to what extent is it practical to purchase embassy services from the private sector ? does the ratio of support staff to program staff at the embassy suggest opportunities for streamlining ? can functions be reengineered to provide greater efficiencies and reduce requirements for personnel ? iii and iv ) . omb said that it appreciated our efforts to develop a rightsizing framework . omb agreed with the framework's key elements and options and plans to build upon the framework in examining staffing at all posts within the european and eurasia bureau . however , omb expressed concern regarding whether the gao methodology can be uniformly applied at all posts worldwide . nonetheless , omb noted that it looks forward to working with us and the state department in using the framework as a starting point to develop a broader methodology that can be applied worldwide . state said that it welcomed our work in developing a framework for rightsizing . state noted the difficulties of previous efforts to develop a methodology , including attempts by the overseas presence advisory panel and a state - led interagency rightsizing committee . it stated that it has taken steps to regionalize responsibilities in the united states and overseas where appropriate . in addition , state provided technical comments that we have incorporated into this report , as appropriate . to develop the elements of the rightsizing framework and corresponding checklist of suggested questions , we analyzed previous reports on overseas staffing issues , including those of the accountability review boards , opap , and the state - led interagency rightsizing committee . we interviewed officials from omb to discuss the administration's current rightsizing initiatives in relation to the president's management agenda . we discussed embassy staffing with rightsizing experts , including the chairman of opap and the current and former undersecretary of state for management .