ii ) . we address them in the “agency comments and evaluation” section of this report . accurate census results are critical because the data are used to reapportion seats in the house of representatives and for congressional redistricting . moreover , census data remain an important element in allocating federal aid to state and local governments . with billions of dollars at stake , the data are scrutinized intensely for accuracy . to help ensure the accuracy of census data , the bureau conducted a number of quality assurance programs throughout the course of the census . one such program was the full count review program , which was designed to rapidly examine , rectify if possible , and clear census data files and products for subsequent processing or public release . the bureau expected data analysts to identify data discrepancies , anomalies , and other data “issues” by checking the data for its overall reasonableness , as well as for its consistency with historical and demographic data , and other census data products . the full count review program ran from june 2000 through march 2001 . according to bureau officials , because the bureau could not complete the full count review workload without a costly staff increase , some of the analysts' work was contracted to members of the fscpe , an organization composed of state demographers that works with the bureau to ensure accurate state and local population estimates . the bureau contracted with 53 fscpe members who reviewed data for 39 states and puerto rico . bureau employees reviewed data for the 11 remaining states and the district of columbia without fscpe representation in full count review . bureau and fscpe analysts were to ensure that ( 1 ) group quarters were correctly placed or “geocoded” on census maps , and that their population counts and demographic characteristics appeared reasonable and ( 2 ) population counts of other areas were in line with population estimates . they were to describe each issue flagged and provide supporting documentation derived from bureau resources and / or resources of the respective state government . additionally , bureau officials stated that staff from the regional offices reviewed demographic data from the 50 states , puerto rico , and the district of columbia . they focused on identifying inconsistent demographic characteristics and did not necessarily concentrate on any one particular state or locality . the bureau reimbursed state governments for wages and expenses fscpe members incurred . a separate set of employees from the bureau's population division assessed issues identified by full count review analysts based on ( 1 ) the adequacy of the documentation supporting each issue , and ( 2 ) whether or not they believed the issue to be resolvable through follow - up research by the bureau . those issues deemed to have adequate documentation were classified as a “group quarters,” “housing unit,” or “household” or “other” issue . bureau officials told us that the remaining issues could not be categorized because the nature of the issue could not be determined from the documentation .