we agree . however , until dhs determines which databases it plans to use for screening esta applications , dhs officials told us they will not be able to determine how many vwp travelers would likely not be approved for travel by esta . in addition , dhs officials told us that it was unclear at this point what testing , if any , dhs would do to determine how many foreign citizens would choose to obtain a visa , rather than use esta . we believe that sharing of this type of information between dhs and state is a first step toward implementing our recommendation that dhs and state estimate how esta will affect visa demand in existing vwp countries , but we believe much more needs to be done . we did not intend to suggest that dhs is not sharing information with state . our point is that dhs has not made a final decision on what databases it will use to screen esta applications ; as a result , neither dhs nor state can estimate the number of vwp citizens who would not be approved to travel under the program . without this information , it is difficult for state to plan for how it will meet changes in visa demand . we do not believe that dhs should estimate the resources that state would need to manage increased visa demand or how esta could affect visa fee revenues collected by state as a result of the implementation of esta . these are actions that state needs to take . however , state has not yet performed this analysis and planning largely due to , according to state officials , the lack of information from dhs on the number of foreign citizens whose esta application might be rejected and might seek a visa from u.s. embassies . we agree that it is difficult to predict how many travelers would prefer to apply for a visa instead of using esta . consular officials in washington and overseas said that the number of travelers choosing to do this could be significant . some dhs , state , and embassy officials suggested that an actual test or pilot use of esta in one or more existing vwp countries could provide information on the number of foreign citizens who choose to obtain a visa rather than use esta and the number of foreign citizens whose esta applications are not approved by esta . however , as noted previously , dhs told us it is unclear what tests , if any , it will undertake to better understand esta's impact , even though dhs stated it plans to implement esta in the summer of 2008 . in addition to the individual named above , john brummet , assistant director ; j. addison ricks ; brian bothwell ; joe carney ; carmen donohue ; jennifer echard ; tim fairbanks ; grace lui ; and karen richey made key contributions to this report .