other lep efforts are in earlier phases . nnsa describes its plans to meet nuclear weapons stockpile life extension and alteration goals in two key documents that also describe nnsa's operations and budget estimates for implementing these plans . these documents , which nnsa updates annually , constitute nnsa's nuclear security budget materials . first , the stockpile stewardship and management plan is nnsa's formal means of communicating to congress information on modernization and operations plans and budget estimates over the following 25 years . second , nnsa's annual justification of the president's budget provides program information and budget estimates for the following 5 years . this 5-year plan is called the future - years nuclear security program ( fynsp ) , and the budget estimates in this plan reflect amounts approved by the office of management and budget . these estimates align with those presented for the first 5 years included in the stockpile stewardship and management plan . according to the fiscal year 2018 stockpile stewardship and management plan , nnsa and its nuclear security enterprise are conducting a substantial level of activity to ensure the continued credibility of the nation's nuclear weapons stockpile . specifically , in fiscal year 2018 nnsa was executing three nuclear weapons leps and one major alt , which are described in table 1 . in addition , the 2018 nuclear posture review calls for nnsa to resume a program to replace the w78 warhead in fiscal year 2019 ; produce a low - yield submarine launched ballistic missile warhead , known as the w76-2 ; and consider options for providing a nuclear warhead for a potential sea - launched cruise missile . according to nnsa officials and contractor representatives , nnsa developed an early production planning roadmap for implementing the nuclear posture review in late 2018 . the conference report accompanying doe's fiscal year 2019 appropriations act directed the agency to spend a specified amount on the w78 warhead replacement and w76-2 efforts . projected workload for the kansas city site has increased significantly , based on nnsa's stockpile plan changes from 2012 — when the new modern facility was built — to the 2018 stockpile plan update . a comparison between the 2012 and 2018 plans shows that the start of full production for the b61-12 lep and the w88 alt were delayed by approximately 2 years , and their completions were delayed by 3 years from initial schedule estimates in 2012 . the 2018 plan also accelerates production of the w80-4 lep by approximately 5 years . figure 3 below shows the change in the full production timelines for key weapons systems . using an enterprise risk management approach , the kansas city site determined that this change in production schedule represented a significant challenge that needed to be better understood and regularly monitored . nnsa contractor representatives at the kansas city site developed a strategy for analyzing workload to better understand the enterprise risk and ensure the site's ability to provide an adequate supply of nonnuclear components under variable requirements scenarios .