, subject to frequent changes ) . this evm approach in effect ensured that material variances from planned performance would not be identified and that the state of the project would not be reliably reported . we recommended that the director of opm conduct effective system tests prior to system deployment and improve program cost estimation and progress reporting . then the agency provides the retirement package to the employee's payroll office . after the employee separates for retirement , the payroll office is responsible for reviewing the documents for correct signatures and information , making sure that all required forms have been submitted , and adding any additional paperwork that will be necessary for processing the retirement package . once the payroll office has finalized the paperwork , the retirement package is mailed to opm to continue the retirement process . payroll offices are required to submit the package to opm within 30 days of the retiree's separation date . upon receipt of the retirement package , opm calculates an interim payment based on information provided by the employing agency . the interim payments are partial payments that typically provide retirees with 80 percent of the total monthly benefit they will eventually receive.then starts the process of analyzing the retirement application and associated paperwork to determine the total monthly benefit amount to which the retiree is entitled . this process includes collecting additional information from the employing agency's human resources and payroll offices or from the retiree to ensure that all necessary data are available before calculating benefits . in april 2009 , we again reported on opm's retirement modernization , noting that the agency still remained far from achieving the modernized specifically , we retirement processing capabilities that it had planned.noted that significant weaknesses continued to exist in the areas of cost estimating , progress reporting , and testing , while also noting two additional weaknesses related to planning and oversight . although it concurred with our january 2008 recommendation to develop a revised cost estimate for the retirement modernization effort , opm had not completed initial steps for developing the new estimate by the time we issued our report in april 2009 . we reported that the agency had not yet fully defined the estimate's purpose , developed an estimating plan , or defined the project's characteristics . by not completing these steps , opm increased the risk that it would produce an unreliable estimate and not have a sound basis for measuring project performance and formulating retirement modernization budgets . opm also concurred with our january 2008 recommendation to establish a basis for effective evm but had not completed key steps as of the time of our report . specifically , despite planning to use evm to report the retirement modernization project's progress , the agency had not developed a reliable cost estimate and a validated baseline . engaging in evm reporting without first taking these fundamental steps could have again rendered the agency's assessments unreliable . as previously discussed , effective testing is an essential component of any project that includes developing systems . to be effectively managed , testing should be planned and conducted in a structured and disciplined fashion .