level . officials said that the purpose of the database is to provide transparency for new york city residents and to fulfill future reporting requirements . the database is expected to provide such details on a recovery act - funded program as the number of additional beds at a homeless shelter . however , new york city officials said that it is difficult to begin planning how to assess impact until they know what measures will be called for by federal reporting guidelines . furthermore , new york city officials recommended relaxing the reporting deadlines and requirements for the first quarter after recovery act funds are received so states and localities have more time to understand new guidance . we provided the governor of new york with a draft of this appendix on april 17 , 2009 . the senior advisor for transportation and infrastructure responded for the governor on april 20 , 2009 by providing technical suggestions that were incorporated , as appropriate . in addition to the contacts named above , ronald stouffer , assistant director ; barbara shields , analyst - in - charge ; jeremiah donoghue , colin fallon , summer pachman , frank putallaz , jeremy rothgerber , and cheri truett made major contributions to this report . use of funds: an estimated 90 percent of recovery act funding provided to states and localities nationwide in fiscal year 2009 ( through sept. 30 , 2009 ) will be for health , transportation and education programs . the three largest programs in these categories are the medicaid federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) awards , the state fiscal stabilization fund , and highways . medicaid federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) funds as of april 3 , 2009 , centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) had made about $657 million in increased fmap grant awards to north carolina . as of april 1 , 2009 , north carolina had drawn down $414.6 million in increased fmap grant awards , or 63 percent of its awards to date . north carolina officials reported that they plan to use funds made available as a result of the increased fmap to maintain current populations and benefits and to offset the state's general fund deficit . north carolina was apportioned about $736 million for infrastructure investment on march 2 , 2009 , by the u.s. department of transportation . as of april 16 , 2009 , the u.s. department of transportation had obligated about $165 million for 53 projects in as of april 16 , 2009 the north carolina department of transportation had selected 138 projects estimated to utilize about 90 percent of its allocated recovery act funds . these projects include activities such as repaving highways and replacing bridges . north carolina department of transportation officials told us they identified these projects based on recovery act criteria that priority is to be given to projects that are anticipated for completion within a 3-year time frame and that are located in economically distressed areas . u.s. department of education state fiscal stabilization fund ( initial release ) north carolina was allocated about $952 million from the initial release of these funds on april 2 , 2009 , by the u.s. department of education .