( app . i lists our reports and testimonies on these reviews. ) federal land management: additional guidance on community involvement could enhance effectiveness of stewardship contracting . landfire — estimated to cost $40 million — is scheduled for nationwide implementation in 2009 . local fire management planning also has been strengthened . as we reported in 2002 , over half of the agencies' land management units had not completed local fire management plans in accordance with the 1995 federal wildland fire management policy . they subsequently adopted an expedited schedule to complete all of these plans in 2004 , and agency officials told us that they believed they would meet this schedule . the agencies also adopted a common interagency template for preparing these plans to ensure greater consistency in their contents . these reviews focused largely on the activities of the forest service in the department of agriculture and the land management agencies in the department of the interior , which together manage over 95 percent of all federal lands . we also interviewed officials and obtained data from the forest service , interior , congressional research service , brookings institution , and national academy of public administration . appendix ii contains a more complete description of our methodology . we conducted our work between may and november 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . wildland fire triggered by lightning is a natural , inevitable , and necessary ecological process . such fires periodically consume excess vegetation and renew the productivity of our nation's ecosystems . however , in ecosystems that are adapted to frequent small , low - intensity fires , uncharacteristically large and intense wildland fires increasingly threaten catastrophic damage to such ecosystems . large intense fires in these and other ecosystems also increasingly threaten human lives , health , property , and infrastructure in the wildland - urban interface . uncharacteristically large , intense fires often are fueled by abnormally dense accumulations of vegetation in many forest and rangeland ecosystems . this excess vegetation is the result of several human land use and management practices , including several decades of effective fire suppression activities that have reduced the normal frequency of wildland fires that nature had periodically used to clear undergrowth and small trees . this vegetation , in turn , provides abnormally large amounts of fuel for fires , causing some to spread more rapidly , burn larger areas , and burn more intensely than normal . such uncharacteristic fires are more common in warmer , drier climates such as the interior western united states and during periods of drought . federal researchers estimate that these vegetative conditions exist on approximately 190 million acres ( or more than 40 percent ) of federal lands in the contiguous united states , but could vary from 90 million to 200 million acres , and that these conditions also exist on many nonfederal lands . the acreage burned by wildland fire — after having declined nationally throughout most of the 20th century due to land management practices , including fire suppression — increased in the latter decades of the century .