ii for the questionnaire ) . the usms told us that the deputation process has improved and that renewing deputized igs' law enforcement authority was the easiest task of their deputation workload . the pcie stated that the draft report seems to assume that , unless significant cost savings can be associated with permanent statutory law enforcement authority , temporary deputation should be retained . the pcie said that it is a misperception that a decision on permanent statutory law enforcement authority for all igs should be driven by cost considerations . we did not conclude or imply that significant cost savings should be a determining factor in deciding whether to switch deputized igs to permanent statutory law enforcement authority . rather , deputized igs and other federal agencies including the cbo said that minimal costs or savings would result from switching from deputation to statutory authority . we were specifically asked by congress to answer this question . the pcie also said that as part of its oversight mechanisms , the proposed bill ( s. 3144 ) would have established a peer review process among deputized igs . the pcie said there are no known administrative burdens associated with this approach and its implementation would not increase federal expenditures . while the operational procedures of the peer review are not known , undoubtedly any review system would have some level of administrative burden and costs . for example , the pcie's draft peer review guidelines — “guide for conducting qualitative assessment reviews of the investigative operations of offices of inspector general,” among other things , recommends reviewing samples of ig criminal investigators' training and basic qualification records as well as closed investigative files to ensure adherence to professional law enforcement standards . according to the pcie , depending on the size of the ig agency or level of detail of the review , a peer review cycle could take up to 120 days . the staff resources and activities related to scheduling , conducting , and reporting results of 23 igs' “peer reviews” would incur time and costs . on may 3 , 2002 the pcie provided further comments on our draft report . the pcie continued to disagree with our draft report for the basic reasons stated in their earlier comments . also , the pcie requested that we defer issuance of the final report until we obtain and incorporate doj's current views . the pcie said it had become aware that doj was close to making a decision and was optimistic that this decision will support a grant of statutory law enforcement authority to the deputized igs . on may 7 , 2002 , doj told us that the matter is still under review within the administration with no estimated date of completion . as a result , we do not feel that it is appropriate to delay the report issuance . the pcie also provided technical comments , which were incorporated into the report as appropriate . doj neither agreed nor disagreed with our draft report . doj requested that our report state that doj has not settled on a position on providing law enforcement authority through either statute or deputation and that the issue is under review within the administration .