part 31 . other specific federal provisions relating to state dots' contracting practices are summarized in table 1 . for projects using federal - aid funding , fhwa has also promulgated regulations that establish design , construction , and materials standards for highway projects that are on the national highway system . in general , states' laws , regulations , directives , safety standards , design standards , and construction standards apply to highway projects that are off of the national highway system . fhwa has authority to oversee any project that receives federal - aid highway funds . however , the agency has increasingly delegated responsibility for oversight to state dots since the passage of the intermodal surface transportation equity act in 1991 . oversight roles and responsibilities are outlined in stewardship agreements that each fhwa division office executes with its respective state dot . these stewardship agreements outline when fhwa will have project - level oversight , or what is known as “full oversight” over a project , and when that responsibility will be delegated to states . stewardship agreements vary in how full oversight is determined . a stewardship agreement may indicate that full oversight occurs on only “high - profile” projects , which will be agreed upon by the state and the division office , or there may be a specific dollar threshold , such as all interstate projects that are over $1 million . generally speaking , fhwa has project - level oversight for a relatively limited number of federal - aid projects . recently , fhwa developed guidance on the development of stewardship agreements and encouraged its division offices to revise their agreements on the basis of this guidance to achieve more consistency throughout the agency . among other things , the guidance encourages the division offices to use risk management principles to determine where to focus their stewardship activities . the guidance also recommends that division offices develop performance measures to better track the health of the federal - aid highway program in their states . however , the guidance gives state dots and division offices broad flexibility in determining how risks should be assessed and how performance should be measured . in addition to having oversight over some specific projects , fhwa division offices oversee state dots through reviews of the departments' programs and processes . some of these reviews occur annually , and others are undertaken at the discretion of the division office on the basis of areas where there may be increasing risk to the highway program . these reviews are meant to ensure that states have adequate controls in place to effectively manage federally assisted projects and will generally result in recommendations and corrective actions for the state dots . over the past several years , gao has expressed concerns about fhwa's oversight role . for example , we reported in 2005 that fhwa lacked a comprehensive approach in its oversight efforts . we found that even though fhwa had made progress in improving its oversight efforts , such as establishing performance goals and outcome measures to limit cost growth and schedule slippage on projects , fhwa had not linked these efforts to its day - to - day activities and was not using them to identify problems and target oversight .