for audits performed in accordance with omb circular no . a - 133 , federal student aid staff are to ob tain the audit reports from the federal audit clearinghouse web site , a governmentwide audit information repository . federal student aid staff are to perform acceptability reviews on the audit reports using checklist that address issues such as whether all required reporting elements are included . the school eligibility channel uses contractors to assist with the acceptability review of school audit reports . we did not confirm whether the processes were implemented as designed . see appendix ii for additional information about our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit at federal student aid offices in washington , d.c. , from august 2009 to july 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards ( gagas ) . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition , education contracts with a servicer ( dl servicer ) to administer certain aspects of the dl program , such as payment processing . the number of participants in the dl program is detailed in table 2 . under hcera , no new ffel loans may be made after june 30 , 2010 . borrowers who may have been eligible to obtain new ffel loans prior to the passage of hcera could receive loans under the dl program . accordingly , the number of dl borrowers is expected to increase with the expansion of the program . education has awarded contracts to four additional dl servicers to begin servicing direct loans by august 31 , 2010 . audits required under ffel or dl are performed in accordance with guidance issued by the office of management and budget ( omb ) or the applicable department of education office of inspector general ( oig ) audit guide . states , local government entities , and nonprofit entities are generally required to have their audits performed in accordance with omb circular no . a - 133 , audits of states , local governments , and nonprofit institutions , although , if federal student assistance is the only federal program in which the entity participates , omb circular no . a - 133 gives the entity the option of using the program - specific audit guide issued by the oig in place of the guidance produced under the circular . for - profit entities are required to have their audits performed in accordance with the applicable oig audit guide . the ffel and dl programs generally have different audit requirements stemming mainly from different program structures . the ffel program relies on lenders , guaranty agencies , and other entities that are subject to statutory , regulatory , and contractual audit requirements . the dl program does not have as many of these audit requirements because dl loans are provided by the federal government , and fewer external entities are involved . the audit requirements set out under the ffel and dl programs are similar with regard to schools and their servicers , which are participants in both programs .