( see fig . among public sector workers , uneven coverage among states led to the relatively low percentage of workers with bargaining rights . while 26 states and the district of columbia have laws that provide collective bargaining rights to essentially all public employees , 12 states essentially do not have any laws for collective bargaining among state and local employees . the remaining 12 states have laws that provide bargaining rights to specific groups of workers ( e.g . state workers , teachers , or firefighters ) but not to all state and local government workers . among workers with bargaining rights , most are covered by the federal nlra . however , other federal , state , or local statutes cover some private sector workers as well as those public workers who currently have rights . while some of these statutes provide broader rights than those available under the nlra , other statutes offer substantially fewer rights than those provided by the nlra . although we did not attempt to either catalog or assess the other bargaining statutes , we did outline some of their key differences . within the private sector , airline and railroad employees have somewhat different collective bargaining rights than other workers . airline and railroad employees are covered by the federal railway labor act , a law that predates the nlra by 9 years . among other differences , the railway labor act applies to “all subordinate officials,” thereby permitting many supervisory employees to join in collective bargaining . while agricultural workers are excluded from the nlra , nine states provide these workers with bargaining rights . however , these statutes vary from the nlra's provisions . for example , in arizona the state agricultural statute has different standards for bargaining unit determination than the nlra . california also has different standards for bargaining unit determination than the nlra and allows agricultural workers to use secondary boycotts , actions prohibited under the nlra . within the public sector , where federal , state , and local government workers rely on an array of federal , state , and local statutes for bargaining rights , most workers are prohibited from striking . although some states allow certain workers the right to strike for at least some employees,many states provide compulsory binding interest arbitration ( a procedure unavailable under the nlra that requires an arbitrator to resolve differences in the event of an unsettled dispute between the union representing the employees and the employer ) . we estimate that about 32 million workers currently do not have any collective bargaining rights . these workers include over 25 million private sector workers — 8.5 million independent contractors , 5.5 million employees of certain small businesses , 10.2 million managers and supervisors ( including 8.6 million first - line supervisors ) , 532,000 domestic workers , and 357,000 agricultural workers . those groups without rights also include over 6.9 million federal , state , and local government employees . in general , these workers do not have bargaining rights under any federal or state statute . about 7 percent ( 8.5 million ) of all private sector workers classified themselves as independent contractors in february 2001 . the percentage of independent contractors in private sector industries varied widely .