we disagree . specifically , as described in the report , we reviewed several documents on behavior detection research that s&t and tsa officials provided to us , including an unclassified and a classified literature review that s&t had commissioned . further , after meetings in june and july 2013 , s&t officials provided additional studies , which we reviewed and included in the report as applicable . we also included research in the report on the use of behavioral indicators that correspond closely to indicators identified in spot procedures as indicative of stress , fear , or deception . these studies , many of which were included in the meta - analyses we reviewed , were conducted in a variety of settings — including high - stakes situations where the consequences are great , such as a police interview with an accused murderer — and with different types of individuals — including law enforcement personnel . to what extent does available evidence support the use of behavioral indicators to identify aviation security threats ? to what extent does tsa have data necessary to assess the effectiveness of the spot program in identifying threats to aviation security ? in addition , we also reviewed information related to recent allegations of profiling in the spot program . this information can be found in appendix i . to address the first question , we reviewed academic and government research on behavior - based deception detection , which we identified through a structured literature search and recommendations from experts in the field . we assessed the reliability of this research against established practices for study design , and through interviews with nine experts we selected based on their published peer - reviewed research in this area . while the results of these interviews cannot be used to generalize about all research on behavior detection , they represent a mix of views and subject matter expertise . we determined that the research was sufficiently reliable for describing the evidence that existed regarding the use of behavioral indicators to identify security threats . we also analyzed documentation related to the april 2011 spot validation study , including study protocols and the final reports , and assessed the study against established practices for evaluation design and generally accepted statistical principles . we interviewed headquarters tsa and s&t officials responsible for the validation study and contractor officials . we obtained the data that were used by these officials to reach the conclusions in the validation study . to assess the soundness of the methodology and conclusions in the validation study , we replicated some of the analyses that were conducted by the contractor , based on the methodology described in the final report . generally , we replicated the study's results , and as an extra step , we extended the analyses using the full sample of spot referrals to increase the power to detect significant associations , as described in appendix ii .