we also interviewed va officials . we conducted our work for these performance audits in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . our prior work highlights some of the challenges va faces in formulating its budget . as we reported in 2006 , these challenges include making realistic assumptions about the budgetary impact of some of its policies , making accurate calculations , and obtaining sufficient data for useful budget projections . in 2009 , we again reported on va's budget formulation challenges — specifically , va's challenges projecting the amount of long - term care it will provide and estimating the costs of this care . our 2006 report on va's overall health care budget illustrated that in formulating its budget , va faces challenges making realistic assumptions about the budgetary impact of its proposed policies . we reported that the president's requests for additional funding for va's medical programs for fiscal years 2005 and 2006 were in part due to unrealistic assumptions va made about how quickly the department would realize savings from proposed changes in its nursing home policy . specifically , we found that: va's fiscal year 2005 budget justification included a proposal to reduce the amount of care va provides — known as workload — in va - operated nursing homes , one of three settings which provide va nursing home services . in our january 2009 report , we also found that va's estimate of the amount it would spend for noninstitutional long - term care services in fiscal year 2009 appeared to be unreliable — in part because va based this estimate on a cost assumption that appeared unrealistically low , when compared to va's recent experience and to economic forecasts of increases in health care costs . specifically , va assumed that the cost of providing a day of noninstitutional long - term care would not increase from its fiscal year 2008 level . va used this assumption to formulate its noninstitutional long - term care spending estimate despite the fact that from fiscal year 2006 to fiscal year 2007 — the most recent year for which actual cost data are available — the cost of providing these services increased 19 percent . va's cost assumption is also inconsistent with the omb guidance provided to va . in its fiscal year 2009 budget justification , va did not provide information regarding its nursing home or noninstitutional cost assumptions . however , va officials told us that they made these assumptions in order to be conservative in va's fiscal year 2009 budget estimates .