omb did not comment on the report . from august 2018 through april 2019 , our analysis of opm documents showed that these groups met and communicated frequently — from every few days to every few weeks , depending on the group . from may 2019 — when the administration transmitted their legislative proposal to congress to reorganize opm — to november 2019 , these groups met less frequently , according to omb staff and gsa officials . omb , opm , and gsa partially addressed the key practices related to managing and monitoring . since our may 2019 testimony , opm provided us with documents that demonstrated improvements in this area , but as of november 2019 , had yet to finalize an implementation plan . specifically , the documents showed that omb , opm , and gsa held leadership meetings and systematically tracked various aspects of the reform . for example , opm officials tracked the status of certain activities associated with the reform , such as progress on developing a plan for communicating with employees and stakeholders , through leadership meetings . also , opm had a document identifying risks associated with the reform , such as ensuring continuity of services , as well as mitigation strategies , such as including provisions in opm - gsa interagency agreements . — but has not decided on one . in addition , as discussed previously , omb contracted with mitre to further assist with determining how the gear center will operate . as omb moves forward with establishing the gear center , it will be able to track the gear center's progress , and communicate these results to congress and key stakeholders , by developing and communicating an implementation plan with key milestones and deliverables . in response to our request to identify the legal authority omb will need to implement this reform , omb's general counsel stated in a november 2019 letter to us that it and its agency partners have relied upon existing legal authorities and available appropriations to develop the request for information , obtain external submissions for ideas to develop the gear center , and issue the prize challenge . omb stated that in conducting any future implementation activities , it would seek new legislative authority , if necessary . while planning and implementation progress has been made since the administration's government - wide reform plan was released in june 2018 , important details surrounding the implementation of certain reform proposals have not been developed or communicated . omb has a central role in overseeing and prioritizing these reforms for implementation , with support from lead agencies . in our previous work on government reorganization and reforms , we have found that there are key practices that , if followed , can help manage the risk of reduced productivity and effectiveness that often occurs as a result of major change initiatives . important practices such as engaging and communicating with congress , employees , and key stakeholders ; dedicating a senior leadership team ; and developing implementation plans , can help to ensure the successful implementation of reorganizations and reforms .