ram . rocess as you know , we have reported on a variety of issues related to the federal government's response to the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes . as part of this committee's efforts to assess the level and success of federal efforts to help gulf coast small businesses recover from the 2005 hurricanes , we are conducting work at your request that focuses on small business recovery efforts in four states impacted by hurricanes katrina and rita: alabama , louisiana , mississippi , and texas . this summer , we will report to this committee on: ( 1 ) assistance small businesses in the gulf coast received from the sba , the department of housing and urban development , and the economic development administration ; ( 2 ) federal contract funds received by small businesses ; and ( 3 ) the small business economy in the gulf coast region . madam chair , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have . for further information on this testimony , please contact william b. shear at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include kay kuhlman , assistant director ; beth faraguna , alexandra martin - arseneau , marc molino , linda rego and barbara roesmann . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . sba still has to take additional steps to completely address 6 provisions . not having an implementation plan in place for addressing the remaining requirements can lead to a lac of transparency about the agency's disaster loan program , capacity to reform the program and program improvements , as well as its ability to e adequately prepare for and respond to disasters . in our 2009 report , w recommended that sba develop an implementation plan and include milestone dates for completing implementation and any major program , resource , or other challenges the agency faces as it continues efforts to address requirements of the act . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . sba's office of disaster assistance ( oda ) responds to disasters and administers the disaster loan program . a presidential disaster declaration puts into motion long - term federal recovery programs , such as the disaster loan program , but sba is not a “first responder” after a disaster . rather , local government emergency services assume that role with help from state and volunteer agencies . for catastrophic disasters , and if a governor requests it , federal resources can be mobilized through the u.s. department of homeland security's federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .