robert a . van order and peter m. zorn . the performance of low income and minority mortgages: a tale of two options , august 2001 . robert van order and peter zorn . performance of low - income and minority mortgages , a report prepared for the joint center for housing studies' symposium on low - income homeownership as an asset - building strategy , september 2001 . robert van order and peter zorn . “income , location , and default: some implications for community lending,” real estate economics , vol . economic systems inc. , orc macro , and the hay group . evaluation of va's home loan guaranty program: final report . we identified 151 papers . there may be some relevant research that our search did not identify . for the papers we identified , we conducted a multistep review . initially , we determined which papers to include in our analysis . papers included in the analysis were those that ( 1 ) were relevant to our inquiry , ( 2 ) included empirical analysis , and ( 3 ) utilized satisfactory methodologies . papers that were not relevant were excluded from our analysis ( for example , subject of paper was off - point — car loans ; or analysis of loans in foreign country ) . additionally , we determined if the paper included empirical analysis . if the paper did not include empirical analysis , we did not include it . however , we did review the paper to determine if it talked about papers that we had not yet identified that appeared to have empirical analysis . if the paper did identify an additional paper that appeared to be relevant to our inquiry , we attempted to obtain it . finally , we excluded papers with weak methodologies . gao economists conducted the evaluations of economic models . during this review , we excluded 106 papers leaving 45 for the second - stage review . stephen l. ross . “mortgage lending , sample selection and default,” real estate economics , vol . 4 ( winter 2000 ) . a report prepared for the department of veterans affairs . ( july 2004 ) . in addition to those individuals named above , anne cangi , rudy chatloss , bert japikse , austin kelly , marc molino , andy pauline , roberto piñero , and mitch rachlis made key contributions to this report . va did not have comments on the draft . hud stated that it is in basic agreement with gao that all policy options , implications , and implementation methods should be evaluated when considering or proposing a new fha product . hud also stated that in designing its zero down payment program it considered the items that we recommended it consider , including piloting . hud stated that it adopted the prepurchase counseling requirement as a component of a proposed zero down program and that it determined that structuring the mortgage insurance premium in such a way as to minimize risk represents the most appropriate tool for managing the risk of this proposed program .