collaboration competencies . ensured participation from high - level leaders in regular , in - person group meetings and activities . dedicated towards interagency outcomes . leveraged related agency resources toward the group's outcomes . pilot tested new collaborative ideas , programs , or policies before investing resources . agency officials from all four of the interagency groups we reviewed , and omb staff told us that agencies generally do not receive specific funding for interagency activities . interagency group had available , two of the interagency groups developed a detailed inventory of programs and authorities that related to the outcomes of the interagency group . according to officials , the inventories that each of the groups developed were intended to help the group better understand the full range of federal programs and resources devoted to government - wide outcomes or initiatives . for example , officials told us the rental policy working group developed an inventory of government programs that were related to each of the group's 10 rental alignment proposals . the inventory was based on information from federal , state , and local government officials as well as housing developers and managers and included relevant regulations , statutes , and policies . additionally , the inventory was used to promote to understand the resources that the understanding of government - wide rental programs , and according to officials , was useful in making decisions about the coordination of related programs across agency lines and between levels of government . an inventory of relevant resources can also be used to identify the range of federal spending on an issue , which can result in more coordinated spending . in fiscal year 2011 , doj , labor , and hhs separately administered reentry grant programs . the attorney general convened the reentry council , in part , to coordinate agencies' reentry efforts to further prevent unnecessary duplication and share promising practices . participants of the reentry council told us they developed an inventory of federal resources that are used to assess where resources are targeted to enable federal and local stakeholders to leverage these investments . to develop this inventory , participants of the reentry council created a spreadsheet that listed relevant funding streams and resources from their agencies that were dedicated to reentry programs . the inventory identified the amount of funding , the intended purpose , and jurisdictions associated with resources . the information from this inventory is available in an online resource with an interactive map of reentry resources across the united states . officials we spoke with said this type of inventory can also help communicate some of the differences between agency organizational cultures , capabilities of agencies to control spending , and array of program tools being used to achieve mission objectives . for example , in the instance of usich , agency officials reported that their agencies often had different policy and program tools , such as grants , at their disposal . accordingly , in the early days of the council , participants from the different agencies needed to understand the different purposes and requirements of the policy and program tools that each agency could bring to the table .