dme . a majority of dme macs reported claims for glucose monitors , urological supplies , continuous positive airway pressure ( cpap ) devices , oxygen , wheelchair options and accessories , lower limb prosthetics , and immunosuppressive drugs as areas vulnerable to improper billing . an example of a reported problem area with oxygen billing was that the beneficiary medical record documentation did not provide support for symptoms that might be expected to improve with oxygen therapy . half of the hh+h macs reported claims for home health therapy services and home health or hospice stays that were longer than average as areas vulnerable to improper billing . an example of a reported problem area with home health therapy services included claims from home health providers reporting a high average number of therapy visits for their patients as compared to their peers within the state and the mac's jurisdiction . cms collects limited information on macs' provider education department efforts that focus on areas vulnerable to improper billing . cms officials told us that they oversee the extent to which macs' provider education department efforts focus on areas vulnerable to improper billing by reviewing macs' iprs reports . although the iprs reports focus mainly on how the medical review departments will address the areas identified as vulnerable to improper billing , cms's instructions to the macs state that they should also include information on related provider education department activities or provider education department referrals . however , the iprs reports we reviewed lacked specifics indicating how provider education department efforts focused on 74 percent of the 278 mac - identified areas vulnerable to improper billing . we considered a provider education department effort to be specific if it included one or more of the following: the month , day , and year the event occurred or would occur ; the type or number of providers attending ; or a description of the event . as an example of a provider education department description that met our definition of ‘specific,' one mac reported its provider education department would conduct webinars focused on the top 5 to 10 denial reasons for oxygen equipment in the upcoming year . part a . a majority of part a macs reported claims from skilled nursing facilities and inpatient rehabilitation facilities as vulnerable to improper billing . examples of reported problem areas within skilled nursing facilities included claims for individuals using an “ultrahigh” level of therapy and episodes of care greater than 90 days . part b . a majority of part b macs reported claims for evaluation and management and ambulance services as areas vulnerable to improper billing . examples of reported problem areas within the evaluation and management category included the incorrect level of coding for office visits , hospital visits , emergency room visits , and home visits for assisted living and nursing homes . this mac's iprs report in our analysis listed specific provider education department efforts for all areas vulnerable to improper billing .