in other cases , the personnel reductions were greater than estimated . some of this can be attributed to shifting planned actions to future years . further , estimated revenues generated from actions — such as land sales , property leases , and other reimbursements — have increased by $180 million to $300 million , thereby increasing the offset to brac program cost estimates . according to the air force , its increased revenues resulted from the reporting of reimbursements received from the city of chicago , illinois , for the cost of moving an air national guard unit from o'hare international airport to scott air force base , illinois , and from increased proceeds from land sales and property leases . in addition to reductions in estimated costs , dod is reporting over $610 million in additional estimated savings through 2001 in its closure accounts . our analysis shows that more than half , or $381 million , of the $610 million increase in savings shown in table 1 is attributable to air force operation and maintenance . air force officials told us that the savings increase was attributable to actions at two bases — mcclellan air force base , california , and kelly air force base , texas . while the air force did not provide an estimate for savings at these two bases in its fiscal year 1999 budget request because of uncertainties regarding the performance of the bases' workloads , it reported a $381 million savings estimate in its fiscal year 2001 budget request . further , an additional $101 million in increased savings is due primarily to inflationary adjustments in the estimated post - implementation savings for the 1988 , 1991 , and 1993 rounds through fiscal year 2001 . post - implementation savings for the 1995 round do not begin accruing until fiscal year 2002 . in addition to the revisions made to the cost and savings estimates through fiscal year 2001 , dod has also revised its annual recurring savings estimate for fiscal years 2002 and beyond . dod is now projecting annual recurring savings of $6.1 billion for the four brac rounds , an increase of approximately $500 million from the $5.6 billion dod reported in fiscal year 1999 . our analysis shows that the increase is attributable equally to an increase in the brac 1995 round savings estimate and to a reported increase in prior rounds' recurring savings caused by using an inflation factor to convert them into current year dollars . our prior work , along with work by others including the congressional budget office , the dod inspector general , and the army audit agency , has shown that brac savings are real and substantial , and are related to cost reductions in key operational areas as a result of brac actions . at the same time , limitations have existed in dod's efforts to track actual costs and savings over time , which limits the precision of its net savings estimate .