we agree . our report , however , recommends that actual costs be compared with estimated costs and that adjustments be made as needed . we acknowledge interior's concurrence to work with the bureaus and periodically compare the rates set with actual cost incurred , examine usage , and establish a methodology that will assist in more fully recovering fleet costs . we support interior's proposed actions to recover personnel costs , and its actions to improve use and scheduling of aircraft . we disagree . our report describes the process for making projections and attributes comments about projections to oas , but draws no conclusions about the intent on the part of oas or the bureaus . during our review , we noted that when total flight hours decline year after year , projections based on historical averages will inherently result in over - estimating future flight hour requirements . interior agrees with our findings and recommendation that periodic monitoring of fleet cost and subsequent adjustment of rates would result in more complete recovery of costs . interior points out that , once rates are established for budgeting purposes , increasing rates after budget allocation would reduce flying hours , which in turn could adversely impact cost recovery . interior agrees that there may be opportunities to improve the efficiency of its use of fleet aircraft . interior stated that it will be reviewing its scheduling policies to identify such opportunities . we support this initiative . interior emphasizes that the department's aviation program is complex and multi - faceted due to the diverse missions of the bureaus and the high priority of safety and mission accomplishment . we agree with this assessment . aviation program responsibility is shared by oas and the bureaus . we support oas and bureau partnerships to seek more efficient and cost - effective ways to manage the aviation program . in addition to those named above , mark connelly , robert e. kigerl , lisa knight , dawn shorey , and carol herrnstadt shulman made key contributions to this report . a number of oas efforts have contributed to this reduction . oas requested a clarification regarding wage determination rates , but did not receive a reply ; therefore , the wage provisions remained in the solicitation as issued . prior to the establishment of oas's aviation safety efforts , safety standards varied from bureau to bureau and between regions within bureaus ; in some cases , standards did not exist at all . according to the 1973 task force , virtually no control over aviation operations existed within the department , which resulted in a high accident rate and higher operational costs . oas officials attribute the department's reduced accident rate , in part , to the implementation of a standard aviation operating policy . oas sets pilot qualifications and proficiency standards as well as standards for aircraft maintenance and equipment inspections . these standards exceed the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) requirements . in addition , oas periodically evaluates the bureaus' implementation of the aviation program , with a special emphasis on safe operations .