extend the time limit . states can provide cash assistance beyond the 60-month time limit by using state - only funds . these states typically apply their own work requirements and time limits to these families , demonstrating the states' expectation that these families take steps to reduce dependency in the absence of a federal requirement to do so . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for future contacts regarding this testimony , please call cynthia m. fagnoni at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or gale harris at ( 202 ) 512-7235 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included sigurd nilsen , katrina ryan , elisabeth anderson , kara kramer , kim reniero , and patrick dibattista . most states use some form of state moe funding to provide cash assistance to families . eighteen states relied solely on federal or commingled federal and state funds in their tanf programs to provide cash assistance , as shown in figure 4 . the other 33 states used at least one of the state moe funding options in addition to commingled funds: 7 had segregated state funds ; 17 had separate state programs ; 9 had both segregated funds and separate state programs . states across the nation have opted to use state moe funds to provide cash assistance . ( see table 3. ) states with larger caseloads are more likely to use segregated funds or separate state programs than smaller states ; similarly , states with the smallest caseloads are more likely to commingle all of their state and federal funds . even though two - thirds of the states have opted to use segregated funds , separate state programs , or both to provide cash assistance , only 11 percent of the total number of families receiving cash assistance is funded with these funds . twenty - six of the 33 states with state - only funds apply a state time limit to some or all of their state - funded cases . ( see appendix iv for additional information on state choices regarding funding and time limits. ) the percentage of the caseload that is excluded from time limits may increase , since most families have not reached their time limit . in 22 states tanf had not been in effect long enough for families to reach either the federal or the state time limit by the time we conducted our survey . even in those states where it was possible to have received 60 months of cash assistance , many families had not reached their time limit because they have cycled on and off welfare , slowing their accrual of time on assistance . as a result , only 15 states had begun to use the federal 20 percent hardship extension , and all of these states were applying it to less than 6 percent of their total caseload . one state we visited , california , told us it estimated that over 100,000 families with adults would reach the federal time limit in the next year .