for dod , the challenges are many . we are encouraged by dod's efforts toward addressing its long - standing financial management weaknesses and its efforts to achieve auditability . consistent and diligent top management oversight toward achieving financial management capabilities , including audit readiness , will be needed . what kind of information is most relevant and useful for a sovereign nation ? how should items that are unique to the federal government , such as social insurance commitments and the power to tax , be reported ? in addition , further enhancements to accounting and financial reporting standards are needed to effectively convey the long - term financial condition of the u.s. government and annual changes therein . for example , the federal government's financial reporting should be expanded to disclose the reasons for significant changes during the year in scheduled social insurance benefits and funding . it should also include ( 1 ) a statement of fiscal sustainability that provides a long - term look at the fiscal sustainability of all federal programs including social insurance programs , and ( 2 ) other sustainability information , including intergenerational equity and an analysis of changes in sustainability during the year . recently , the federal accounting standards advisory board ( fasab ) unanimously approved a proposed new standard on fiscal sustainability reporting . also , fasab is currently considering possible changes to accounting for social insurance . in addition , there is a need for a combined report on the performance and financial accountability of the federal government as a whole . this report would include , among other things , key outcome - based national indicators ( eg , economic , security , social , and environmental ) , which could be used to help assess the nation's and other governmental jurisdictions' position and progress . engaging in a reevaluation of the federal financial reporting model could stimulate discussion that would bring about a new way of thinking about the federal government's financial and performance reporting needs . to understand various perceptions and needs of the stakeholders for federal financial reporting , a wide variety of stakeholders from the public and private sector should be consulted . ultimately , the goal of such a reevaluation would be reporting enhancements that can help the congress deliberate on strategies to address the federal government's challenges , including its long - term fiscal challenge . in closing , it is important that the progress that has been made in improving federal financial management activities and practices be sustained by the new administration . across government , financial management improvement initiatives are under way , and if effectively implemented , they have the potential to greatly improve the quality of financial management information as well as the efficiency and effectiveness of agency operations . however , the federal government still has a long way to go before realizing strong federal financial management . the civilian cfo act agencies must continue to strive toward routinely producing not only annual financial statements that can pass the scrutiny of a financial audit , but also quarterly financial statements and other meaningful financial and performance data to help guide decision makers on a day - to - day basis .