( see fig . the announced awards went to several types of intercity passenger rail projects — including almost $2.3 billion for initial investments in the planned over 200 miles per hour service between los angeles and san francisco and , eventually , sacramento and san diego ; $1.1 billion to increase top speeds to 110 miles per hour for existing service between chicago and st. louis ; $400 million for new service with a top speed of 79 miles per hour between cincinnati and cleveland ; and $4 million for signal timing improvements in texas to benefit amtrak's existing heartland flyer service . all of the states that have initiated or improved services over the last 15 years were awarded about 62 percent of all recovery act high speed rail funds ( about $4.9 billion of the $8 billion available ) . officials from states that initiated or improved intercity passenger rail services in the recent past told us that their ability to start or upgrade their services largely hinged on their ability to resolve a number of issues . first , public and political support and funding provided a foundation for initiating and improving their services . second , states acquired equipment for their services through collaborative and cost - saving approaches . states also built consensus with stakeholders , borrowed expertise , and developed state capacity to effectively manage their rail services . the activities that helped states initiate and improve their services will be important for states seeking to initiate or improve services in the future — including developing conventional passenger rail , higher speed passenger rail , and high speed rail . learning ways to build support , secure funding , obtain equipment , and effectively manage rail services will be even more crucial to states developing high speed rail because they will face long time frames , high costs , and a lack of experience in the u.s. passenger rail market for all stages of developing and managing these new passenger rail services . while other countries have experience with high speed passenger rail service , no state currently supports high speed intercity passenger rail service . while there are differences between conventional passenger and high speed passenger rail services , some of the lessons learned by states apply to both . as such , our review of state experiences with conventional passenger rail service could provide some insight into how states might accomplish both initiating and improving conventional passenger rail services , as well as developing higher and high speed passenger rail services . state officials favoring investment in intercity passenger rail services secured funding to initiate or expand such services by achieving public and political support and by using innovative approaches for funding both capital and operating costs . support from passenger rail proponents including governors , state legislators , passenger rail advocacy groups , and communities helped develop public and political support for committing state funds to capital and operating costs of passenger rail services . for example , corridor coalitions of grassroots supporters , advocates , and elected officials aided illinois' efforts to gain support for making improvements and operating a new service .