gao - 11-231 . washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2011 . concomitant hearing and visual impairments . this disability causes such severe communication , developmental , and educational problems that they cannot be accommodated in special education programs solely for students with deafness or students with blindness . an impairment in hearing , whether permanent or fluctuating that adversely affects a student's educational performance , but is not included under the definition of deafness . other health impairment ( ohi ) though not exhaustive , ohi may include limited strength , vitality , or alertness due to chronic or acute health problems that adversely affect a student's educational performance , including but not limited to heart condition , tuberculosis , rheumatic fever , nephritis , asthma , sickle cell anemia , hemophilia , epilepsy , lead poisoning , leukemia , diabetes or attention deficit disorder with or without hyperactivity . a severe physical impairment that adversely affects a student's educational performance . the term includes congenital impairments , impairments caused by disease ( eg , poliomyelitis , bone tuberculosis , etc .

 ) , and impairments from other causes such as cerebral palsy , amputations , and fractures or burns causing contractures . an acquired injury to the brain caused by an external physical force , resulting in total or partial functional disability or psychosocial impairment , or both , that adversely affects a student's educational performance . the term applies to open or closed head injuries resulting in impairments in one or more areas , such as cognition , language , memory , attention , reasoning , abstract thinking , judgment , or problem - solving ; sensory , perceptual , and motor abilities ; psychosocial behavior ; physical functions ; information processing , and speech . the term does not apply to brain injuries that are congenital or degenerative , or brain injuries induced by birth trauma . impairment in vision that , even with correction , adversely affects a student's educational performance . the term includes both partial sight and blindness . a condition that has been confirmed by clinical evaluation and diagnosis and that , over a long period of time and to a marked degree , adversely affects educational performance and that exhibits one or more of the following characteristics: 1 . an inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual , sensory , or health factors . an inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships with peers and teachers . inappropriate types of behavior under normal circumstances . a tendency to develop physical symptoms or fears associated with personal or school problems . a general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression . this includes students who are schizophrenic , but does not include students who are socially maladjusted , unless it is determined that they are seriously emotionally disturbed . the term emotional impairment does not usually include ( a ) antisocial behavior , ( b ) parent - child problems , ( c ) conduct disorders , ( d ) interpersonal problems , or ( e ) other problems that are not the result of a severe mental disorder . communication impairment includes two disabilities: speech disorders and language disorders .