gao - 03-330 . washington , d.c.: january 17 , 2003 . table 3 provides more information . two key factors will likely continue to increase eas program costs in the future . first , more communities may require subsidized service . yet whether any of the projects funded will prove to be effective at developing sustainable air service is uncertain . relatively few communities offered innovative approaches to developing or enhancing air service . most of the initiatives that received federal grants resembled other state or local efforts that we had already identified . evidence from those efforts indicated that some communities could develop sustainable air service — but likely only small hub communities that have a relatively large population and economic base . among smaller , nonhub communities , direct financial assistance to carriers was most effective at attracting air service , but only as long as the financing existed . if the pilot program is extended , will it essentially become another subsidy program ? reauthorization provides an opportunity for the congress to clarify the federal strategy for assisting small communities with commercial air service . we believe that there may be a number of questions that need to be addressed , including the following: what amount of assistance would be needed to maintain the current federal commitment to both small hub and nonhub airports ? would federal assistance be better targeted at nonhub or small hub communities , but not both ? rather than providing subsidies directly to carriers , should federal assistance be directed to states or local communities to allow them to determine the most effective local strategy ? what role should state and local governments play in helping small communities secure air service ? mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee might have . for further information on this testimony , please contact jayetta hecker at ( 202 ) 512-2834 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included janet frisch , steve martin , stan stenersen , and pamela vines . commercial aviation: factors affecting efforts to improve air service at small community airports . commercial aviation: financial condition and industry responses affect competition . gao - 03-171t . washington , d.c.: october 2 , 2002 . options to enhance the long - term viability of the essential air service program . gao - 02-997r . washington , d.c.: august 30 , 2002 . commercial aviation: air service trends at small communities since october 2000 . gao - 02-432 . washington , d.c.: march 29 , 2002 . “state of the u.s. commercial airlines industry and possible issues for congressional consideration” , speech by comptroller general of the united states david walker . the international aviation club of washington: november 28 , 2001 . financial management: assessment of the airline industry's estimated losses arising from the events of september 11 . gao - 02-133r . washington , d.c.: october 5 , 2001 . commercial aviation: a framework for considering federal financial assistance . gao - 01-1163t . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2001 . aviation competition: restricting airline ticketing rules unlikely to help consumers . gao - 01-832 .