other needs of the department . also , in may 2013 , we found that dod had not taken a holistic approach to its workforce requirements to achieve the appropriate balance using all three components — military , civilian , and contractor — of its total workforce , and to prioritize the achievement of a workforce sufficiently sized and of the appropriate mix to carry out dod's mission over costs . we recommended that dod revise its workforce policies and procedures to address the determination of the appropriate workforce mix . dod partially concurred , stating that it had issued updated guidance related to its military , civilian , and contractor manpower management and did not believe additional direction was necessary at the time of the report . as of april 2015 , dod has not taken actions to implement this recommendation . further , in june 2014 , we reported on dod's implementation of furloughs for its civilians , where we found that clarifying guidance from dod was issued in 2013 to help ensure that borrowed military personnel were not used to compensate for lost work resulting from the civilian furlough , and no evidence was found at that time to indicate that borrowed military personnel were used in this manner . the house armed services committee reportthe national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 noted that the use of borrowed military personnel outside of a servicemember's military occupational specialty may pose risks to readiness and training and included a provision for us to review the use of borrowed military personnel . this report examines the extent to which ( 1 ) the army used borrowed military personnel for fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and what is known about any impacts on training and readiness during that period , accompanying a bill for and ( 2 ) the army considered costs when making decisions to use borrowed military personnel for fiscal years 2013 and 2014 . through discussions in march 2014 with officials from the navy , the marine corps , and the air force we did not obtain any indication that they were using military personnel for civilian or contractor positions . furthermore , the house armed services committee report noted that the department of the navy and the department of the air force stated in april 2013 testimony before the committee that they did not anticipate using large numbers of military personnel for this purpose . therefore , we focused our review on the army's use of borrowed military personnel . in addition , we limited our review to fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , which reflects the period immediately before , during , and after sequestration was ordered in march 2013 . to determine the extent to which the army used borrowed military personnel for fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and what is known about any readiness and training impacts , we reviewed dod , army , and local installation policies and guidance regarding the use of special duty personnel , which includes borrowed military personnel and another category of special duty personnel . we also obtained and analyzed data reported to the army by installations and commands on special duty personnel use during these years .