eitc . treasury agreed that it lacks performance measures for the eitc program and describes other measures that it uses in managing the program . however , as we note in the report , without performance measures and an evaluation strategy , treasury will not be able to assess progress in achieving less waste , fraud , and error in the program . delinquent tax collection . treasury commented that irs' reorganization , new mission , and strategic goals caused irs to find methods of measuring success without considering dollars collected . treasury went on to note that for various reasons , irs' traditional debt collection activities have declined and that with additional staffing it has been authorized , irs believes it will realize significant improvement in critical debt collection areas by the end of fiscal year 2002 . while irs' current performance measures provide some perspective on its collections success , we believe , as explained in our report , that some measures that consider whether irs is collecting the correct amount of taxes under proper collection procedures would provide a more balanced performance perspective . non - tax debt collection . treasury disagreed with our assessment that one of its measures - - involving a comparison of delinquent non - tax debts referred and eligible for referral - - for this outcome is not a good gauge of success . while we agree that fms has spent considerable resources working with other agencies so that the agencies will refer their debt , it is also true that the measure is unduly influenced by factors outside fms' full control . we modified the wording in our report to better reflect our concern about that measure . customs drug interdiction program . treasury disagreed with our statement that some of its performance measures were not linked directly to its goals . in response , we revised our wording to better articulate our assessment of the progress treasury has made in achieving its outcomes . personal search data . treasury provided additional perspective on its efforts in response to our previous recommendation related to its performance measures for target efficiency . short landings . treasury disagreed with our assessment that some of its drug interdiction performance measures do not support the outcome of reduced drug availability . it also took issue with our use of an example regarding the performance measure on the number of suspect aircraft that land shortly before crossing the border into the u.s . the intent of the example was to illustrate the need for better outcome measures , a need that treasury acknowledged in its comments . we clarified our wording in the report . automated commercial environment ( ace ) . we deleted reference to the development of the ace initiative , as suggested by treasury . data accuracy , incomplete assessment . at treasury's request , we revised the report to include an example of components of an assessment of data issues . fms' computer security . treasury provided information in its comments about the performance measures it established for its information technology security program in the self - assessment framework . while that action is commendable , it does not substitute for performance measures in treasury's performance report or plan .