we are not making recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of this product to dod for comment . however , dod provided a few technical comments which we incorporated into the report , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the secretary of defense . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . programs too often have not delivered required capabilities when needed at expected costs . we have found that many problems can be traced to a culture in which the military services begin programs with unrealistic requirements , immature technologies , overly optimistic cost and schedule estimates , and the absence of disciplined systems engineering . congress and dod have continually explored ways to improve acquisition outcomes , including actions like the weapon systems acquisition reform act of 2009 and the department's own “better buying power” initiatives . these and other reforms have emphasized sound management practices , such as realistic cost estimating , prototyping , and systems engineering . our work has shown that when these practices are properly implemented , they have a positive effect on individual acquisition programs . however , all too often we have found that there is a lack of discipline and accountability in planning and executing acquisition programs , which leads to poor outcomes . many acquisition reform studies in the past have identified the need for increased accountability in the dod acquisition management chain of command . changing the culture and incentives in dod that cause these factors to be prevalent has been difficult . also , the president issued a directive that directed implementation of another packard commission recommendation , to establish a more streamlined acquisition chain of command in dod . the reporting chain , which remains in place today , runs upward from a program manager , through a program executive officer ( peo ) , to the service acquisition executive ( sae ) , and to the defense acquisition executive ( dae ) , which is usd ( at&l ) . figure 1 provides an overview of the current acquisition chain of command in dod and the military departments . within dod , three key acquisition decision - support processes influence the planning and execution of weapon system programs — requirements determination , resource allocation , and the acquisition management system . each process is managed and overseen by different organizations and leaders within dod and the military departments . at the dod level , usd ( at&l ) is responsible for the acquisition function and is the milestone decision authority ( mda ) for major defense acquisition programs,implementing the requirements process , and the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) is responsible for the resource process .