centers . cards reviews use a standard list of elements to review other human resources requirements , including performance awards . in addition , the cards reviewers do not have the authority to require medical centers to resolve compliance problems they identify , and vha has not formally assigned responsibility to an organizational component with the knowledge and expertise of human resources issues to do this , a condition that is inconsistent with internal control standards for control environment . currently indicate that network human resources managers , who typically accompany cards reviewers on reviews , are to follow up with medical centers' human resources offices to ensure identified problems are resolved . however , this reviewer said cards reviewers do not have the authority to require that this follow - up be done . further , network human resources managers lack the authority to require medical center human resources managers to correct identified problems because medical center directors , not network human resources managers , typically have oversight authority over medical center human resources managers , according to vha officials . figure 2 shows the organization of vha offices that are involved in performance pay and awards for providers at medical centers . gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 . network director reports directly to the deputy under secretary for health for operations and management . generally , the applicable network human resources official attends the cards review . as a result of the limitations with cards reviews — the lack of a standard list of performance pay elements , as well as the lack of an organizational component assigned to follow up on noncompliance and ensure it is corrected — vha is unable to ensure that medical centers correct the problems found by the reviews and that problems do not recur , a condition that is inconsistent with internal control standards for monitoring . we found that two of the four va medical centers we visited did not always correct problems identified through cards reviews . for example , a may 2011 cards review of one of these two medical centers found that the medical center did not conduct a formal evaluation of its awards program , as required . a cards review of this same medical center about a year later found the identical problem . ( see fig . 1 , section a. ) the va officials who wrote the policy , and vha officials who are responsible for helping medical centers implement it , told us they expect that provider and supervisor signatures on the top of the form would indicate that goals have been discussed and the date would indicate when this discussion took place . the officials told us that this date is to verify that the 90-day requirement was met , but they have not documented or provided this guidance to the medical centers . because the policy does not specify how compliance with the 90-day requirement should be documented , one of the four medical centers we visited did not interpret the policy the way va and vha officials did , and therefore , did not document compliance with the 90-day requirement when administering performance pay .