( see fig . we focused our work on the section 130 program . for each of our objectives , we reviewed pertinent statutes and fhwa and fra regulations and documents , and interviewed fhwa and fra program officials in headquarters as well as a non - generalizable sample of 10 stakeholders from railroads , industry and transportation associations , and academia , in addition to a rail safety organization and a rail safety consultant . we also interviewed federal officials from the national transportation safety board and the volpe center . we selected these organizations based on our initial background research , prior work , and input from other stakeholders , among other things . we also selected eight states for case studies to include a mix of state experiences based on several factors . we selected half of our states from those ranked in the top 25 percent of all states for the number of grade crossings and the amount of section 130 program funds received . according to the report , fra sponsored a workshop to learn about the benefits of collecting and analyzing close calls . however , stakeholders we interviewed noted challenges formalizing near - miss reporting . for example , volpe center officials said these reports are subjective in nature — what one engineer considers a close call , others may not . fra developed another online tool — gradedec — to allow states to compare the costs and benefits for various grade - crossing improvement projects . gradedec uses models to analyze a project's risk and calculate cost - benefit ratios and net present value for potential projects . fra provides state dots with on - site gradedec workshops upon request . while fra officials noted that many state and local governments have registered to use the program , none of the state officials we spoke with identified gradedec as a tool that they use to conduct cost - benefit analysis . officials from two state dots we spoke with said that cost - benefit analyses could help them better identify and select the most cost - effective crossing safety projects in the future . according to the academic study of 50 states noted above , because of limited funding for grade - crossing improvements , states should consider the life - cycle costs of the projects as well as net present value to help select projects . as discussed later in this report , the small number of crashes at grade crossings can make it challenging to distinguish between different projects in terms of their effectiveness in reducing accidents . finally , after they have considered risk factors and created a list of potential grade crossings for improvement , state officials , along with relevant stakeholders from railroads and local governments , conduct field reviews of the potential projects . according to state officials , these reviews help identify grade - crossing characteristics that may not be included in the accident prediction models , such as vegetation that would obstruct drivers' views . in 2008 , legislation was enacted mandating reporting by states and railroads to the national highway - rail crossing inventory .