our report does not address this issue . however , we note that requiring bea award recipients to use their award proceeds for additional community development activities would pose complexities . for example , it would require treasury to develop information about current award recipients' overall community development activities and a mechanism for monitoring recipients' use of award dollars . our report does not comment on the bea program's funding relative to other related programs within treasury . we provide information on the program's funding for descriptive purposes only and make no assertions concerning its priority within treasury . in addition to the contact named above , wesley phillips ( assistant director ) , emilie cassou , david dornisch , ronald ito , austin kelly , elizabeth olivarez , david pittman , linda rego , and james vitarello made key contributions to this report . the guidance also does not establish standards for documenting verification efforts . consequently , the bea program is vulnerable to making improper payments . to help ensure the integrity of the bea award payment process , we recommend that the secretary of the treasury revise the guidance for reviewing program applications so that program staff are required to ( 1 ) geocode property addresses where appropriate and ( 2 ) document their efforts to verify property addresses . we provided a draft of this report to the department of the treasury for its review and comment . treasury provided written comments that are reprinted ( with annotations ) in appendix ii . in its comments , treasury agreed with our conclusion that determining the extent to which the bea program provides banks with incentives to increase their investments in cdfis and lending in distressed communities remains difficult given the number of external factors that drive such decisions . however , treasury stated that our report bases many of its conclusions on information that is overly general , outdated , or developed for other purposes and , as a result , does not reflect an accurate portrayal of the bea program or its importance within the banking industry . treasury also said that we did not adequately consider evidence the department provided regarding the bea program's impact . treasury did agree to implement our recommendation that application review staff ( 1 ) geocode property addresses , where appropriate ; and ( 2 ) document their efforts to verify property addresses . we selected these award recipients and cdfi beneficiaries for interviews based on a range of characteristics , including differing bank asset sizes , frequency of program participation , status as a traditional bank or certified community development bank , and cdfi type . our sample selection criteria was intended to obtain a diverse pool of respondents possessing a range of views and perspectives on the bea program . to address our second objective , we interviewed treasury officials to obtain information on the bea program's measures and internal controls . we compared the program's performance measures to gao's standards for effective measures , as outlined in publications we have issued in connection with the government performance and results act . we also compared the bea program's internal controls to gao's standards for internal control in the federal government .