( fig . 2 illustrates one of the potential hazards. ) however , each agency initiated its product in response to different triggering events . in december 2000 , an osha regional office became aware of a media report that discussed the potential exposure to asbestos during brake and clutch repairs and its effect on automobile mechanics . according to the article , there were indications that mechanics were being exposed to asbestos levels potentially much higher than the level recommended in the standards . the article also raised concerns that many people were unaware that the epa ban on asbestos products had been partially overturned and that asbestos - related products — including automobile brakes — were still being sold and used . therefore , mechanics and automobile shop owners might not have been taking preventive measures to avoid exposure to asbestos fibers . osha regional officials suggested that the agency could either issue a hazard alert to automotive associations via the internet as a means of disseminating information to the public , or implement a local emphasis program ( lep ) to address this issue . after being notified by its regional office , the osha national office decided that the agency's response would be to develop a hazard information bulletin . according to agency officials , leps are developed by the regional or area office and reviewed by the directorate of enforcement programs , however , the regional office did not develop an lep to address the issues of exposure to asbestos in automotive brakes . officials decided that among the osha communication products available , the health information bulletin would alert the public in the most efficient manner . however , according to osha officials , the asbestos shib was unique because , in most cases , a shib is developed to address a new hazard or refocus the public's attention on a recurring hazard in light of a recent incident . this was not the case for the asbestos bulletin because there had not been any recent incidents associated with asbestos in automobile brakes . what general policies and procedures do osha and oppts have for the initiation , development , review , and dissemination of communication products ? how do the agencies' policies and procedures for communication products compare to those applicable to the initiation , development , review , and dissemination of rules , and what might be the effects of 2007 administration initiatives on guidance documents ? to address the first objective , we obtained and analyzed information on the preparation of the osha and oppts communication products on asbestos in automotive brakes . we asked agency officials to provide a chronology and description of events that led to the initiation , development , review , and eventual dissemination of the products . among other things , the iqa allows “affected persons” to seek and obtain correction of information maintained and disseminated by agencies . we also asked the officials to provide any available documentation that would corroborate the events and processes described in their respective chronologies . once the agency received the request for correction , updating the gold book became a higher priority .