education . patients will receive a written notice of their providers' and payers' privacy procedures , including an explanation of patients' rights and anticipated uses and disclosures of their health information . remedies . patients will be able to file a complaint with the hhs office for civil rights ( ocr ) that a user of their personal health information has not complied with the privacy requirements . violators will be subject to civil and criminal penalties established under hipaa . providers , health plans , and clearinghouses — referred to as covered entities — must meet new requirements and follow various procedures , as follows: develop policies and procedures for protecting patient privacy . among other requirements , a covered entity must designate a privacy official , train its employees on the entity's privacy policies , and develop procedures to receive and address complaints . obtain patients' written consent or authorization . providers directly treating patients must obtain written consent to use or disclose protected health information to carry out routine health care functions . routine uses include nonemergency treatment , payment , and an entity's own health care operations . in addition , providers , health plans , and clearinghouses must obtain separate written authorization from the patient to use or disclose information for nonroutine purposes , such as releasing information to lending institutions or life insurers . without explicit authorization from the individual . furthermore , where staff administering the group health plan work in the same office as staff making hiring and promotion decisions , access to personal health information must be limited to those employees who perform health plan administrative functions . the regulation sets out special requirements for use of personal health information that apply to both federal and privately funded research: researchers may use and disclose health information without authorization if it does not identify an individual . information is presumed to be de - identified by removing or concealing all individually identifiable data , including name , addresses , phone numbers , social security numbers , health plan beneficiary numbers , dates indicative of age , and other unique identifiers specified in the regulation . researchers who seek personal health information from covered entities will have two options . they can either obtain patient authorization or obtain a waiver from such authorization by having their research protocol reviewed and approved by an independent body — an institutional review board ( irb ) or privacy board . in its review , the independent body must determine that the use of personal health information will not adversely affect the rights or welfare of the individuals involved , and that the benefit of the research is expected to outweigh the risks to the individuals' privacy . hhs and others within the federal government will have a number of specific responsibilities to perform under the regulations . although it no longer falls to the states to regulate the privacy of health information , states will still be able to enact more stringent laws . federal and state public officials may obtain , without patient authorization , personal health information for public health surveillance ; abuse , neglect , or domestic violence investigations ; health care fraud investigations ; and other oversight and law enforcement activities .