it acquisitions . fitara includes a provision to enhance covered agency cios' authority through , among other things , requiring agency heads to ensure that cios review and approve it contracts . omb's fitara implementation guidance expanded upon this aspect of the legislation in a number of ways . specifically , according to the guidance , cios may review and approve it acquisition strategies and plans , rather than individual it contracts , and cios can designate other agency officials to act as their representatives . in january 2018 , we reported that most of the cios at 22 selected agencies , including ssa , were not adequately involved in reviewing and approving billions of dollars of it acquisitions . in particular , we found that ssa's process to identify it acquisitions for cio review did not involve the acquisition office , as required by omb . in addition , we noted that ssa had a cio review and approval process in place that fully satisfied the requirements set forth in omb's guidance . however , while ssa provided evidence of the cio's review of most of the it contracts we examined , the agency had not ensured that the cio or a designee reviewed and approved each it acquisition plan or strategy . specifically , of 10 randomly selected it contracts that we examined at ssa , 7 acquisitions associated with those contracts had been reviewed and approved , as required by omb . we pointed out that , until ssa ensured that its cio or designee reviewed and approved all it acquisitions , the agency would have limited visibility and input into its planned it expenditures and would not be effectively positioned to benefit from the increased authority that fitara's contract approval provision is intended to provide . cios are to establish , implement , and ensure compliance with an agency - wide information security program . for example , cios are required to develop and maintain an agency - wide security program , policies , procedures , and control techniques . in our august 2018 report , we noted that ssa , along with 23 other agencies , did not have policies that fully addressed the role of the cio in these six key areas , consistent with the laws and guidance . to its credit , ssa had fully addressed the role of the cio in the it leadership and accountability area . in particular , the agency's policies addressed the requirements that the cio report directly to the agency head , assume responsibility and accountability for it investments , and designate a senior agency information security officer . however , the policies did not fully address the role of the cio in the other five areas ( i.e. , strategic planning , workforce , budgeting , investment management , and information security ) . for example , the agency's policies did not address the it workforce area at all , including the requirements that the cio annually assess the extent to which agency personnel meet it management knowledge and skill requirements , develop strategies to address deficiencies , and report to the head of the agency on the progress made in improving these capabilities .