these special publications are summarized below . sp 800-73 is a companion document to fips 201 that specifies the technical aspects of retrieving and using the identity credentials stored in a personal identity verification ( piv ) card's memory . this special publication aims to promote interoperability among piv systems across the federal government by specifying detailed requirements intended to constrain vendors' interpretation of fips 201 . sp 800-73 also outlines two distinct approaches that agencies might take to become fips 201 compliant and specifies a set of requirements for each: one set for “transitional” card interfaces that are based on the government smart card interoperability specification ( gsc - is ) , version 2.1 and another set for “end - point” card interfaces that are more fully compliant with the fips 201 piv - ii card specification . federal agencies that have implemented smart card systems based on the gsc - is can elect to adopt the transitional specification as an intermediate step before moving to the end - point specification . however , agencies with no existing implementation are required to implement piv systems that meet the end - point specification . sp 800-73 includes requirements for both the transitional and end - point specifications and is divided into the following three parts: part 1 specifies the requirements for a piv data model that is designed to support dual interface ( contact and contactless ) cards . the mandatory data elements outlined in the data model are common to both the transitional and end - point interfaces and include strategic guidance for agencies that are planning to take the path of moving from the transitional interfaces to the end - point interfaces . part 2 describes the transitional interface specifications and is for use by agencies with existing gsc - is based smart card systems . part 3 specifies the requirements for the end - point piv card and associated software applications . sp 800-79 is a companion document to fips 201 that describes the attributes that a piv card issuer — an organization that issues piv cards that comply with fips 201 — should exhibit in order to be accredited . agency officials need complete , accurate , and trustworthy information about their piv credential issuers to make decisions about whether to authorize their operation . agencies can use the guidelines in this document to certify and accredit the reliability of such organizations . there are four phases ( initiation , certification , accreditation , and monitoring ) in the certification and accreditation processes that cover a piv credential issuer's ability to carry out its primary responsibilities in identity proofing and registration , piv card creation and issuance , and piv card life - cycle management .