issue pending . market news reviewing current information provided by packer . in addition to the individual above charles adams , assistant director , aldo davila , barbara el osta , paige gilbreath , kirk menard , lynn musser , karen o'conor , alison o'neill , vanessa taylor and amy webbink made key contributions to this report . we met with usda headquarters officials from ams and gipsa . in des moines , we met with gipsa's packers and stockyards programs regional officials , and on separate occasions , spoke with gipsa's denver regional office officials regarding gipsa and ams coordination . during the course of our review , we identified and obtained the views of several industry groups and associations representing packers and producers . we also interviewed several nationally recognized economic experts knowledgeable about mandatory price reporting and related market issues . we conducted our review between february and november 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . overall , from april 2005 through june 2005 , we found approximately 8.8 percent of cattle transactions , 0.2 percent of hog transactions , and 2.7 percent of boxed beef transactions were eliminated . from may 2003 to october 2003 , a period of rapidly rising prices , we found that approximately 22.8 percent of all cattle transactions were excluded from ams reports . figure 1 shows that close to 95 percent of all excluded dressed weight cattle transactions from negotiated sales were smaller lots — groupings of cattle for sales purposes — of fewer than 25 cattle . however , as figure 2 shows , the proportion of negotiated live cattle transactions that were eliminated consisted of lots that were relatively larger than dressed cattle lots and more consistent in size ; about 75 percent of lots were greater than the 0 to 25 lot category and over 10 percent were between 201 and 400 head of cattle . information on the size distribution of excluded lots is relevant because excluding large lots could have a relatively greater impact on weighted average prices reported by ams than smaller lots . also , the effects of excluding large lots could be greater in daily reports when trade volume is light , and an accumulation of excluded large lots could affect weekly and monthly reports . market news reporters of hog trade eliminated significantly fewer transactions than the cattle reporters early on in the livestock mandatory reporting program . for hogs , from october 2003 to march 2004 , we found that approximately 0.1 percent of transactions were excluded , which was less than 0.1 percent of all hogs . figure 3 shows that , for negotiated sales , while nearly 40 percent of excluded transactions were smaller lots of 50 hogs or less , the largest category of slaughtered swine excluded — over 35 percent — were somewhat larger lots , in the 151 – 200 head lot category . during a sample period of rapidly rising prices , our analysis of cattle and hog livestock data shows that the elimination of transactions from market news reports narrowed price ranges while having a limited , but frequently positive , effect on the average reported price .