vii ) . the assistant attorney general for the office of justice programs noted that we made several valuable recommendations for improving the collection of data on the performance and impact of federally funded drug court programs and outlined steps doj is considering to address two of the six recommendations we make for improving its collection of data on the performance and impact of federally funded drug court programs . however , concerning the remaining four recommendations for improving doj's data collection effort , doj does not specifically outline any plans ( 1 ) for taking corrective action towards grantees who do not comply with dcpo's data collection reporting requirements ; ( 2 ) to reinstate the collection of post program data in dcpo's data collection effort , despite the evidence cited in our report supporting the feasibility of collecting post program data ; ( 3 ) to analyze and report results on the performance and outcome of dcpo grantees ; and ( 4 ) to consolidate the multiple doj - funded drug court program - related data collection efforts to ensure that the primary focus of any future efforts is on the collection and reporting of data on dcpo - funded programs . although doj points out in its comments that a number of individual program evaluation studies have been completed , no national impact evaluation of these programs has been done to date . we continue to believe that until post - program follow - up data on program participants are collected across a broad range of programs and also included within the scope of future program and impact evaluations ( including nonprogram participant data ) , it will not be possible to reach firm conclusions about whether drug court programs are an effective use of federal funds or whether different types of drug court program structures funded by dcpo work better than others . also , unless these results are compared with those on the impact of other criminal justice programs , it will not be clear whether drug court programs are more or less effective than other criminal justice programs . as such , these limitations have prevented firm conclusions from being drawn on the overall impact of federally funded drug court programs . nij's original objective , however , never called for a simple evaluation design , but rather a viable design strategy involving the use of comparison groups and the collection of post - program data . we conducted our work at doj headquarters in washington , d.c. , between march 2001 and february 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date . at that time , we will provide copies of this report to the attorney general , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact daniel c. harris or me at ( 202 ) 512-2758 or at ekstrandl@gao.gov . key contributors to this report are acknowledged in appendix ix .