iii. ) specifically for individual programs , participants reported spending an average of $190,974 to initiate and $409,332 to operate case management programs in py1 , almost twice the spending associated with any other type of program . ( see table 5. ) several participants reported that the majority of their individual program expenditures were labor costs for care managers . officials from several participating physician groups said that smaller practices might have difficulty implementing similar programs because they may not have the financial resources to do so . the second advantage the 10 large participating physician groups had over smaller physician practices is a greater likelihood of having or acquiring ehr systems , which was essential in participants' ability to gather data and track progress in meeting quality - of - care targets . to determine the potential challenges involved in broadening the payment approach used in the demonstration to other physician groups , we compared selected characteristics of the 10 participating physician groups to physician practices in the united states , using data primarily from the medical group management association's ( mgma ) annual survey . we also used data we collected from the questionnaire and from our interviews with officials from the physician group practices . we also interviewed experts on health information technology systems . in addition , we asked officials from these physician groups to identify the start - up costs and the annual operating costs of these programs . we also asked about the extent to which the physician groups believe smaller physician practices could implement similar programs . the third section of the questionnaire gathered information about how the participating physician groups compensated their physicians and how any demonstration bonus dollars they may earn would be distributed to individual physicians within the group . we also conducted site visits or telephone interviews with staff of all 10 participating physician groups . five of these interviews were site visits , which we chose to reflect geographic diversity ( region of country and urban / rural ) , size , and ownership status , among other factors . we conducted site visits to geisinger health system in pennsylvania , park nicollet health services in minnesota , marshfield clinic in wisconsin , billings clinic in montana , and the everett clinic in washington . we collected the same information by telephone from the other participants in the demonstration . for these in - person or telephone interviews , we interviewed the demonstration project managers , physicians , care managers , finance officials , and information technology staff . to identify programs used by the participating physician groups to achieve cost savings and meet the cms - set diabetes quality - of - care targets , we analyzed data we collected by written questionnaires and interviews , supplemented with information we obtained at site visits to 5 of the 10 participants . we included in our analysis new programs or expansions of existing programs created in response to the demonstration .