cargo profiling . the gore commission recommended that faa work with industry to develop a computer - assisted cargo profiling system that could be integrated into airlines' and freight forwarders' reservations and operating systems . since 1997 , faa and now tsa have been working to develop a cargo profiling system that is similar to the computer assisted passenger prescreening system . screening technologies . both the gore commission and the cargo working group recommended using existing technology to screen cargo for explosives and developing new technologies to screen cargo for explosives . trace explosives detection devices and bulk explosives detection systems , which are currently used to screen passenger baggage for explosive material , could also be used to screen cargo containers . according to tsa , the use of trace devices to screen cargo has shown few problems . canines have been identified as one of the most effective ways to screen cargo and their use has expanded significantly in recent years , based upon recommendations from the gore commission and others . in addition to screening cargo , canine teams are used at airports to respond to suspicious events , such as bomb threats . how can air cargo security be improved in the near - and long - term ? to answer our research questions , we conducted a comprehensive assessment of pertinent literature , including reports from tsa , faa , dot's volpe transportation center , the u.s. customs service , federal commissions and working groups , aviation industry groups , and dot's office of inspector general ( oig ) . we also interviewed tsa officials , industry officials representing passenger and cargo airlines and consolidators of air freight , and aviation security experts . in addition , to determine possible ways in which the security of air cargo can be improved in the long - term , we reviewed our previous reports on risk management techniques and compared the risk management approach outlined in those reports with tsa's current procedures and plans for air cargo security . we performed our work from august to december 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . transporting cargo by air involves many participants , including manufacturers and shippers who make routine or occasional shipments , freight forwarders who consolidate shipments and deliver them to air carriers , and cargo facilities of passenger and all - cargo air carriers that store cargo until it is placed aboard an aircraft . figure 1 depicts these participants and the two primary ways in which a shipper can send cargo by air . a shipper may take its packages to a freight forwarder , which consolidates cargo from many shippers and delivers it to air carriers , as illustrated in the top portion of figure 1 . the freight forwarder usually has cargo facilities in or near airports and uses trucks to deliver bulk freight to commercial air carriers — either to a cargo facility or to a small - package receiving area at the ticket counter . freight forwarders operate about 10,000 facilities nationwide . according to tsa , about 80 percent of shippers use freight forwarders .