nrcs has the authority to recover duplicate payments . csp contracts , by way of reference , include a clause stating that csp participants cannot receive duplicate payments . under a csp contract , as required in the 2002 farm bill , a producer agrees that on violation of any term or condition of the contract to refund payments and forfeit all rights to receive payments or to refund or accept adjustments to payments , depending on whether the secretary of agriculture determines that termination of the contract is or is not warranted , respectively . duplicate payments reduce program effectiveness and , because of limited funding , may result in some producers not receiving program benefits for which they are otherwise eligible . for these reasons , we recommended that the secretary of agriculture direct the chief of nrcs to ( 1 ) develop a comprehensive process , such as an automated system , to review csp contract applications to ensure that csp payments , if awarded , would not duplicate payments made by other usda conservation programs ; and ( 2 ) develop a process to efficiently review existing csp contracts to identify cases where csp payments duplicate payments made under other programs and take action to recover appropriate amounts and to ensure that these duplicate payments are not repeated in fiscal year 2006 and beyond . regarding the first recommendation , in july 2006 , nrcs said it had created an automated system within its contracting software to conduct a comparison between existing contracts for eqip and other conservation programs and new csp applications to reveal potential areas of overlapping practices . in addition , nrcs indicated that for the fiscal year 2006 csp sign - up , it would require applicants to complete a form that asks an applicant to certify whether or not they are receiving payments from another conservation program on any of the land being offered for enrollment in csp . these actions appear to be steps in the right direction , but we have not assessed their effectiveness . regarding the second recommendation , nrcs indicated that all identified duplicate payments would be dealt with according to the nrcs contracting manual . we do not know the extent to which nrcs has identified and recovered duplicate payments . in conclusion , eqip and csp are key agricultural conservation programs that can play an invaluable role in encouraging farmers and ranchers to act as stewards of the nation's natural resources . however , the weaknesses we identified in the management of eqip and csp funds may lessen these programs' effectiveness . refining the eqip allocation formula to ensure funds are provided to states in a manner that optimizes environmental benefits , continuing to develop outcome - oriented performance measures to help refine its funding allocation process , and developing processes designed to eliminate duplicate payments between csp and other programs would enhance the programs' ability to effectively promote conservation among u.s. agricultural producers . furthermore , oversight of these programs , such as today's hearing , helps ensure funds are spent as economically , efficiently and effectively as possible and benefit the agricultural sector as intended .