irs agreed with both recommendations directed to it . regarding our recommendation to set up a control in irs systems to require assistors to send required correspondence before closing a case , irs stated that it would analyze its options for bolstering controls to address correspondence concerns . irs officials said they would reassess both . we developed and administered a standardized discussion guide to improve the quality of information gathered . our questions for assistors focused on their experiences and suggestions , if any , for how irs can more efficiently conduct its correspondence and telephone processes . we discussed the benefits and drawbacks of centralized evaluative review at the campuses that piloted it . we asked examiners about their experiences processing returns with errors and what suggestions , if any , they had for irs to process such returns more efficiently . to determine what resources irs realized from implementing service initiatives , we first calculated the total gross dollars irs saved by implementing each of the six service initiatives and redirected toward other purposes . we determined this amount by multiplying full - time equivalents ( fte ) redirected by salaries and benefits per fte using data provided by irs . next , we calculated total costs of implementing each of the service initiatives , then subtracted the amount from total gross dollars saved to calculate irs resources realized from implementing each of the six initiatives in fiscal year 2014 dollars . irs officials concurred with our approach and calculations . to describe irs's actions to implement our prior recommendations , we reviewed relevant documentation , including irs joint audit management enterprise system reports tracking irs's actions to implement our recommendations , and obtained information from irs officials . to identify data limitations and assess data reliability , we reviewed irs data and documentation , assessed documentation for data limitations , and compared those results to our data reliability standards . we consider the data presented in this report to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we reported in our prior work that the internal revenue service ( irs ) was struggling to provide taxpayers access to services despite regularly realizing efficiency gains , and that irs's performance would likely continue to suffer unless it made tough choices about what services to provide . consistent with these findings , irs implemented service changes in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 by reducing or eliminating certain telephone and walk - in services , and redirecting taxpayers toward other service channels such as irs's website . fiscal year 2014 service changes: 1 . limited telephone assistance to only basic tax law questions during the filing season and reassigned assistors to work account - related inquiries . eliminated free return preparation and reduced other services at irs's walk - in sites . launched the “get transcript” tool , which allows taxpayers to obtain a viewable and printable transcript on irs.gov , and redirected taxpayers to automated tools for additional guidance . redirected refund - related inquiries to automated services and did not answer refund inquiries until 21 days after a tax return was filed electronically or 6 weeks after a return was filed by paper ( unless the automated service directed the taxpayer to contact irs ) .