however , we and others reported a number of problems with this system . we have also reported that not all medical encounters in theater were being recorded in individual records . our 1997 report identified that this problem was particularly common for immunizations given in theater . detailed data on service members' vaccine history are vital for scheduling the regimen of vaccinations and boosters and for tracking individuals who received vaccinations from a specific lot in the event health concerns about the vaccine lot emerge . we found that almost one - fourth of the service members' medical records that we reviewed did not document the fact that they had received a vaccine for tick - borne encephalitis . in addition , in its 2000 report , iom cited limited progress in medical recordkeeping for deployed active duty and reserve forces and emphasized the need for records of immunizations to be included in individual medical records . responding to our and others' recommendations to improve information on service members' deployments , in - theater medical encounters , and immunizations , dod has continued to revise and expand its policies relating to medical surveillance , and the system continues to evolve . in addition , in 2000 , dod released its force health protection plan , which presents its vision for protecting deployed forces . this vision emphasizes force fitness and health preparedness and improving the monitoring and surveillance of health threats in military operations . however , iom criticized dod's progress in implementing its medical surveillance program and the failure to implement several recommendations that iom had made . in addition , iom raised concerns about dod's ability to achieve the vision outlined in the force health protection plan . we have also reported that some of dod's programs designed to improve medical surveillance have not been fully implemented . iom's 2000 report presented the results of its assessment of dod's progress in implementing recommendations for improving medical surveillance made by iom and several others . iom stated that , although dod generally concurred with the findings of these groups , dod had made few concrete changes at the field level . for example , medical encounters in theater were still not always recorded in individuals' medical records , and the locations of service members during deployments were still not systematically documented or archived for future use . in addition , environmental and medical hazards were not yet well integrated in the information provided to commanders . the iom report notes that a major reason for this lack of progress is no single authority within dod has been assigned responsibility for the implementation of the recommendations and plans . iom said that because of the complexity of the tasks involved and the overlapping areas of responsibility involved , the single authority must rest with the secretary of defense . in its report , iom describes six strategies that in its view demand further emphasis and require greater efforts by dod: use a systematic process to prospectively evaluate non - battle - related risks associated with the activities and settings of deployments .