gao - 10-132t . washington , d.c.: october 7 , 2009 . we did not fully assess their use of the tools . the progress measures they demonstrated with one of the tools predicted that the completion dates would be missed . it also showed that the development team was underestimating the development effort required to achieve its iterative development goals . when we noted this , the presenters told us that the information in their management system was not current . until the bureau completes the detailed requirements for pbocs and prioritizes them and its pbocs development monitoring is relying on current and reliable progress measures , such as those the development team attempted to demonstrate to us for estimating the effort needed to complete remaining development , it will not be able to fully gauge the pbocs development progress and have reasonable assurance that pbocs will meet the program's needs . the bureau is continuing to examine how improvements will be made . the bureau has experienced delays in the development and testing of software that will play a key role along with pbocs in controlling and managing field data collection activity for the quality assurance programs of nrfu and update / enumerate . census marcs will help manage the process of identifying systematic or regular violations in the door - to - door data collection procedures . in particular , census marcs will be a tool to help target additional households needing reinterview as part of the quality assurance program for these two major census data collection operations in the field . therefore , fully developing and testing census marcs will be important to the successful conduct of the census . like other systems at the bureau , census marcs had to undergo design changes when the bureau made the april 2008 decision to switch to paper - based operations . detailed performance requirements — such as the information to be included on reports and its sources , including performance metrics , such as the number of users the system is designed to handle — are documented and were baselined in may 2009 . however , specifications have been added or clarified as software development has progressed and improvements have been suggested . software development has at times been slower than expected , leading to delays in some testing . test plans for census marcs software and interfaces are in place , having been documented in may 2009 . according to those plans , the bureau is in the second of three stages of testing census marcs and is scheduled to complete its final stage in december 2009 , almost 2 months before its first deployment for the update / enumerate operation . slower - than - expected development has delayed some parts of the second phase of testing , which will thus finish late according to the bureau , but bureau officials have indicated that they believe that delay can be absorbed into the schedule , and that the system will be delivered as scheduled in february 2010 . the compressed testing schedule leaves little time for additional delays in writing software or conducting tests .