( see fig . in september 1959 , the corps began work on the big bend dam , which is about 100 miles northwest of the fort randall dam on land belonging to both the crow creek sioux and lower brule sioux tribes . the big bend dam is 95 feet high and was completed in september 1966 . the reservoir behind the dam , known as lake sharpe , is 20 miles long . ( see fig . the crow creek sioux and lower brule sioux tribes reside on reservations located across the missouri river from one another in central south dakota . the crow creek reservation includes about 225,000 acres , 56 percent of which is owned by the tribe or individual indians . according to the 2000 census , the crow creek reservation has 2,199 residents , with the majority residing in the community of fort thompson . the lower brule reservation includes about 226,000 acres , 60 percent of which is owned by the tribe or individual indians . according to the 2000 census , the lower brule reservation has 1,355 residents , including several hundred who reside in the community of lower brule . both reservations include some non - indians , and both tribes have several hundred members who do not live on the reservations . the major economic activities for both the crow creek sioux and lower brule sioux tribes are cattle ranching and farming , and both tribes provide guided hunting for fowl and other game . each tribe also operates a casino and a hotel . both tribes are governed by a tribal council under their respective tribal constitutions , and each tribal council is led by a tribal chairman . the major employers on the reservations are the tribes , the casinos , the bureau of indian affairs , and the indian health service . in addition , the lower brule sioux tribe provides employment through the lower brule farm corporation , which is the nation's number one popcorn producer . see appendix ii for a map of the crow creek and lower brule reservations and the locations of the previously mentioned dams and reservoirs . the construction of the fort randall dam caused the flooding of more than 17,000 acres of crow creek and lower brule reservation land and the displacement of more than 100 tribal families . after these two tribes sustained major damage from this project , the construction of the big bend dam inundated over 20,000 additional acres of their reservations . this flooding displaced more families , some of whom had moved earlier as a result of flooding from the fort randall dam . ( see table 1. ) flooding from the installation of both dams resulted in the loss of valuable timber and pasture and forced families to move to less desirable land , which affected their way of life . during the early 1950s , the corps ; interior , through its missouri river basin investigations unit ( mrbi ) ; and the tribes — represented through tribal negotiating committees — developed their own estimates of the damages caused by the fort randall dam .