identifying alternatives . doe's order 413.3b requirements minimally meet best practices for identifying alternatives by partially or minimally meeting 2 of the 4 best practices in this category and not meeting the other 2 . doe requires that the project's customer , not the aoa team , explore a variety of alternatives and that the alternatives be defined clearly and concisely . doe's order 413.3b does not make any reference to including a status quo alternative in the aoa or pre - screening the list of identified alternatives for viability . analyzing alternatives . doe's order 413.3b requirements minimally meet best practices for analyzing alternatives by partially or minimally meeting 3 of the 8 best practices in this category and not meeting the other 5 . doe requires that life - cycle cost assumptions be included in the conceptual design report , which leaves room for interpretation because it could be interpreted as requiring the inclusion of life - cycle cost estimates for all alternatives or , as doe and nnsa officials said that they interpret this statement , as requiring a life - cycle cost estimate for only the selected alternative after completion of the aoa process . doe also requires that project risks and mitigation strategies are assessed . doe's order 413.3b does not make any reference to presenting life - cycle cost estimates in present value terms , quantifying benefits , explaining how measures of benefit support the mission need , or testing the sensitivity of cost and benefit estimates to risks and changes in key assumptions . selecting a preferred alternative . doe's order 413.3b requirements do not meet best practices for selecting a preferred alternative by minimally meeting 1 of the 4 best practices in this category and not meeting the other 3 . the best practice that doe minimally meets is having an entity independent of the aoa process reviewing the extent to which all best practices have been followed . order 413.3b contains four separate reviews that might be required during cd - 0 and cd - 1 processes depending on the amount of the project's cost estimate , but these reviews are limited to two aspects of the aoa process: the validation of ( 1 ) the mission need statement and ( 2 ) the cost estimates . in addition , one of these reviews is not an independent review because it is conducted by the program office , which is on the project's chain of command . table 5 lists these required reviews . doe's requirements do not meet the other best practices in this category because doe's order 413.3b does not make any reference to defining selection criteria based on the mission need ; weighting selection criteria to reflect the relative importance of each ; or comparing the alternatives considered , using net present value . table 6 and appendix iv summarize our assessment of doe's requirements . doe's order 413.3b aoa requirements combined with guidance partially meet best practices . therefore , doe does not have assurance that applying its requirements combined with its guidance may lead to reliable aoas .