( see app . i for additional information on these 16 systems. ) we also collected information on the remaining 39 system acquisitions under this program , which account for about 19 percent of faa's facilities and equipment account for fiscal year 2005 . ( see app . ii for additional information on these 39 systems. ) in addition , we reviewed past gao and dot ig reports . we interviewed faa officials within the recently created ato and collected and analyzed the documents they provided . we also interviewed officials with the aircraft owners and pilots association , air transport association , department of defense ( dod ) , national air traffic controllers association , and rtca . furthermore , we convened a panel of international aviation experts . our review did not focus on faa's efforts to modernize its airports and other agency facilities . we conducted our review from november 2004 through may 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( see app . iii for additional information on our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) the mission of faa , as a dot agency , is to provide the safest , most efficient aerospace system in the world . to fulfill its mission , faa must rely on an extensive use of technology , including many software - intensive systems . faa constantly relies on the adequacy and reliability of the nation's atc system , which comprises a vast network of radars ; automated data processing , navigation , and communications equipment ; and atc facilities . through this system , faa provides services such as controlling takeoffs and landings and managing the flow of traffic between airports . faa is organized into several staff support offices and five lines of business , which include airports , aviation safety , commercial space transportation , the office of security and hazardous materials , and the newly formed ato . the ato was formed in february 2004 to , among other things , improve the provision of air traffic services and accelerate modernization efforts . to create the ato , faa combined its research and acquisition and air traffic services into one performance - based organization , bringing together those who acquire systems and those who use them , respectively . the ato is led by faa's chief operating officer , consists of 10 service units , and has 36,000 of faa's 48,000 employees . the ato is the principal faa organizational unit responsible for acquiring atc systems through the use of the agency's acquisition management system ( ams ) . because faa formerly contended that some of its modernization problems were caused by federal acquisition regulations , congress enacted legislation in november 1995 that exempted the agency from most federal procurement laws and regulations and directed faa to develop and implement a new acquisition management system that would address the unique needs of the agency . in april 1996 , faa implemented ams . ii for additional information on these 39 systems. )