credible . a schedule should be horizontally and vertically integrated . a horizontally integrated schedule links products and outcomes with other associated sequenced activities , which helps verify that activities are arranged in the right order to achieve aggregated products or outcomes . a vertically integrated schedule ensures that the start and completion dates for activities are aligned with such dates on subsidiary schedules supporting tasks and subtasks . a schedule risk analysis should also be performed using statistical techniques to predict the level of confidence in meeting a program's completion date . we found that the gcss - army schedule was substantially credible . the schedule was substantially horizontally integrated , which means that outcomes were aligned with sequenced activities . the schedule was also substantially vertically integrated ; we were able to trace varying levels of activities and supporting subactivities . such mapping or alignment among subsidiary schedules enables different groups — such as government teams and contractors — to work to the same master schedule , and provides assurance that the representation of the schedule to different audiences is consistent and accurate . however , our analysis found that a schedule risk analysis had not been fully conducted . gcss - army program management officials provided documentation for a schedule risk analysis , but we noted that risk analyses were not performed for all supporting activities because program management officials stated that the program fielding schedule was not finalized at the time of the full deployment decision . if a schedule risk analysis is not conducted , program management cannot determine ( 1 ) the likelihood that the project completion date will occur , ( 2 ) how much schedule risk contingency is needed to provide an acceptable level of certainty for completion by a specific date , ( 3 ) risks most likely to delay the project , ( 4 ) how much contingency reserve each risk requires , and ( 5 ) the activities that are most likely to delay the project . controlled . a schedule should be continually updated using logic , durations , and actual progress to realistically forecast dates for program activities . a schedule narrative should accompany the updated schedule to provide decision makers and auditors a log of changes and their effect , if any , on the schedule time frame . the schedule should be analyzed continually for variances to determine when forecasted completion dates differ from planned dates . this analysis is especially important for those variations that affect activities identified as being in a program's critical path and that can affect a scheduled completion date . a baseline schedule should be used to manage the program scope , the time period for accomplishing it , and the required resources . we found that the gcss - army schedule was substantially controlled . gcss - army program management officials stated that they met weekly to discuss proposed schedule changes and update the schedule's progress , and management also prepared a schedule narrative document that contained a list of custom fields and assumptions .