according to the u.s . global change research program's fourth national climate assessment , the observed and projected effects of climate change include increases in the incidence of extremely high temperatures , heavy precipitation events , and high tide flooding events along the coastline . the assessment states that such effects are already being felt in the united states and are projected to intensify in the future . over many years , we and others , such as the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( national academies ) , have reported on climate change issues . we have recommended enhancing climate resilience as one strategy to help limit the federal government's fiscal exposure to disasters related to climate change . while enhancing climate resilience can create additional costs up front , it could also reduce potential future costs resulting from climate - related events . for example , in a 2018 report , we found that investments in disaster resilience reduced the damage and costs of subsequent severe weather events such as hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria . similarly , the congressional budget office reported in april 2019 that the federal government could reduce the damage caused by natural disasters by increasing the stringency of building codes , by for example , requiring elevated buildings or placing heating and cooling equipment on roofs in areas that are at risk of flooding from extreme weather events . dhs also recognized the importance of protecting critical infrastructure from these and other risks . in 2013 , it updated its national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) guidance for critical infrastructure owners and operators to emphasize security and resilience as the primary aim of homeland security planning efforts for critical infrastructure . as part of the nipp , dhs established a five step risk management framework for assessing critical infrastructure ( dhs critical infrastructure risk management framework ) and recommended that owners and operators of critical infrastructure , whether private or public , use the framework to identify priorities , articulate clear goals , mitigate risk , measure progress , and adapt based on feedback and the changing environment . you requested that we assess coast guard actions and processes to improve the resilience of its shore infrastructure to better manage future damage from extreme weather events . in this report , we ( 1 ) describe actions the coast guard has taken since 2005 to improve the resilience of its shore infrastructure to natural disasters , and ( 2 ) examine the extent to which coast guard processes to improve shore infrastructure resilience to natural disasters align with key steps from the dhs critical infrastructure risk management framework . for both objectives , we obtained data from the coast guard on the locations and replacement value of its infrastructure as well as the scope , methodology , and results of the shore infrastructure vulnerability assessment the coast guard conducted from 2015 through 2018 . we also reviewed our prior work on the coast guard's shore infrastructure where we examined its procurement , construction , and improvements backlog of projects from fiscal years 2012 through 2018 , as well as its depot - level maintenance backlog as of march 2018 .