see app . ii for information on our methodology for selecting experts and obtaining their views. ) the experts who completed our questionnaire strongly supported the damage prevention and leak detection and enhanced operations , controls , and monitoring categories of r&d as important areas for ops to fund . ninety - two percent of the experts ( 45 of 49 ) indicated that the damage prevention and leak detection category should receive high or very high funding priority . within this category , experts assigned the most scores of high or very high funding priority to the following types of r&d: improvements in the ability of in - line inspection tools , such as “smart pigs,” to detect damage and defects ( 39 of 49 ) , and the development of new technologies , such as the innovative application of ultrasonics , that can be used for inspecting pipelines ( 38 of 49 ) . several experts we interviewed highlighted the need to improve methods for detecting damage to pipelines , citing the fact that third - party damage is the leading cause of pipeline accidents . according to both liquid and gas pipeline associations , current inspection tools cannot reliably detect such damage to pipelines . eighty percent of the experts ( 39 of 49 ) indicated that the enhanced operations , controls , and monitoring category should receive high or very high funding priority . within this category , the type of r&d that received the most scores of high or very high funding priority ( 37 of 49 ) was the improvement of alternative inspection techniques , called direct assessment , to identify corrosion and other defects in pipelines that cannot accommodate in - line inspection devices known as smart pigs . this is a significant issue for natural gas pipelines because the majority of these pipelines cannot currently accommodate smart pigs , which are typically used to assess the condition of liquid pipelines . in contrast to the experts' views on the importance of these first two categories , less than one - third of the experts considered the remaining two categories of r&d , improved materials performance and arctic and offshore technologies , to be a high priority for ops to fund . thirty - one percent of the experts ( 15 of 49 ) assigned scores of high or very high funding priority to the improved materials performance category , and 20 percent ( 10 of 49 ) assigned such scores to the arctic and offshore technologies category . however , within the category of improved materials performance , about half ( 25 of 49 ) of the experts indicated that the type of r&d aimed at developing damage - and defect - resistant materials should receive high or very high funding priority . such materials could be used in the replacement of existing pipe or in the installation of new pipe . one researcher we interviewed noted that such materials are particularly important for the gas pipeline industry , which is expanding its infrastructure in response to increased demands for natural gas . one industry association estimates that the natural gas industry will need to install about 49,500 miles of transmission pipeline from 2001 through 2015 to meet increased demand in the united states .