our work confirmed these findings . we found that olo does not maintain standards for the timely issuance of examination reports . however , olo has recently developed draft customer service goals calling for sblc examination reports to be finalized within 90 days of receipt of a draft report from fca . however , as of august 2002 , none of the examination reports from fiscal year 2002 had been issued . according to the ig , because of the delays in finalizing the reports and sba's policy to delay any necessary enforcement actions until final reports are issued , two sblcs were allowed to continue operating in an unsafe and unsound manner , despite early identification of material weaknesses during fiscal year 2001 examinations . the effectiveness of any examination program is measured , to a large degree , on its ability to identify and promptly remedy unsafe and unsound conditions . by delaying reporting and remedial action , sba has significantly limited the effectiveness of its sblc oversight program . sba has been slow to implement recommendations from fca for improving the sblc examination program . in addition to examining sblcs , fca was asked by sba to provide recommendations for changes in the sblc program . each year fca provides its views in a comprehensive report . fca's september 1999 report made 15 recommendations , 12 of which sba agreed to implement . we reviewed the reports for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 , in which fca made additional recommendations with which sba agreed . yet , the 2001 report still lists 8 recommendations from the 1999 report and 2 from the 2000 report . sba officials explained that limited resources have contributed to the delay in implementation of many of these recommendations . assessing whether a borrower is eligible for 7 ( a ) assistance is difficult because the requirements are broad and variable , making a qualitative assessment of a lender's decision by a trained reviewer all the more important . sba regulations require a lender to attest to the borrower's demonstrated need for credit by determining that the desired credit is unavailable to the borrower on reasonable terms and conditions from nonfederal sources without sba assistance . these “credit elsewhere” provisions are particularly difficult to assess and must be determined prior to assessing other credit factors . sba guidance also requires preferred lenders to certify that credit is not otherwise available and to retain the explanation in the borrower file . sba does provide guidance on factors that may contribute to a borrower being unable to receive credit elsewhere . factors that lenders should consider include the following: the business requires a loan with a longer maturity than the lender's the requested loan exceeds either the lender's legal limit or policy limit , regarding amounts loaned to one customer ; the lender's liquidity depends upon selling the guaranteed portion of the loan on the secondary market ; the collateral does not meet the lender's policy requirements because of its uniqueness or low value ; the lender's policy normally does not allow loans to new ventures or businesses in the applicant's industry ; and any other factors relating to the credit that in the lender's opinion cannot be overcome except by receiving a guaranty .