however , this documentation was not always adequate . vulnerabilities that are not mitigated are referred to as residual risk . the designated approving authority considers the residual risks in determining whether to accredit a system . such risk assessments , as part of the requirement to reaccredit systems , are to be performed prior to a significant change in processing , but at least every 3 years . although dla categorized its systems in accordance with dod guidance , we found that it did not consistently assess the residual risk for 9 of the 10 systems we selected for review . for example: nine did not use the established baseline security controls to assess the three did not clearly identify the threats , vulnerabilities , and two did not state how the threats and vulnerabilities would affect the mission that the system supports ; one only referenced the security controls as the threat or vulnerability ; one had not been updated since 2001 . unless dla performs risk assessments consistently and assesses them against the appropriate set of controls , it will not have assurance that it has implemented appropriate controls that cost - effectively reduce risk to an acceptable level . fisma mandates that all federal employees and contractors who are involved in the use of agency information systems be provided training in information security awareness and that agency heads ensure that employees with significant information security responsibilities are provided sufficient training with respect to such responsibilities . an effective information security program should promote awareness and provide training so that employees who use computer resources in their day - to - day operations understand security risks and their roles in implementing related policies and controls to mitigate those risks . details of our scope and methodology are contained in appendix i . the dramatic expansion in computer interconnectivity and the rapid increase in the use of the internet are changing the way our government , the nation , and much of the world communicate and conduct business . because of the concern about attacks from individuals and groups , protecting the computer systems that support critical operations and infrastructures has never been more important . these concerns are well founded for a number of reasons , such as escalating threats of computer security incidents , the ease of obtaining and using hacking tools , the steady advances in the sophistication and effectiveness of attack technology , and the emergence of new and more destructive attacks . according to experts from government and industry , during the first quarter of 2005 , more than 600 new internet security vulnerabilities were discovered , thereby placing organizations that use the internet at risk . computer - supported federal operations are likewise at risk . ibm recently reported that there were over 54 million attacks against government computers from january 2005 to june 2005 . without proper safeguards , there is risk that individuals and groups with malicious intent may intrude into inadequately protected systems and use this access to obtain sensitive information , commit fraud , disrupt operations , or launch attacks against other computer systems and networks . how well federal agencies are addressing these risks is a topic of increasing interest in both congress and the executive branch .