corals . corals were also identified in the summary reports we reviewed as being among the calcifying species most at risk for harm from ocean acidification . ocean acidification may make it more difficult for some corals to grow their skeletons due to the reduced carbonate ion concentration and may affect coral reproduction . in addition , ocean acidification could potentially increase the rate at which coral skeletons dissolve and erode . however , not all coral species are expected to be negatively affected by ocean acidification , according to the reports we reviewed . and reduced ph: variable responses to ocean acidification at local scales ? ” journal of experimental marine biology and ecology , vol . could cause behavioral changes in some fish species by interfering with the functioning of sensory systems , such as the ability to smell . such changes in sensory systems could , in turn , produce behavioral changes that alter predator - prey interactions , among other things . for example , one study cited in two of the summary reports we reviewed found that clownfish larvae raised in an elevated carbon dioxide environment became attracted to the scent of predators rather than avoiding this odor , whereas clownfish larvae raised under carbon dioxide conditions similar to the current environment exhibited a strong avoidance to the odor of predators . for example , the reports we reviewed noted that marine macroalgae ( seaweeds ) are expected to display a diverse response to ocean acidification , in part because macroalgae include a mix of calcifying and noncalcifying species . since ocean acidification may reduce calcification abilities , the growth of calcifying macroalgae may be compromised under future ocean acidification conditions even if these species experience increased photosynthesis , whereas the growth of noncalcifying macroalgae is more likely to be enhanced . for instance , in a study cited in one of the reports we reviewed , researchers examined the abundance of calcifying versus noncalcifying species of macroalgae near volcanic vents in the ocean and found that the abundance of noncalcifying macroalgae increased as the ph declined , whereas the abundance of calcifying macroalgae decreased . similarly , another study found that juvenile damselfish and cardinalfish living in ocean waters with naturally high carbon dioxide levels — caused by nearby volcanic vents that emit carbon dioxide and lower the ph of surrounding waters — were attracted to predators' odors and exhibited bolder behavior than fish from ocean waters that were unaffected by the volcanic vents.behavioral changes cause species to be at a higher risk from predators , such changes could potentially lead to increased mortality rates for affected species . knowledge about the simultaneous effects of ocean acidification and these other stressors on species is incomplete , but these stressors could potentially exacerbate the effects of ocean acidification . for example , a recent study found that the combined effects of hypoxia and ocean acidification were more severe on early life stage bivalves than would be expected for either stressor on its own . reviewed stated that ocean acidification may compromise the resiliency of corals to the other threats they face , such as increased ocean temperatures , by , for example , causing some coral species to be more susceptible to coral bleaching .