is being forgiven . although irs receives nearly all 1099-c information returns electronically , the information cannot be used by itself to determine whether the cancelled debt is for a mortgage . irs instructions ask lenders to be as specific as possible when describing the type of debt being forgiven , but do not require lenders to uniformly identify the specific type of cancelled debt . 6. make irs's interactive tool for cancelled debt publicly available for the 2011 7. use irs's telephone software to obtain better information about why , if at all , taxpayers call irs with questions about forgiven mortgage debt ; 8. work with tax return preparation software companies to more fully support complex debt cancellation issues , particularly those related to forgiven mortgage debts ; and 9. either send notices to taxpayers when a lender files a 1099-c indicating a forgiven mortgage and the taxpayer does not file a form 982 or document that the costs of doing so would exceed the benefits . for example , lenders filing 1099-cs do not select from a list of types of forgiven debt when completing box 4 , which describes the type of debt being forgiven . because box 4 is an open - ended description , irs is unable to code or quantify cancelled debts by type . without being able to systematically identify whether the forgiven debt is for a mortgage , irs also cannot identify taxpayers who may be eligible for the provision , but are not taking advantage of it . little concrete information exists to measure the extent to which paid preparers and taxpayers experience difficulty adhering to mortgage debt forgiveness provisions due to the complexity of the law , irs forms , and instructions . however , anecdotal evidence suggests irs's forms and instructions and the related tax laws are difficult to understand . for example: irs officials acknowledged that the mortgage debt forgiveness law is complex . the national taxpayer advocate described form 982 as “technically challenging.” the center for responsible lending ( a nonprofit organization that seeks to eliminate abusive financial practices ) characterized form 982 as “a very complicated and difficult form. multiple types of cancelled debts are reported on form 982 by both individuals title of form 982 is difficult to understand – “reduction of tax attributes due to discharge of indebtedness ( and section 1082 basis adjustment ) ” ; form 982 consists of 23 lines with four pages of instructions and includes technical terms such as “basis reduction” and “debt discharged” ; and form 982 instructions attempt to explain a difficult - to - understand “ordering rule” that requires taxpayers to distinguish between qualified and nonqualified debt . revising form 982 instructions and publication 4681 , cancelled debts , foreclosures , repossessions , and abandonments , to explain the requirements for excluding forgiven mortgage debt . engaging in outreach to paid preparers and software providers on cancelled debt , including providing presentations and conducting focus groups at tax forums , and issuing press releases and other publications to clarify the tax treatment of forgiven mortgage debt . irs officials said that paid preparers and software providers have asked few questions about how forgiven mortgage debt should be treated for tax purposes .