the reasons vary . many banks may not see any synergies with insurance underwriting . additionally , it may be that many mergers are not economically efficient , the regulatory structure set up under glba may not be advantageous to these mergers , or , it is simply too soon to tell what the impact will be . further , a general slowdown occurred in merger and acquisition activity across the economy in the early 2000s , which may also be a contributing factor to the pace of industry conglomeration post glba . as we stated in our 2005 report , ilcs have significantly evolved from the small , limited purpose institutions that existed in the early 1900s . because of the significant recent growth and complexity of some ilcs , the industry has changed since being granted an exemption from consolidated supervision in 1987 , and some have expressed concerns that ilcs may have expanded beyond the original scope and purpose intended by congress . the vast majority of ilcs have corporate holding companies and affiliates and , as a result , are subject to similar risks from holding company and affiliate operations as banks and thrifts and their holding companies . however , unlike bank and thrift holding companies , most ilc holding companies are not subject to federal supervision on a consolidated basis . while fdic has supervisory authority over an insured ilc , it does not have the same authority to supervise ilc holding companies and affiliates as a consolidated supervisor . while the fdic's authority to assess the nature and effect of relationships between an ilc and its holding company and affiliates does not directly provide for the same range of examination authority , its cooperative working relationships with state supervisors and ilc holding company organizations , combined with its other bank regulatory powers , has allowed the fdic , under limited circumstances , to assess and address the risks to the insured institution and to achieve other results to protect the insurance fund against ilc - related risks . however , fdic's supervisory approach over ilc holding companies and affiliates has not been tested by a large ilc parent during periods of economic stress . moreover , we are concerned that insured institutions posing similar risks to the deposit insurance fund are not being overseen by bank supervisors that possess similar powers . because of these differences in supervision , we found that , from a regulatory standpoint , ilcs in a holding company structure may pose more risk of loss to the fund than other types of insured depository institutions in a holding company structure . to better ensure that supervisors of institutions with similar risks have similar authorities , congress should consider various options such as eliminating the current exclusion for ilcs and their holding companies from consolidated supervision , granting fdic similar examination and enforcement authority as a consolidated supervisor , or leaving the oversight responsibility of small , less complex ilcs with the fdic , and transferring oversight of large , more complex ilcs to a consolidated supervisor .