more focus on food safety . representatives of 5 stakeholder groups stated that the pilot projects allow fsis to focus more on food safety activities . for example , a representative of 1 stakeholder group stated that , in the pilot projects , fsis inspectors focused on carcass and verification activities designed to reduce the incidence of foodborne pathogens . potential job creation and increased production . representatives of 3 stakeholder groups stated that the pilot projects may result in potential job creation and increased production at plants . for example , a representative of 1 stakeholder group stated some plants that joined the pilot projects hired new workers , purchased additional equipment , and expanded their facilities . a representative of another stakeholder group stated that the pilot projects allowed plants to increase line speeds to process and sell a larger quantity of products . in young chicken plants participating in the pilot project , inspectors view the backs of the carcasses after the birds have been sorted and cleaned and generally do not touch the carcasses . pilot projects may decide to address a food safety hazard — such as fecal material — at a point on the slaughter line after the fsis inspector . for example , a representative of 1 stakeholder group raised a concern that by allowing plants in the pilot project to move the critical control point for preventing , eliminating , and controlling fecal material to a location on the slaughter line after the fsis inspector , the fsis inspector no longer had the ability to ensure that more the plant complied with the standard to control for that hazard.specifically , the fsis inspector positioned on the line could no longer cite the plant for noncompliance with fsis' zero - tolerance standard for fecal material because the plant would not yet have had an opportunity to control for this hazard . in response , fsis officials stated that there were more opportunities for identifying noncompliance with fecal standards for young poultry plants in the pilot projects because fsis inspectors positioned off the slaughter line perform more food safety activities than at plants not participating in the pilot projects . conflict of interest of plant personnel sorting carcasses . representatives from 4 stakeholder groups stated that plants' responsibility for sorting carcasses presents a conflict of interest . for example , a representative of 1 stakeholder group expressed concern that a plant's financial incentive to process the maximum number of birds conflicted with its responsibility to regulate itself and stated that if plant personnel continually removed birds from the line , those personnel might be taken off the line . fsis officials stated that plants' responsibility for sorting carcasses did not present a conflict of interest because fsis inspectors performed food safety activities , inspected each carcass , and verified the effectiveness of plant personnel's sorting activities . insufficient evidence of success of the pilot projects . representatives of 3 stakeholder groups stated that fsis does not have sufficient evidence to demonstrate the success of the pilot projects . fsis officials maintained , in its 2011 report evaluating the pilot project at young chicken plants , that the pilot project improved the safety of chicken products at participating plants .