epa agreed with the recommendation . also in july 2011 , we identified challenges epa faces in managing its laboratories and its related workforce . epa operates a laboratory enterprise consisting of 37 laboratories housed in 170 buildings and facilities located in 30 cities across the nation . we reported that epa had not fully addressed findings and recommendations of independent evaluations of its science activities dating back to 1992 and that its laboratory activities were largely uncoordinated . we also found that , consistent with our 2010 report on workforce planning , epa did not use a comprehensive planning process for managing its laboratories' workforce . specifically , we reported that epa did not have basic information on its laboratory workload and workforce , including demographic data on the number of federal and contract employees working in its laboratories . without such information , we reported , epa could not successfully undertake succession planning and management to help the organization adapt to meet emerging and future needs . because of the challenges identified in this report , we made recommendations to address workforce and workload planning decisions . epa generally agreed with our findings and recommendations . in september 2010 , we reported on epa's library network and found that epa had not completed a plan identifying an overall strategy for its libraries , implementation goals , or a timeline . epa had developed a draft strategic plan , but it did not describe how funding decisions were made . we reported that setting out details for such decisions , to ensure that they are informed and transparent , was especially important because of the decentralized nature of the library network . we recommended , among other things , that epa complete its strategic plan for the library network , including implementation goals and timelines . as part of this effort , we recommended that epa outline details for how funding decisions were to be made to ensure they are informed and transparent . for further information about this testimony , please contact david trimble at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or trimbled@gao.gov . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the third section of this statement is based on the results of our reviews of epa budget justifications conducted in 2010 and 2011 . the objective of our budget justification reviews is to provide pertinent and timely information that congress can use during budget deliberations by raising questions about specific programs in the president's proposed budget . we conducted the underlying performance audits in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we conducted our work in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that were relevant to our objectives . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work . we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for findings and conclusions in this product .