postassessment . the operator integrates and analyzes the information gathered during the three previous steps to determine whether additional excavations are necessary and how often pipeline segments should be reassessed . like other assessment methods , direct assessment has some limitations . for example , direct assessment has been proven reliable in detecting only one threat to the integrity of pipelines — external corrosion — while smart pigs can identify a wide range of threats to the integrity of pipelines , such as external corrosion , internal corrosion , and metal loss from external damage . state pipeline safety officials and some natural gas pipeline company representatives we spoke with are concerned about the limitations of direct assessment and believe that its use should be closely monitored . for example , the texas railroad commission's pipeline safety section requires intrastate pipeline operators to obtain approval from the office if they plan to use direct assessment to assess the safety of their pipelines . to obtain approval , the operators must present evidence at a hearing that this method is a valid choice for the circumstances of the pipeline and receive approval from the commission . ops officials explained that the agency has ongoing research activities focused on advancing the state of the art of direct assessment technology . agency officials expect to issue a proposed rule by the end of this summer for integrity management requirements for natural gas transmission pipeline operators , which will address how direct assessment should be treated as an assessment method . establishing an appropriate interval between the safety inspections that operators are required to make of gas pipelines is likely to be a complex and controversial challenge for ops because the agency must strike a balance between the existing industry standards , which allow intervals of up to 20 years , and shorter intervals . although the appropriate interval for individual pipelines could vary with their circumstances , ops is including a maximum interval in the requirements for integrity management programs to ensure that all operators conduct their inspections within a reasonable time frame . for hazardous liquid pipelines , ops requires inspections at least once every 5 years . for natural gas transmission pipelines , longer intervals could be justified for several reasons: pressure fluctuations , which can weaken a pipeline , are less frequent . thicker pipeline walls or operation at lower pressure is already required in high consequence areas under the existing uniform requirements . internal corrosion is less likely because natural gas contains a minimal amount of moisture . fewer storage facilities exist , therefore , interrupting the flow of gas to conduct inspections of the pipeline would have a greater impact on customers . because of these differences , the industry standards for natural gas pipeline integrity management programs ( published by the american society of mechanical engineers ) allow maximum inspection intervals from 5 years to 20 years , depending on the type of assessment method and test procedures used and the operating pressure of the pipeline .