appx . government auditing standards , gao - 03-673g ( rev . june 2003 ) ( commonly referred to as the “yellow book” ) , and omb bulletin no . 06- 03 , audit requirements for federal financial statements , ( aug. 23 , 2006 ) , require auditors to report on internal control as part of a federal agency financial - statement audit , including a description of reportable conditions and material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting . do these expenditures appear affordable and sustainable in the long term ? considering the performance of the current system relative to all these factors will be critical in deciding the future of intercity passenger rail , the federal role in intercity passenger rail , and how intercity passenger rail is structured , operated , and funded in the united states . reexamining the federal role and expenditures on intercity passenger rail service will be particularly difficult because of the divergent opinions about what this service should be . some advocate a greatly expanded federal role and the expansion of intercity passenger rail to relieve growing congestion on highways and airways and ( as energy prices increase ) to provide more fuel - efficient transport ; others believe the federal role should be scaled back , and that at least some federal operating subsidies should be eliminated . specific proposals vary — while one proposal would keep amtrak largely intact and provide more funding for capital and other improvements , another proposal would significantly restructure the management and accountability for intercity passenger rail with regional , state , and local entities making fundamental decisions about what intercity passenger rail services are justified and will receive public financial support . amtrak itself has proposed a new vision for intercity passenger rail service that would include a greater role for states in planning and developing passenger rail corridors . the acting president of amtrak told us that , in his view , amtrak itself is not a substitute for a national intercity passenger rail policy and that congress needs to develop such a policy . one of the primary difficulties in developing a clear national intercity passenger rail policy will be reconciling the wide diversity of views about what intercity passenger rail service should be and what it should achieve . to assist congress as it assesses the future of intercity passenger rail service in the u. s. , and the federal role in such service , you asked us to identify critical issues and options that congress should consider in deciding the future federal role . in response to your request , this report addresses the following: the characteristics of the current u.s. intercity passenger rail system and the potential benefits obtained from this system ; foreign experiences with passenger rail reform and observations for the how well the united states is positioned for reforming its intercity challenges the united states faces in overcoming obstacles to reform ; potential options for the future of intercity passenger rail service . to address these issues , we collected information on the characteristics of amtrak's routes , including ridership , costs , and the extent of public subsidies provided on routes .