this report responds to house report no . we will send copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security , fps director of dhs , the administrator of gsa , the secretary of va , the secretary of agriculture , the attorney general , and appropriate congressional committees . the 2010 standards provide in - depth descriptions of the roles of security officials who conduct and provide early risk assessments , the tenant agency , and the leasing agency ( eg , gsa ) and also define each entity's respective responsibilities for implementing the standards' decision - making process . for example , the 2010 standards state that: tenant agencies are the decision maker as to whether to fully mitigate or accept risk . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . doj is comprised of about 40 component agencies with wide - ranging missions , such as the u.s. attorneys' offices , drug enforcement agency ( dea ) , and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . the homeland security act of 2002 established dhs to centralize the federal government's efforts to prevent and mitigate terrorist attacks within the united states — including terrorism directed at federal facilities . under the act , fps was transferred from gsa to dhs . we reviewed our prior work on gsa and dhs's moa and analyzed how the 2010 standards were applicable to their renegotiation of the moa . doj leased approximately 3 million square feet . additionally , the 2010 standards emphasize documentation of the decision - making process — a cornerstone for performance measurement . for example , dea has its own in - house security officials who work with leasing officials to conduct risk assessments early in the leasing process . this helps leasing officials assess risk and obtain space specific to dea's security needs . leasing officials primarily rely on security officials to supply information on physical security requirements for federally leased space . additionally , va currently budgets $5 per net usable square foot for physical building security and sustainability requirements into all of its leases . at one site , va officials are in the early stages of identifying space needs for the relocation of a community - based outpatient clinic . va leasing officials and security officials , among others , are collaborating on decisions that integrate security with the function of the outpatient clinic that will help ensure funds are available to finance the security requirements . despite the in - house expertise of some tenant agencies , leasing officials sometimes do not have the information they need to allocate resources using a risk management approach before a lease is signed because early risk assessments are not conducted for all leased space . early risk assessments are absent for a significant portion of the gsa - acquired leased space portfolio because fps does not uniformly conduct these assessments for spaces under 10,000 square feet — which constitute 69 percent of all gsa leases ( see figure 2 ) .