iii ) . in the department's response , the deputy secretary of commerce agreed with our recommendations to conduct a thorough cost - benefit analysis , develop a rigorous evaluation plan with fully defined performance measures , and involve internal and external stakeholders . the response stated that our findings were included in the under secretary's recent review of the concept of operations prototype . on the basis of that review , the noaa administrator directed nws to cease all activities associated with the concept of operations prototype , and to undertake a comprehensive and analytical review to determine new and revised requirements for nws products and services . this review is expected to determine what , if any , changes are required . should nws decide to proceed with a new concept of operations , we believe that our recommendations to justify , evaluate , and involve stakeholders in any such changes would still be relevant and useful . in addition , commerce agreed with our recommendation to evaluate moving forward with technology upgrades to the awips processing system to allow weather forecast offices to switch to backup service more quickly during high - impact weather situations . the department stated that nws has established a proposal for improving its service backup capability , expects to approve requirements for the backup capability by september 2007 , and plans to deploy this capability by september 2008 . as we agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of commerce , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on our web site at www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the current status of and plans for the prototype , ( 2 ) evaluate whether the justification for the prototype is sufficient , ( 3 ) determine whether the national weather service's ( nws ) plans to evaluate the prototype are adequate , ( 4 ) evaluate whether nws is sufficiently involving stakeholders in its prototype plans , and ( 5 ) determine how nws plans to ensure that there will be no degradation of service during and after the prototype . to determine the current status of and plans for the prototype , we reviewed agency documentation on the planned prototype's goals , major components , and milestones , such as the corporate board's meeting minutes , the prototype plan , and the preprototype laboratory report . we also interviewed nws officials to obtain clarifications on agency plans .