ii ) . as part of its role in supporting uas integration , faa authorizes all uas operations ( access to the airspace as well as the aircraft itself ) in the national airspace system — military ; public ( academic institutions and , federal , state , and local governments including law enforcement organizations ) ; and civil ( non - government including commercial ) . depending on the type of user , public or civil , the process for accessing the airspace may be different ( see table 2 ) . currently , since a final rulemaking is not yet completed , faa only approves uass access to the national airspace on a case - by - case basis . faa provides this approval through three different means: public or civil certificates of waiver or authorization ( coa ) : a coa is an authorization , generally for up to 2 years , issued by the faa to an operator for a specific uas activity . public entities , including faa - designated test sites ( described in more detail later ) , and civil entities may apply for a coa to obtain authorized access to the airspace . faa has a goal to review and approve all coas within 60 days of being received . section 333 exemptions: since september 2014 , commercial entities have applied to faa for exemptions under section 333 of the 2012 act , special rules for certain unmanned aircraft systems . this exemption requires the secretary of transportation to determine if certain uass may operate safely in the national airspace system prior to the completion of uas rulemakings . special airworthiness certificates in the experimental category and the restricted category ( experimental certificate ) : civil entities , including commercial interests , may apply for experimental certificates , which may be used for research and development , commercial operations , training , or demonstrations by manufacturers . while faa has proceeded in planning for integration , foreign countries are also experiencing an increase in uas use and planning for integration , and some have begun to allow commercial entities to fly uass under limited circumstances . some countries have already established regulations for flying uass or formal processes for exemptions , while others have taken steps to completely ban all uas operations . while some countries have worked independently to integrate uas operations , some international groups , such as the icao , are working to harmonize uas regulations and standards across borders . faa has taken a number of steps to move toward further safe integration of uas in the national airspace in response to key requirements of the 2012 act . faa has developed the following planning documents: in november 2013 , faa issued the uas comprehensive plan identifying six high - level strategic goals for integrating uas into the national airspace , including routine public operation and routine civil operations . the comprehensive plan provides a phased - in approach for achieving these goals , which will initially focus on public uas operations , but ultimately will provide a framework for civil uas operations .