the impacts . dot expects to issue these projects' final reports in fall 2014 . these reports can be a tool , highlighting practices that transit agencies could adopt for their systems . the reports are intended to inform climate change efforts of participating transit agencies and provide information on the efforts' applicability to other transit agencies . in addition , in 2011 , fta issued a study , flooded bus barns and buckled rails , which it has disseminated to the nation's transit agencies . this study focused on how transit agencies could incorporate climate change adaptation into their systems and activities — such as asset management systems , planning , and emergency response — and provided examples of strategies . in 2011 and 2012 , fta offered workshops for transit agencies on how they can adapt their transit systems so that they are more resilient to the long - term effects of climate change . further , fta has held training sessions and workshops for transit agencies to share lessons learned and best practices . fta has also funded the transportation research board ( trb ) to undertake a research project entitled improving the resiliency of transit systems threatened by natural disaster . objectives include reviewing current research and developing guidelines , strategies and tools for public transit agencies to make their systems more resilient to natural disasters and climatic events . trb plans to issue all this work by mid - 2016 . in addition to workshops , webinars , and other workgroups sponsored by the american public transportation associations , fta has held as part of the climate change adaptation initiative , fta provides guidance and training that can aid transit agencies in preparing for , responding to and mitigating the potential impact of disasters , thereby improving their systems' resilience to such disasters . for example , built - in redundancy: fta encourages transit agencies to “build in” redundancy in , among other things , infrastructure , communications , and power supplies . redundancy of assets and operations within a transit system may help a system respond to catastrophic events by allowing transit agencies to fall back to secondary options rather than ceasing service if a portion of the system is damaged during a disaster . mutual aid agreements: fta recommends — in its guidance — that transit agencies develop mutual aid agreements or memorandums of understanding ( mou ) with other relevant organizations and agencies in the same or adjoining communities or areas to , among other things , formalize and authorize assistance during emergencies , so that they can quickly recover and resume operations following a disaster . capital investment decision making: map - 21 develop a transit asset - management system that would , in part , assist transit agencies in prioritizing rehabilitation and replacement investments . these rehabilitation and replacement projects may help transit agencies mitigate the impacts of catastrophic events by incorporating strategies such as elevating assets above flood levels . fta's october 2013 advance notice of proposed rulemaking on a national transit asset - management system would require transit agencies to , among other things , develop transit asset - management plans to help them make these investment decisions .