available anywhere . an sba program administered by a cdc . commercial lender required . available anywhere . a direct loan from an sba intermediary . rural areas with a population of less than 50,000 . generally negotiated between the commercial lending institution and the borrower . available only in rural areas with a population of less than 25,000 . rural areas with populations of 2,500 or less are given priority . the rural utility cooperatives provide loans to small businesses . available only in rural areas with a population of less than 50,000 . requires 75% minimum applicant match for grants , and 50% maximum project level for guaranteed loans . 6124 , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , ( the 2008 farm bill ) became law on june 18 , 2008 . the 2008 farm bill contains 15 titles covering , among other things , support for commodity crops , horticulture and livestock production , conservation , nutrition , trade and food aid , agricultural research , farm credit , rural development , energy , forestry , and other related programs . the 2008 farm bill guides most federal farm and food policies through fiscal year 2012 . section 6028 of the 2008 farm bill requires the secretary of agriculture to establish a new rural collaborative investment program to support comprehensive regional investment strategies for achieving rural competitiveness . the purpose of the program is to provide rural areas with a flexible investment vehicle , allowing for local control with federal oversight , assistance , and accountability ; provide rural areas with incentives and resources to develop and implement comprehensive strategies for achieving regional competitiveness , innovation , and prosperity ; foster multisector collaborations that will optimize the asset - based competitive advantages of rural regions , with particular emphasis on innovation , entrepreneurship , and the creation of quality jobs ; foster collaborations necessary to provide the professional technical expertise , institutional capacity , and economies of scale that are essential for the long - term competitiveness of rural regions ; and better use usda and other federal , state , and local governmental resources , and to leverage those resources with private , nonprofit , and philanthropic investments , in order to achieve measurable community and economic prosperity , growth , and sustainability . subject to change annually . minimum for both grants is $10,000 . maximum loan is $10,000,000 . long - term financing of real estate and equipment . working capital , inventory , and small equipment . working capital , hard asset acquisition , real estate , equipment and limited refinancing . up to 50% of loan . new and existing business , equipment purchase , or lease and working capital . business start - up or expansion projects that create rural jobs . grants may only establish a revolving loan fund . purchase equipment , construction energy audits , feasibility studies , business plans , and permit / professional service fees . renewable energy systems & energy efficiency improvements guaranteed loan and grant program 10 – 45 business days . 10 – 60 business days depending on scope of project . subject to in - state loan approval limit . the agencies used to collaborate .