corporate information management . the corporate information management ( cim ) , initiative , begun in 1989 , was expected to save billions of dollars by streamlining operations and implementing standard information systems . cim was expected to reform all dod's functional areas - - including finance , procurement , material management , and human resources - - through consolidating , standardizing , and integrating information systems . dod also expected cim to replace approximately 2,000 duplicative systems . over the years , we have made numerous recommendations to improve cim's management , but these recommendations were largely not addressed . instead , dod spent billions of dollars with little sound analytical justification . we reported in 1997,that 8 years after beginning cim , and spending about $20 billion on the initiative , expected savings had yet to materialize . the initiative was eventually abandoned . defense business operations fund . in october 1991 , dod established a new entity , the defense business operations fund by consolidating nine existing industrial and stock funds and five other activities operated throughout dod . through this consolidation , the fund was intended to bring greater visibility and management to the overall cost of carrying out certain critical dod business operations . however , from its inception , the fund was plagued by management problems . in 1996 , dod announced the fund's elimination . in its place , dod established four working capital funds . history is a good teacher . to solve the problems of today , it is instructive to look to the past . the problems with the department's financial management operations date back decades , and previous attempts at reform have largely proven unsuccessful . these problems adversely affect dod's ability to control costs , ensure basic accountability , anticipate future costs and claims on the budget ( such as for health care , weapon systems , and environmental liabilities ) , measure performance , maintain funds control , prevent fraud , and address pressing management issues . in this regard , i would like to briefly highlight three of our recent products that exemplify the adverse impact of dod's reliance on fundamentally flawed financial management systems and processes and a weak overall internal control environment . in a testimony before your subcommittee last week , we highlighted continuing problems with internal controls over approximately $64 million in fiscal year 2001 purchase card transactions involving two navy activities . consistent with our testimony last july on fiscal year 2000 purchase card transactions at these locations , our follow - up review demonstrated that continuing control problems left these navy activities vulnerable to fraudulent , improper , and abusive purchases and theft and misuse of government property . we are currently auditing purchase card usage across the department . in a testimony before your subcommittee in july 2001 , we reported that dod did not have adequate systems , controls , and managerial attention to ensure that $2.7 billion of adjustments to closed appropriations were legal and otherwise proper . our review of $2.2 billion of these adjustments found that about $615 million of them should not have been made , including about $146 million that were illegal .