years . state dot and usdot officials offered several reasons for infrequently updating the long - range statewide transportation plan: ( 1 ) two state dots reported they have insufficient staff to address the long - range statewide transportation plan among their other planning priorities ; ( 2 ) one state dot reported that it had updated its plan , but the plan was not adopted by the state's transportation commission and legislature ; and ( 3 ) usdot officials said some states issue what they referred to as policy - based plans that are not updated regularly because they do not include projects and therefore do not change much over time . usdot officials suggested that if state dots were required to include project - specific information in their plans , plans would likely be updated more regularly . state dot and fhwa officials reported that periodic updates to the long - range statewide transportation plan offer important benefits to state dots and the public , including setting realistic public expectations for what the state dot can expect to accomplish . for example , officials with one state dot that we interviewed told us that it recently completed an update of the state's plan issued in 2002 . the update was prompted by a new governor and a review of the existing plan , which found that the plan included approximately $20 to $30 billion worth of projects that had not been funded or implemented because of insufficient revenues . in updating the plan , the state dot focused its public outreach and consultations with local officials on setting more realistic expectations for future investments . the recently issued , updated plan includes a funding scenario based on current , flat revenue expectations , and identifies four key corridors in the state where improvements could be made , subject to additional revenues . similarly , fhwa officials that we interviewed told us that , although a state's long - range plan is vital for setting and communicating the state's future transportation goals and strategies , the process of updating the long - range plan is equally important to the state dot as the final document itself . officials noted that states that take a committed approach to planning — such as by continually monitoring system performance , conducting ongoing research , and reaching out to the public and stakeholders — increase the likelihood of developing a plan that stakeholders will accept . while regularly updating the long - range statewide transportation plan has inherent benefits , infrequently updating it presents several risks: infrequent updates limit usdot's ability to determine whether states are using federal planning funds effectively to address long - range planning needs . state dots receive substantial amounts of funding from fhwa and fta for statewide planning , including funds for developing long - range statewide transportation plans . for example , in fiscal year 2009 , fhwa provided $682 million in spr funds to state dots to support their planning activities , including developing long - range statewide transportation plans and stips and annually collecting and reporting pavement condition and other data to fhwa's hpms program .