efficiency costs . irs's enforcement activities can alter the tax avoidance and evasion behavior of individuals , which affects the efficiency of resource allocation in the economy . if an enforcement activity increases the aggregate costs of tax avoidance and evasion , economic efficiency and the average standard of living is reduced . conversely , if the activity reduces such aggregate costs , economic efficiency would improve . compliance burden . irs's enforcement activities can affect the costs that taxpayers incur when complying with the tax law by increasing the time and money that they spend preparing their returns and interacting with irs . equity costs . irs's resource allocation can affect how exam - related compliance burdens are distributed across different groups of taxpayers and also how the risk of noncompliant taxpayers getting penalized for evasion varies across groups . it is difficult to know what society as a whole would view as an equitable distribution of these burdens and risks ; therefore it is difficult to assess the equity effects of any particular reallocation of resources . the only component of social costs that can be reliably measured is the irs budget cost , and it is difficult to attribute even that cost to very specific enforcement activities ( such as specific audits ) . consequently , irs planners cannot consider all types of social costs in a rigorously quantitative manner when making their resource allocation decisions . economists use the term “margin” when referring to the scopes of the various types of decisions that individuals make . 3 and table 1 in app . ii. ) we estimated that the average direct revenue yield per dollar of cost across all correspondence exams of individual taxpayers was $7 . in contrast , the average direct yield per dollar for field exams of individual taxpayers was $1.8 . we also estimated that the direct revenue per dollar of cost was about $22 for aur cases and about $31 for asfr cases . exams that are more complicated than average are likely to require both more time to complete and more highly skilled examiners , who cost more per hour . in estimating the results for field exams in figure 3 , we incorporated differences in the amount of time spent on each field exam , which is recorded in the eris database , but we did not account for differences in hourly costs relating to varying skill levels of examiners across cases because the data available for that purpose were limited.nevertheless , to test the potential sensitivity of our results to this missing factor , we estimated an alternative set of field exam results , using an eris data element that reflects the expected difficulty of an exam . we also tested the effect of differences in locality pay for field examiners in different geographic locations . ( see app . i for further details. ) we found that adjusting for skill levels likely reduces some of the differences in direct revenue per dollar of cost across field exam categories ; adjusting for location has a negligible effect . ( see table 3 in app . ii. )