see id . § 901 ( g ) . this responsibility is to be carried out in accordance with department of defense directive 4140.25 , dod management policy for energy commodities and related services ( apr . this directive was reissued as department of defense instruction 4140.25 on june 25 , 2015. alternative fuels are obtained using the dod's standard fuel alternative fuels for operational purposes are purchased when cost - competitive with traditional fuels and when qualified as compatible with existing equipment and infrastructure ; and fuel systems are qualified to use available commercial - type fuels , including alternative fuels . dod's alternative fuels policy for operational platforms lists the department's primary alternative fuels goal as , among other things , furthering flexibility of military operations through the ability to use multiple , reliable fuel sources . for the department's investment in alternative fuels , to include: increasing dod's resilience against strategic supply disruptions , reducing the effect of petroleum price volatility , and increasing fuel options for operational commanders . this policy indicates alternative fuels can serve as a mechanism for mitigating anti - access / area denial effects , and for enabling flexibility in supply chain logistics . the policy stresses that the desired end - state of investments in alternative fuels is operational military readiness and battlespace effectiveness . additionally , it articulates considerations dod's operational energy strategy and related operational energy implementation plan identify the high - level goal of expanding dod's operational energy supply options . promoting the development of alternative fuels — in the form of testing and approving them for use by existing military platforms , and helping to catalyze a competitive biofuels industry — constitutes one means for achieving this goal . department of defense alternative fuels policy for operational platforms ( july 5 , 2012 ) . each of the three military departments has energy guidance documents that address alternative energy or alternative fuels . two of dod's military departments — the navy and the air force — have also established usage goals for alternative fuels . the department of the navy's guidance sets a goal of deriving 50 percent of total energy consumption from alternative sources — including alternative fuels — by 2020 , which , according to navy estimates , would require using about 336 million gallons of alternative fuels ( both naval distillate and jet fuels ) annually by 2020 . in addition to setting quantitative goals , the guidance established a goal of demonstrating ( which the department of the navy completed in july 2012 ) and deploying ( by 2016 ) the great green fleet — that is , ships and aircraft fueled by alternative fuels and other alternative energy sources or utilizing other energy conservation measures . the department of the air force's guidance includes a goal of increasing , to 50 percent of total consumption , the use of cost - competitive drop - in alternative jet fuel blends for non - contingency operations by 2025 .