, cable franchise ) dummy variables . the level of observation in our model is a cable franchise . many of the variables we used to estimate our model , such as each cable franchise's price , came directly from fcc's survey of franchises . have you considered purchasing internet access service through a satellite provider ? this appendix describes our econometric model of cable - satellite competition . specifically , we discuss ( 1 ) the conceptual development of the model , ( 2 ) the data sources used for the model , ( 3 ) the merger of various data sources into a single data set , ( 4 ) the descriptive statistics for variables included in the model , ( 5 ) the estimation methodology and results , and ( 6 ) alternative specifications . in response to a congressional request , we developed an econometric model to examine the influence of satellite companies' provision of local broadcast channels , along with other factors , on cable prices and dbs penetration rates in a large sample of cable franchise areas in 2001 . this request represented a follow - up to a previous report that we issued which analyzed the impact of dbs penetration rates on cable prices . relying on our previous model , the existing empirical literature , and our assessment of the current subscription video marketplace , we developed a model that included a variety of explanatory variables that were included in our previous model , as well as other models , but that also extended those analyses by adding new variables to account for the recent provision of local broadcast channels by dbs companies as an important factor in competition between cable and dbs companies . to examine the influence of the dbs companies' provision of local channels on cable prices and dbs penetration rates , we employed a model that is based on the subscription video market , rather than on the narrower market for cable television . in 2001 , the national market share of cable systems ( as measured by subscribership ) in what we call the subscription video market was about 78 percent , and the share of the dbs providers was about 18 percent . the remaining 4 percent of subscription television households obtained service through other means such as terrestrial wireless systems , satellite master antenna television systems ( usually used in apartment buildings or other multiple - dwelling units ) , open video systems , and large “c - band” home satellite dishes . cable providers and satellite providers can be regarded as “differentiated,” not so much because they use different technologies but because the services they provide are perceived as different by subscribers and because these varied providers face different laws and regulations that influence their cost structures as well as the type of product they provide . for example , in 2001 , satellite subscribers in only 42 television markets could receive local broadcast signals from either dbs provider . also , cable companies must pay local franchise fees and are required to provide capacity for public , educational , and government channels .