i for more medicaid data. ) according to our analysis of inpatient care data from a large private health insurance company , from birth through early childhood , children with down syndrome were hospitalized , on average , nearly twice as often and stayed twice as long as children without down syndrome . the differences in the average number of hospitalizations and the average length of stay were most pronounced in the first years of life and diminished by age 4 . ( see figs . for example , for children with down syndrome under 1 year of age , the average number of hospitalizations was 2.2 , and the average length of stay was 7.6 days . in contrast , for children of the same age without down syndrome , the average number of hospitalizations was 1.1 , and the average length of stay was 2.1 days . in an older group — children 4 years of age — children with and without down syndrome were hospitalized about the same number of times , an average of 1.3 times for children with down syndrome and an average of 1.2 times for children without , and for about the same length of time , an average of 2.0 days for children with down syndrome and 1.7 days for children without . our review of inpatient claims data showed some differences in the types of hospitalizations for children with down syndrome compared to other children . for example , the most common type of hospitalization for children with down syndrome under 1 year of age was cardiothoracic - related surgery ; 6 percent of children under 1 year of age with down syndrome had this hospitalization type , compared to 0.03 percent of other children . furthermore , while other hospitalization types — such as bronchitis and asthma , pneumonia , and ear issues — appeared as common types of hospitalizations in both groups , the percentage of children with down syndrome hospitalized for these reasons was higher . the medicaid data that we reviewed from seven states also show that children from birth through age 4 with down syndrome who were enrolled in medicaid in 2007 generally had more inpatient care . children with down syndrome had more hospitalizations ( in six of the seven states ) and longer hospital stays to address their special health care needs than other children of the same age . for example , among the seven states , children with down syndrome had 1.0 to 7.4 times more hospitalizations and 1.5 to 10.2 times longer stays than children without down syndrome . ( see app . i for more medicaid data. ) the survey was designed to be representative of the entire u.s. population . we reviewed relevant data reliability materials and performed data reliability checks , such as examining the data for missing values and obvious errors , to test the internal consistency and reliability of the data . after taking these steps , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted this performance audit from november 2009 to october 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .