fema . fema administers the public assistance program in partnership with puerto rico and makes public assistance grant funding available to puerto rico . puerto rico central office of recovery , reconstruction and resilience . puerto rico was required , as a condition to receiving public assistance grant funding , to establish an oversight authority supported by third - party experts and provide centralized oversight over recovery funds . in october 2017 , the governor of puerto rico established the central office of recovery , reconstruction , and resilience ( central recovery office ) to be the recipient for all public assistance funding consistent with the conditions provided in amendment 5 to the president's disaster declaration . the central recovery office is a non - federal entity that provides a subaward to an applicant to carry out part of the federal program . as a recipient of federal funds , the central recovery office must oversee subrecipients to ensure that they are aware of and comply with federal regulations . according to central recovery office officials , the office was also established to ensure coordination with fema across the numerous partners in recovery . commonwealth agencies , local entities , and private non - profits . puerto rico's agencies , such as the department of housing , and public corporations , such as the puerto rico electric power authority , act as subrecipients . specifically , they work with fema and the central recovery office to identify , develop , and implement public assistance projects . local entities , including puerto rico's 78 municipalities and eligible private non - profits that provide critical services , are also subrecipients of fema public assistance funding . as subrecipients , these entities receive subawards from the central recovery office to carry out work under the public assistance program . according to a november 2017 amendment to puerto rico's major disaster declaration , fema must obligate all large project funding for public assistance permanent work through alternative procedures due to the extraordinary level of infrastructure damage caused by hurricane maria , as well as puerto rico's difficult financial position . to develop projects under the public assistance program , fema and puerto rico officials are to collaborate to identify and document the damage caused by a disaster to a particular facility . these officials are to then use the damage description to formulate the scope of work — or activities required to fix the identified damage — as well as the estimated cost of these activities . under the standard public assistance program , fema will fund the actual cost of a large project , and will increase or reduce the amount of funding based on the cost of completed eligible work . in contrast , in puerto rico , the alternative procedures require that the central recovery office and subrecipients work collaboratively with fema to develop a fixed cost estimate . according to fema officials , once this fixed cost estimate is agreed to and obligated , subrecipients have flexibility within that fixed cost estimate to rebuild in the manner that they find most appropriate . subrecipients could do the actual work used to develop the fixed cost estimate , or they could put funds towards another fema approved project .