matters considered . in performing the review , the comptroller general is required to gather information on and consider the following matters: the time that requirements documents take to receive approval through jcids . the quality of cost information considered in jcids and the extent of its consideration . the term requirements document is defined in the statute as “a document produced in jcids that is provided for an acquisition program to guide the subsequent development , production , and testing of the program and that — ( a ) justifies the need for a materiel approach , or an approach that is a combination of materiel and non - materiel , to satisfy one or more specific capability gaps ; ( b ) details the information necessary to develop an increment of militarily useful , logistically supportable , and technically mature capability , including key performance parameters ; or ( c ) identifies production attributes required for a single increment of a program.” see § 862 ( c ) ( 2 ) . the extent to which jcids establishes a meaningful level of priority for requirements . the extent to which jcids is considering trade - offs between cost , schedule , and performance objectives . the quality of information on sustainment considered in jcids and the extent to which sustainment information is considered . an evaluation of the advantages and disadvantages of designating a commander of a unified combatant command for each requirements document for which the joint requirements oversight council ( jroc ) is the validation authority to provide a joint evaluation task force to participate in a materiel solution and to provide input to the analysis of alternatives ; participate in testing ( including limited user tests and prototype testing ) ; provide input on a concept of operations and doctrine ; provide end user feedback to the resource sponsor ; and participate , through the combatant commander concerned , in any alteration of the requirement for such solution . section 862 also provided definitions for jcids , requirements document , requirements creep , and materiel solution . tables 3 through 12 contain our response to each of the requirements mandated by the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 . the provision mandating our report defined the jcids process by referring to the jcids guidance in effect from march 2009 through december 2011 . accordingly , our response to the mandated elements as presented in this appendix generally focuses on jcids under that guidance . however , we also provide some information relating to jcids as described in the revised guidance issued in january 2012 . in addition , our assessments generally focused on those programs that were determined to be jroc - interest , or those that were designated as major defense acquisition programs or major automated information systems and capabilities that have a potentially significant impact on interoperability in allied and coalition operations . generally , these programs have greater costs or are more complex than smaller programs , and therefore provide an opportunity to assess the effectiveness of more aspects of the jcids process .