however , there are some exceptions . for example , one performance goal involves developing and testing – on the ground and in space — competing technologies for human missions beyond low earth orbit in cooperation with international partners . one indicator related to this performance goal involves organizing and conducting an “international forum” at which preliminary concepts , plans , and technology options for future human / robotic exploration and development of space would be reviewed . however , the indicator does not address the testing of competing technologies . also , nasa has a performance goal to engage the commercial community and encourage non - nasa investment in commercial space research by meeting at least three of four performance indicators , but the plan does not state why all of the supporting indicators will not be achieved . since the selected key outcome of deploying and operating the space station safely and cost effectively is not included in nasa's fiscal year 2002 performance plan as a specific strategic goal or objective , we based our assessment of it on a related strategic objective in the plan — to operate the space station to advance science , exploration , engineering , and commerce . nasa set four annual performance goals for this outcome for fiscal year 2002 . we had noted that while many of nasa's annual performance targets were new each year , there was no stated basis for the changes . in its fiscal year 2002 performance plan , nasa has formulated new annual performance goals and has changed many of its strategic goals and objectives without including the reasons for doing so . we continue to believe that providing the rationale for these changes will clarify the reasons for the new goals and measures and augment the value of performance trend analyses . also , the plan does not indicate whether or not achieving any specific goals would be negatively affected by external factors . however , like the prior plan , the fiscal year 2002 plan states that successful execution of nasa's strategic goals and objectives depends on receipt of its requested appropriations , as well as provision of funds , materials , or services , that have been committed to the cooperative agreements or partnerships which are referenced in the performance plan . we have identified two governmentwide high - risk areas: strategic human capital management and information security . regarding strategic human capital management , nasa's fiscal year 2002 performance plan contains a strategic objective and annual performance goals and indicators directly related to human capital . concerning information security , nasa's performance plan contains a strategic objective , an annual performance goal , and indicators directly related to this management challenge . the plan states that safety and security is one of four areas on which nasa's information technology planning is focused . the fiscal year 2002 plan is an improvement over the 2001 plan , which did not include quantifiable measures for improving information security . however , the plan's performance goals do not fully respond to the recommendations we made in 1999 when we reported that the agency lacked an effective agencywide security program .