types of documents to be retained . the program closure plans for the armenia , ghana , and mali compacts specified that the respective partner governments would retain all compact - related information . the program closure plan for the benin compact did not list the types of documents that the government would retain but stated that the mca would provide further information in the document retention schedule . the program closure plan for the el salvador compact stated that the government , through a contractor , would retain original files related to personnel , projects , procurement , finance , monitoring and evaluation , and studies . document retention schedule . the mcas' document retention schedules also varied . armenia and benin did not provide document retention schedules . el salvador provided a comprehensive listing , by category , of all documents to be retained ; however , it provided this list for the purposes of our review in april 2013 , after the compact end date . ghana's schedule , submitted after the compact end date but within the 3- month compact closure period , specified document types to be retained . according to the plans: armenia will store the documents at three different government agencies: the state archives , the ministry of transport and communications , and the foreign financing projects management center ( a foreign donor coordination unit ) ; benin will store the documents at its national archives ; el salvador has made a contractor responsible for the safekeeping of compact - related files and documents ; ghana's mca will continue as a foreign donor coordination unit after compact closure and will retain all mcc documents ; and mali will store compact - related information at the office of the secretary general of the president ( the “office of the segal” ) , which was the office of the principal government representative under the compact . maintenance of compact management records . according to mcc's policy and procedures for compact - related federal recordkeeping , all information defined as a compact management record must be maintained at mcc headquarters during compact development and implementation and after compact closure . records and information management is important in all government agencies , in part because it helps ensure that the agencies remain transparent and accountable to the public and allows for congressional and executive branch oversight . mcc established a records management program that , according to nara , is comparable to many others in the federal government . yet , as an international aid agency providing bilateral assistance to partner governments , mcc's situation regarding records and information management is atypical: much of the information related to its core business is generated by the partner governments' accountable entities , the mcas . in accordance with nara guidelines , mcc has established policies and guidelines stipulating that the mcas must provide it with the compact management information it classifies as u.s. federal records . however , because its policies do not call for , and it does not conduct , systematic reviews of the records it receives , mcc cannot be sure that it is meeting the federal records act's requirement that it preserve all records documenting its functions , activities , decisions , and other important transactions .