a second cause is that some of the guidance is inconsistent . for example , air force materiel command instruction 21-113 , “contract maintenance program for depot maintenance activity group ( dmag ) ,” states that work must be started on at least one asset during the fiscal year that an order is placed . however , the air force logistics command supplement to air force regulation 170-8 states that the contract depot maintenance activity group has until december 31 to get a customer's requirement in a contract ( january 31 for some requirements ) . accordingly , one regulation requires work to be started on an asset before the fiscal year - end , but another regulation does not even require that the contract be awarded until the end of the calendar year . as shown in table 2 , we could not determine the cause of the problem for about $191 million of unfilled orders that were scheduled to be completed prior to september 30 , 2000 , but were not . we could not make this determination because production management specialists did not have documentation on the status of the repairs needed to make this determination . the two primary reasons that information was not available were that production management specialists ( 1 ) did not have required documentation for many of the contracts that were transferred from the sacramento and san antonio air logistics centers to two of the three remaining centers in october 2000 and ( 2 ) did not maintain information on the status of software projects . in october 2000 , the sacramento and san antonio air logistics centers discontinued their contract depot maintenance operations and transferred management responsibility for their contracts to the three remaining centers ( warner robins , oklahoma city , and ogden ) . as part of this management transfer , the sacramento and san antonio centers shipped contract files and related customer order files to the three centers that assumed responsibility for the work . however , in many instances , two of the centers that assumed responsibility for the work either did not receive the required files or received incomplete files . additionally , for the files they did receive , they found numerous and significant discrepancies between the information in the contract files and related customer files . discrepancies were also found between these manual records and the data in the production and cost system . as a result of these problems , two of the three remaining centers have had to reconstruct many of the files and reconcile numerous discrepancies . because the air force does not know the status of these contracts , ( 1 ) it is potentially vulnerable to paying for goods and services not received or performed and is subject to fraud , waste , and abuse , ( 2 ) work may have been accomplished but not recorded in the system , or ( 3 ) the air force may not be taking prompt and appropriate action to resolve problems that are delaying the completion of the work .