gao - 08-1086 . washington , d.c.: september 22 , 2008 . secure border initiative: observations on deployment challenges . gao - 08-1141t . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2008 . in addition to the actions addressed in the report , what actions may be necessary to address northern border security vulnerabilities ? in conducting our work , we reviewed the dhs report structure and content against requirements in the 9 / 11 act . we also reviewed whether the dhs report content was complete and consistent with information provided in its key management documents including strategic plans , performance and accountability reports , budget requests , and other documentation produced by relevant dhs agencies . we interviewed dhs officials from cbp , ice , and uscg located at headquarters and detroit , michigan , who had roles and responsibilities for northern border security to obtain their perspectives on documented information . for this reason , we also interviewed department of justice ( doj ) officials with the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , which has national responsibility for drug enforcement , and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , which has national responsibility for terrorism . we selected detroit , michigan , among cbp's office of border patrol's ( obp ) eight northern border sectors based on factors including relative threat and vulnerabilities , priority for resources , and demonstration site for new technology . our observations from the detroit sector cannot be generalized across the other seven sectors ; however , we believe that they were sufficient for the purposes of this report in comparing the headquarters and field perspective . while in detroit , we also spoke with state and canadian officials involved in northern border security to obtain their perspectives on northern border security threats and vulnerabilities , dhs actions to address them , and the effectiveness of binational and national partnerships . to determine actions that could help address northern border security vulnerabilities , we reviewed whether the information reported by dhs reflected a strategic risk – informed approach as required in the homeland security act of 2002 and homeland security presidential directive 7 ( hspd - 7 ) . we also identified report recommendations for strengthening national border security from past gao evaluations from fiscal years 2005 through 2008 that when fully implemented have potential to help address northern border vulnerabilities . we conducted this performance audit from june 2008 through november 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . the united states shares nearly 4,000 miles of border with canada stretching from the pacific to the atlantic coasts , and the u.s. - canadian border is considered to be the world's longest open border between two nations . there is a great deal of trade and travel across this border , and approximately 90 percent of canada's population lives within 100 miles of the u.s. border .