we are not making any recommendations in this report . each of these 7 contracts was for it or support services . to identify the factors contracting officials considered when deciding to use lpta procedures on these 7 contracts , we obtained and analyzed relevant contract documents including the acquisition plan , solicitation , and source selection decision memorandum . in addition , we interviewed contracting officials for each of these 7 contracts . we also reviewed applicable sections of the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , the dfars , and dod's march 2016 source selection guide . finally , we assessed contract documents and interviewed contracting officials to determine whether they were aware of the new policy of section 813 . because the criteria in section 813 have not yet been incorporated into the dfars , we also determined the extent to which criteria similar to those in section 813 had been considered in the decision to use lpta procedures in the 7 procurements we examined . we conducted this performance audit from march 2017 through november 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the far establishes several types of source selection procedures , which include the tradeoff procedure on one end of the best value continuum and lpta procedures on the other end . ( see fig . dod may elect to use the lpta procedure where the requirement is clearly defined and the risk of unsuccessful contract performance is minimal . fourteen of these were in the ammunition category . we did not identify any contracts in the clothing category . we reviewed descriptions of what was purchased under these 14 awards and also requested that dod identify any contracts that included the purchase of personal protective equipment . the army , navy , and air force confirmed that none of the 14 contracts in the ammunition category included personal protective equipment . the remaining 133 contracts identified were for services coded as it or support services , which include knowledge - based professional services . because fpds - ng does not identify the source selection procedure used to award contracts , we provided contract numbers for these 133 contracts to the army , navy , and air force and requested that these departments identify contracts for which lpta procedures were used , and provide supporting documentation for that determination . of the 133 contracts valued at $10 million and over , dod officials responded to us that 9 were awarded through lpta source selection procedures and 124 were not . to assess the accuracy of lpta status information provided by dod , we reviewed 36 of the 75 unique solicitations for the 124 contracts that dod identified as non - lpta . we could not find information for 39 solicitations , likely because these solicitations were no longer available through online portals , and so for these solicitations , we could not verify the source selection method .