mystery spills . the fosc is unable to determine the source of these spills , so a responsible party cannot be identified . s.s. montebello . on december 23 , 1941 , the s.s. montebello was torpedoed by a japanese submarine off the coast of cambria , california , sinking the 8,272 ton tanker carrying 3 million gallons of crude oil that may still have been in its holds . on december 2 , 2010 , the fosc determined that there was a substantial threat of a discharge of oil in part due to the reported volume of oil carried by the vessel and the potential damage that a release might have on the marine ecosystem in the surrounding area . in september 2011 , the coast guard awarded a contract to global diving and salvage , inc. to conduct a survey to determine the intensity and immediacy ( of the threat ) and to develop further courses of action for removal if necessary . the survey was conducted in october 2011 , at which time a unified command led by the coast guard and california department of fish and game's office of spill prevention and response assessed cargo and fuel tanks of the sunken ship . the unified command determined that there was no substantial oil threat from the s.s. montebello to california waters and shorelines . the cost of the project was $3.2 million . these removal costs were not billed because there was not a responsible party . during fiscal years fiscal years 2011 through 2013 , npfc made about $16 million ( $2.3 million in damage claims and $13.9 million in oil removal ) in disbursements for mystery spills . these disbursements are for mystery spills that occurred during fiscal years 2004 through 2013 . uncertainties exist regarding the primary revenue source of the fund , an 8-cent per - barrel tax on petroleum products . this tax is set to expire in 2017 . if the fund's primary source of revenue expires , this could affect future oil spill response and may increase risk to the federal government . as discussed above , the fund at times is unable to bill and collect reimbursements from responsible parties . the fund enables the coast guard and epa to respond to oil spills as the fund can be used to cover expenses associated with mitigating the threat of an oil spill as well as the costs associated with containment , countermeasures , and cleanup and disposal activities . during fiscal year 2014 , npfc reported 408 oil spills ; the coast guard and epa responded to 324 of these . in the remaining 84 cases , the claimants sustained damages and directly submitted claims to npfc . the per - barrel tax was increased and extended by a provision of the energy improvement and extension act of 2008 , through december 31 , 2017 . the act also eliminated a restriction on the growth of the balance of the fund beyond $2.7 billion .