see figure 5 . as shown in figure 6 , the 3 results from the tests we purchased from web site 4 showed that the dna sample from the female revealed “faulty methylation patterns” which may lead to “an above average risk for developing cardiac aging , brain aging , and cancer” and “sub - optimal glycation,” which can lead to diabetes and increased body fat . these same results also stated that the dna displayed a “significant risk of developing the age related conditions associated with elevated levels of dna damage.” results from the tests we purchased from web site 4 also contain predictions that the dna sample from the female shows relatively low risk for developing some diseases . for example , all the results from these tests note that the dna displayed a “below average risk” of developing “the age related” conditions associated with “oxidation” and “inflammation.” according to the results , oxidation can lead to diabetes , heart disorders , and alzheimer's disease and inflammation can lead to diabetes , heart failure , and fragile bones . despite the implication that these predictions are based on the dna submitted , none of the results we received contained scientific support to assist the consumer in evaluating their credibility , and there is no evidence to suggest that the tests have been evaluated by independent experts . furthermore , the genetic experts we spoke with informed us that even though it is possible to make a definitive diagnosis of disease by looking at certain genes , none of the predictions contained in any of the results we received can be medically proven at this time . according to the experts , cystic fibrosis and huntington's disease are examples of illnesses that can be diagnosed based on an analysis of only one gene . in contrast , the diseases and conditions identified in the test results we received involve complex bodily processes . according to the experts we spoke with , although genes are known to be associated with these processes , scientists have very limited understanding about the functional significance of any particular gene , how it interacts with other genes , and the role of environmental factors in causing disease . with regard to the specific predictions of heart disease , diabetes , osteoporosis , cancer , altered ability to metabolize cholesterol , and reduced ability to clear toxins , the experts informed us that research proving a genetic connection to the development of these conditions is at a very early stage and there are many issues yet to be resolved . in addition , the experts we spoke with also stated that the types of tests we purchased cannot be used to confirm that an individual has a reduced risk of developing these types of diseases . therefore , the claims that a person may be at “below average risk” of developing certain “age related conditions” based on the analysis of a few genetic variants is misleading . there could be other genetic variants not tested for that confer risk or other environmental factors not assessed . even if the predictions could be medically proven , the way the results are presented — using ambiguous language — renders them meaningless .