, in tax havens ) . washington , d.c.: june 12 , 2007 . this option would facilitate the creation of onshore transactions , potentially reducing transactions costs and allowing for increased regulatory oversight . tax treatment of catastrophe bonds would be similar to the treatment received by issuers of asset - backed or mortgage - backed securities that , for example , are generally not subject to tax on the income from underlying assets , which is passed on to investors . it would also be mandatory for all homeowners . this type of option offers several potential advantages . first , a mandatory all - perils policy , by definition , would encourage broad participation in natural catastrophe insurance programs . moreover , including all american homeowners in natural catastrophe coverage could help reduce the number of americans needing postdisaster payments and possibly limit the federal government's exposure . an all - perils policy would also eliminate existing gaps in coverage and remove the uncertainty many homeowners face in determining whether certain perils are covered and by whom — an issue that was spotlighted after hurricane katrina , when disputes emerged between private insurers and homeowners over the extent of the insurers' obligations to cover certain damages . finally , because it would be mandatory and broad - based , an all - perils policy could lessen the problem of adverse selection that is often identified as the reason that some types of catastrophes , such as flooding , are considered to be uninsurable . this type of policy would spread risks geographically and potentially would make the policy more affordable than other options . however , this option is not without its disadvantages . first , it is unclear how private markets would be encouraged to underwrite all risks . second , a mandatory all - perils policy might not be a cost - effective solution for the federal government , because it could create affordability concerns for low - income residents in certain areas and might require targeted government subsidies . if they did not sufficiently reduce postevent disaster relief , these subsidies could increase costs to taxpayers . third , an all - perils policy would undoubtedly be more expensive than current homeowner policy premiums in some regions of the country . as a result , at least during the transition , it could lead to complaints about higher premium costs from residents of catastrophe - prone areas . moreover , homeowners in relatively low - risk areas could wind up subsidizing the costs of insurance for those living in high - risk areas . fourth , enforcement would be extremely challenging , as we have seen with mandatory flood insurance in communities in designated floodplains . finally , this policy option faces opposition from the private insurance industry , in part because of concerns about state insurance regulators impeding private insurers' ability to charge premiums that reflect the actual risk of loss in catastrophe - prone areas . private insurers have also traditionally opposed all - perils policies because of the difficulty of pricing flood and earthquake coverage . one insurance company has said that an all - perils policy would cause rates to skyrocket and could cause many insurers to abandon the homeowners insurance market .