magazine inspection . storage magazines must be inspected at least every 7 days . this inspection need not be an inventory , but it must be sufficient to determine if there has been an unauthorized entry or attempted entry into the magazines , or unauthorized removal of the magazine contents . magazine inventory . also , while atf licensing regulations require explosives licensees to conduct a physical inventory at least annually , there is no similar inventory requirement in the storage regulations applicable to other persons who store explosives . according to atf data , the number of reported state and local government thefts is relatively small when compared with the total number of thefts that have occurred nationwide . for example , during a recent 3-year period ( january 2002 — february 2005 ) , 9 thefts involving state and local government storage facilities were reported . what security oversight measures are in place at selected state and local government storage facilities to ensure the safe and secure storage of explosives ? two of the 9 incidents occurred in california ( including last year's theft that was mentioned previously ) , and no other state reported more than one incident . to address these questions , we obtained information from u.s. government agencies , law enforcement associations , industry groups , and other experts on explosives . more specifically , to obtain the perspectives of u.s. government agencies on their efforts to regulate and oversee state and local government explosives storage facilities , and to obtain information on the numbers of explosives thefts and law enforcement bomb squads , we contacted officials from the department of justice ( doj ) , atf , and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . to obtain other public sector and private sector perspectives on the security oversight of explosives storage facilities , we contacted associations representing state and local law enforcement agencies and the explosives industry . to determine what selected states and localities are doing to provide oversight of explosives storage in state and local government sector facilities , we met with officials at 14 state and local government entities ( 13 law enforcement bomb squads and one public university ) in four states — colorado , pennsylvania , tennessee , and texas — and observed their explosives storage facilities . we selected these four states to obtain a geographic spread ( west , northeast , southeast , and southwest ) across the country , based on ( 1 ) the number of explosives licensees and reported explosives thefts , ( 2 ) the number of law enforcement bomb squads , and ( 3 ) the location of universities with mining programs . our criteria for identifying the type of security oversight measures in place included existing federal explosives storage laws and regulations and security guidelines issued by the explosives industry . what authority does atf have to regulate and oversee state and local government explosives storage facilities and how does this compare with its authority over private sector storage facilities ? what information does atf collect regarding the locations and types and amounts of explosives stored at state and local government explosives storage facilities and how does this compare with information collected about private sector storage facilities ?