additional copies of reports are $2 each . a check or money order should be made out to the superintendent of documents . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . agency officials gave two reasons for this decision . first , they noted that fns is not responsible for ensuring that children participating in wic are actually immunized , but rather those children needing immunizations are referred to doctors as appropriate . second , they pointed out that immunization data provided by cdc on wic participants did not permit fns to measure the extent to which wic health referrals actually contributed to the immunization of wic child participants . fns officials noted that the problems they faced in finding a measure that appropriately linked wic health referral activities to a desired outcome are not unique to the health referral services . they pointed out that it is difficult to measure the impact of any of the individual services wic offers because , among other things , other variables also influence the behavior these services are intended to promote . for example , there are several other state and local programs that , like wic , are aimed at improving health through nutrition education . separating the effects of these efforts from those of the wic program is difficult at best . fns employs a large number of program output measures to gauge performance of the wic nutritional services it offers . generally , these measures are used to examine the types and quantities of services the state agencies provide and whether the agencies are in compliance with grant expenditure and other program requirements . ( a detailed list of output measures can be found in app . to monitor these measures , fns depends in large part on data provided by state and local agencies through routine financial reports , its biennial characteristics study , and fns' management evaluations of state and local agency operations . of these monitoring methods , fns relies heavily on its management evaluations to measure state and local wic agency compliance with program requirements . however , weaknesses in the procedures for conducting evaluations of wic agencies reduce its value as a performance oversight tool . fns recently completed an examination of its practices for conducting management evaluations for all fns programs , including wic , and made several recommendations for improvements . fns uses several financial reports submitted by state agencies to measure the extent to which state and local agencies meet expenditure requirements . the principal measure is whether states are adhering to a legislatively established requirement for spending on nutrition education activities and breastfeeding promotion and support activities . combined spending for these two activities must equal at least one - sixth of the nsa expenditures plus a target amount for breastfeeding promotion and support established by fns at the beginning of each fiscal year . the addendum to the wic program annual closeout report , prepared by each state , serves as the primary source of data on the state's compliance with this expenditure requirement . the breastfeeding initiation rate includes only wic infants who are breastfed at some time .