this approach is inefficient and costly . fragmentation has remained problematic since our earlier reviews partly due to pressing demands and the availability of supplemental funds . while disa and the air force are taking steps to transform the commercial satcom management and acquisition process , these efforts will be hampered by the lack of complete spending and usage data as well as resistance from dod entities that prefer the current acquisition process so they can individually control their own satcom . utilizing strategic sourcing best practices for dod's use of commercial and military satellite bandwidth , beginning with robust analyses of spending and better enforcement of centralized management , would increase chances of success for dod's improvement efforts . in order to improve dod's procurement of satcom , we are making the following three recommendations . to address dod's fragmented procurement of commercial satcom , to better position dod to identify needs , manage and acquire commercial satcom , and to address the incomplete data on commercial satcom spending and demand , we recommend that the secretary of defense , in coordination with the joint chiefs , u.s. strategic command , combatant commands , military services , and disa , enforce current policy requiring disa to acquire all commercial satcom for dod . to better leverage dod's buying power and help dod understand its military and commercial satcom spending , and enable dod to reform its commercial satcom acquisition and management processes , we recommend that the secretary of defense , in conjunction with the air force and disa , complement the pathfinder efforts by conducting the following: a spend analysis that identifies procurement inefficiencies and opportunities to consolidate purchases . specifically , the analysis should identify how much is being spent for which services , who the buyers are , who the suppliers are , duplicative contracts and opportunities to aggregate demand , and where the opportunities are for leveraged buying and other tactics to save money and improve performance . an assessment of whether further centralization of military and commercial satcom procurement , such as the identification of a single focal point within dod to decide how to meet the overall demand or a central procurement knowledge focal point , could further save money and improve performance . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . in its written comments , dod concurred with all three of our recommendations to improve the department's procurement of satcom . the comments are reprinted in appendix i . in concurring with our first recommendation , dod stated that enforcing current policy requiring disa to procure all commercial satcom for dod makes the best use of taxpayer dollars and supports acquisitions that are fully compliant with applicable laws and regulations . dod also stated that recently the army , air force , and navy have been working with disa on their follow - on commercial satcom contracts and once these contracts are awarded , the department expects the percentage of total commercial satcom acquired by disa to be approximately 90 percent .