accountability . the life - cycle cost for a decennial census spans a decade , and decisions made early in the decade about the next decennial census guide the research , investments , and tests carried out throughout the entire 10-year period . institutionalizing accountability over an extended period may help long - term decennial initiatives provide meaningful and sustainable results . what was the intended goal ? have significant changes occurred that affect its purpose ? does it use prevailing leading practices ? our december 2010 report noted potential focus areas for such a reexamination . these include better leveraging of innovations in technology and social media to more fully engage census stakeholders and the general public on census issues ; and reaching agreement on a set of criteria that could be used to weigh the trade - offs associated with the need for high levels of accuracy on the one hand , and the increasing cost of achieving that accuracy on the other hand . one of the areas that the bureau would like to leverage for the 2020 census is the use of an internet response option . the bureau provided the opportunity for respondents to complete the 2000 census short forms on the internet — protected by a 22-digit identification number . according to bureau officials , for the 2000 census , about 60,000 short forms were completed via the internet . the bureau originally planned to include the internet in the 2010 census , but then decided not to , because the benefits gained through processing less paper , as well as improvements to the quality of data , were outweighed by the cost of developing the internet response option and the risks associated with the security of census data . to examine its use for the 2020 decennial census , the bureau will need to review many of those same issues and address the following questions: to what extent could an internet response option lower data collection costs for the bureau ? to what extent could an internet response option increase the quality of data collected ? to what extent does the use of an internet response option pose a risk to the confidentiality of census data ? moreover , given that the research , development , and testing efforts for 2020 will play out over the decade - long census life - cycle , what is the optimal way to ensure continuity and accountability for an enterprise that takes years to complete and extends beyond the tenure of many elected political leaders ? the director of the census bureau can , in concept , provide a measure of continuity , but of the 11 census directors who have served since july 1969 ( not including the current director ) , the average tenure was around 3 years , and only 1 director has served more than 5 years . further , in the decade leading up to the 2010 census , the bureau was led by 4 different directors and several acting directors . the turnover in the bureau's chief executive officer position makes it difficult to develop and sustain efforts that foster change , produce results , mitigate risks , and control costs over the long term .