number of modernized submarines . in 2009 , the navy reported reductions of: 17 percent in program development and production costs , 13 percent in operating and support costs , and 80 percent in development time — developing and installing the sonar on the first ship 2 years after the program started , as opposed to a decade or more . the navy also used an open system architecture to upgrade its virginia - class submarine program to counteract the effects of obsolescence and ensure the submarines have the capability to respond quickly to changing missions and threats . in 2010 the navy reported $96 million in cost avoidance since the upgrade program's inception in 2001 . in addition , in 2008 , congress directed dod to develop a strategy for commonality and standardization in uas ground control station architecture . as part of a joint service / industry effort , the uas task force developed a common , open ground control station architecture , called the uas control segment ( ucs ) , which can be integrated into any uas program's ground control station . the ucs architecture enables the reuse of individual software applications across different types of ground control stations , such as those for weather or vehicle status , thus eliminating the need to redevelop the applications for each new ground control station . the first version of the ucs architecture was released in 2010 , and the ability to share software applications was first made available to uas programs in january 2013 . osd and service officials point to several benefits from using ucs software . for example , one task force official stated that a demonstration of the ucs architecture in 2010 showed that the average time to integrate 10 applications was less than 2 weeks ; significantly shorter than the traditional integration time for a new ground control station capability , which can be about 1 year . dod also estimates that competition for software applications can eliminate up to 90 percent of their cost . in addition , the architecture will enable rapid integration of new aircraft sensors , weapons , and other payloads . the services vary in the extent to which they have adopted open systems for dod's 10 largest uas , with the navy leading the other services . three of the navy's four current and planned uas programs incorporated , or are planning to incorporate , an open systems approach from the start of development in key components of their uas — the air vehicle , ground control station , and payloads ( i.e. , cameras and radar sensors ) . conversely , none of the army or air force uas programs incorporated the approach from the start of development because , according to army and air force officials , legacy uas programs tried to take advantage of commercial off - the - shelf technology or began as technology demonstration programs . several of these programs ( 4 of 6 ) are starting to incorporate the approach , primarily for the ground control station of fielded aircraft during planned upgrades .