hhs did not have any written procedures . we found that education , usda , and dol consistently applied omb's public access and feedback requirements for significant guidance , while hhs did not . we also found opportunities for agencies to improve access to their guidance . in april 2015 , we found that subagencies used different strategies to disseminate guidance and all relied primarily on posting the guidance on their websites . usda , dol , and education posted their significant guidance on a departmental website as directed by omb ; at that time hhs did not , but has since posted such a page on its website in response to our recommendation . on their websites , agencies used several approaches — including organizing guidance by audience or topic and highlighting new or outdated guidance — to facilitate access . however , we identified factors that hindered online access , including long lists of guidance and documents dispersed among multiple web pages . opportunities also exist for agencies to use the web metrics they already collect to improve how guidance can be accessed . all agencies and their subagencies that we studied collected web metrics , and many used them to evaluate online guidance dissemination . however , many of these subagencies did not use metrics to improve how they disseminated guidance through their websites . beyond their websites , subagencies found other ways to disseminate and obtain feedback on issued guidance , including focus groups , surveys , and direct feedback from the public at conferences , webinars , and from monitoring visits . for guidance that does not meet omb's definition of significant , we found opportunities for agencies to improve guidance development , review , evaluation , and dissemination processes by strengthening their adherence to internal controls . wider adoption of these practices could better ensure that agencies have internal controls in place to promote quality and consistency of their guidance development processes , and to ensure that guidance policies , processes , and practices achieve desired results , and prevent and detect errors . we recommended that agencies strengthen their application of internal controls to guidance practices by adopting practices , such as: determining appropriate level of review to manage risk: most subagencies in our study managed risk by determining appropriate levels of review . agencies face multiple risks when going through the guidance production process , such as legal challenges that issued guidance is asserting binding requirements without having gone through the rulemaking process . agencies can manage risk by involving agency management in decisions to initiate guidance , prioritize among proposed guidance , and determine the appropriate level of review prior to issuance . maintaining written policies and procedures for the production of nonsignificant guidance: most subagencies we reviewed did not have written procedures for the production of non - significant guidance . written procedures for guidance initiation , development , and review help ensure that actions are taken to address risks and enforce management's directives when an agency is developing regulatory guidance . documented procedures are an important internal control activity to help ensure that officials understand how to adequately review guidance before issuance .