staff expertise . some of the u.s. companies in our selection ( 7 of 15 ) reported issues related to faa staff expertise . these issues cited included limited experience on the part of faa staff in dispute resolution as well as limited expertise related to intellectual property and export control laws . for example , representatives of three companies told us that faa staff sometimes lack technical knowledge due to having little or no experience with some aviation products , while a representative of another company argued that increased training for faa staff in dispute resolution could be very helpful , especially for disputes involving different cultural norms . in another example , representatives of two companies described situations in which faa staff were ready to share information with an fcaa that the applicant company considered proprietary , until the company objected and other solutions were found . in january 2015 , we found that faa has initiatives under way aimed at improving its process for supporting foreign approvals that may help address some of the challenges raised by the u.s. companies in our review . specifically , faa's current efforts to increase the efficiency of its foreign approval process could help address reported challenges related to faa's process and its limited staff and financial resources . for example , faa is planning to address its resource limitations by focusing on improving the efficiency of its process with such actions as increasing international activities to support u.s. interests in global aviation , and by implementing its 2018 strategic plan , which includes the possibility of allocating more resources to strengthening international relationships . faa has also initiated efforts to improve the robustness of its data on foreign approvals , to further improve the efficiency of its process for supporting these approvals . with more complete data , faa aims to track performance metrics , such as average timeframes for foreign approvals , and to better evaluate its relationships with bilateral partners . as we concluded in january 2015 , to its credit , faa has made some progress in addressing the certification process and regulatory consistency committees' recommendations , as well as in taking steps to address challenges faced by u.s. aviation companies in obtaining foreign it will be critically important for faa to follow approvals of their products.through with its current and planned initiatives to increase the efficiency and consistency of its certification processes , and its efforts to address identified challenges faced by u.s. companies in obtaining foreign approvals . given the importance of u.s. aviation exports to the overall u.s. economy , forecasts for continued growth of aviation exports , and the expected increase in faa's workload over the next decade , it is essential that faa undertake these initiatives to ensure it can meet industry's future needs . it is also important that faa continue to demonstrate that it is making progress on these important initiatives , as well as enhance its data tracking for monitoring the effectiveness of its bilateral agreements and partnerships .