we disagree . we believe three cases we highlight in examples in the report do meet the definition of improper payments under ipia . ipia defines improper payments as any payment that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount ( including overpayments and underpayments ) under statutory , contractual , administrative , or other legally applicable requirements . this definition would include any payment made to an ineligible recipient either directly or through an entity . our examples are consistent with this definition . furthermore , officials in fsa's field offices agreed with our findings and told us they intend to recover the payments . for the remaining farm program payments identified in the report , we continue to believe that the potential exists for improper payments because of the lack of fsa management controls and the complexity of some of the farming operations involved . under current circumstances , fsa cannot be assured that millions of dollars in farm program payments are going to those who met eligibility requirements and thus should have received these payments . fsa's written comments are presented in appendix ii . fsa also provided us with suggested technical corrections , which we have incorporated into this report , as appropriate . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of agriculture ; the director , omb ; and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or shamesl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . at the request of the ranking member of the senate committee on finance , we reviewed the farm service agency's ( fsa ) implementation of payment eligibility provisions to identify improper payments to estates and deceased individuals . specifically , we evaluated the extent to which fsa ( 1 ) follows its regulations that are intended to provide reasonable assurance that farm program payments go only to eligible estates and ( 2 ) makes improper payments to deceased individuals . to determine how well fsa field offices carry out rules that prohibit payments to ineligible recipients , we reviewed guidance that fsa field offices use to determine farm program payment eligibility , including relevant statutes and regulations and agency policy , including the fsa handbook on payment limitations , 1-pl ( revision 1 ) . we reviewed relevant studies prepared by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) office of inspector general and the congressional research service , as well as our own past reports . we also reviewed usda's fy 2006 performance and accountability report to understand its assessment of internal controls for its farm programs .