budgeting . doe and nnsa do not have a formal order defining how doe's and nnsa's budgeting requirements would be combined into a practicable process . as a result , according to nnsa officials , nnsa has had to follow both doe's and nnsa's budgeting processes . procurement . although doe made a commitment to issuing nnsa - specific acquisition procedures in its january 2000 implementation plan for nnsa , it has not done so . according to doe office of general counsel officials , the department subsequently determined that the proposed nnsa - specific procedures were inconsistent with federal acquisition regulations , the nnsa act , and the january 2000 implementation plan . according to both doe and nnsa officials , since 2004 the department has blocked nnsa's efforts to issue its own acquisition regulations . as a result , according to nnsa officials , nnsa has had to issue a series of deviations to the doe acquisition regulations to carry out nnsa acquisition policies in areas such as negotiating a more effective contract fee arrangement and awarding additional years to a contract's term . information technology . the doe and nnsa offices of the chief information officer have yet to reach agreement on a doe order drafted in september 2004 to define the relationship between the two offices . according to doe and nnsa officials , the draft order has not been made final because of doe's concern that the nnsa office would have too great a role in tasks that should be performed by doe's chief information officer . absent this order , certain problems have developed . for example , according to a nnsa official , the two information offices verbally agreed that all direction given to nnsa contractors about information technology must come from nnsa , not doe . however , because this guidance was not formally documented , nnsa contractors continue to receive dual requests for data from both the doe and nnsa offices of the chief information officer . according to an nnsa official , these dual requests have continually forced the contractors to rank the requests . management and administration . doe and nnsa do not have a formal process for obtaining doe approval of nnsa - specific procedures , although the congress authorized the administrator to establish nnsa - specific policies unless disapproved by the secretary of energy . however , doe's office of general counsel has delayed the development of this process because it believes that nnsa should not be treated any differently than any other departmental element and should thus be limited to using the flexibility already available in doe orders . as a result , nnsa's efforts to promulgate administration - specific procedures have become entangled in a cumbersome review process with no certainty that closure of that review will occur , according to nnsa officials . nnsa officials cited instances in which the administration has attempted to promulgate nnsa - specific procurement regulations and policies on the roles of the doe and nnsa offices of the chief information officer . in these instances , the review bogged down because a formal process for establishing nnsa - specific procedures did not exist . safeguards and security .