we have added this information to our report . dod noted that we did not analyze the planned actions in opm's strategic plan . in several areas , we have outlined actions that opm is currently taking to address some of the hiring challenges , including some areas specific to actions indicated in opm's strategic plan . ( see app . iii for details on our scope and methodology. ) the cornerstone of federal hiring is its merit basis . congress has retained the principle of appointment by merit throughout its various amendments and compilations of civil service laws . under this system , opm posts continuously open vacancy announcements for multiple grade levels . as part of a contract with census , opm receives the applications and maintains an inventory of applicants on its system and can rate and rank the applicants and generate a job certificate for census within 3 days of the request for a certificate . since there is no closing date for job announcements , many phases of the typical federal hiring process have been completed in advance of a census request for a certificate . census managers provide quality - ranking factors to opm when they request a job certificate . in addition , census managers have electronic access to information on the applicants because opm updates census's database daily . census officials told us that additional applicant information collected by recruiters on college campuses provides managers pertinent skill data , which could eliminate personal interviews . census estimated that time to hire declined from 3 to 4 months to a week or less . for other occupations , census continues to use its manual competitive examination hiring process to hire people from outside the government . one of the largest obstacles to the federal hiring process mentioned in our interviews with hr directors was the rule of three . in enacting the civil service reform act of 1978 , congress reiterated the importance of merit in hiring by including a merit principle , which requires that “ecruitment should be from qualified individuals from appropriate sources in an endeavor to achieve a work force from all segments of society , and selection and advancement should be determined solely on the basis of relative ability , knowledge , and skills , after fair and open competition which assures that all receive equal opportunity.” opm is responsible for ensuring that the personnel management functions it delegates to agencies are conducted in accordance with merit principles and the standards it has established for conducting those functions . in january 1996 , opm delegated examining authority , acting under the authority of public law 104-52 , to federal agencies for virtually all positions in the competitive service . the delegated examining authority requires agencies to conduct competitive examinations that comply with merit system principles , other personnel - related laws , and regulations as set forth in opm's delegated examining operations handbook . if a candidate with veterans' preference is on the list , the selecting official cannot pass over the veteran and select a lower ranking candidate without veterans' preference unless the selecting official's objection to hiring the veteran is sustained by opm .