bus program . fta does not plan to include all the consortium members' projects in the evaluation . exclusive lanes . experienced a 50- percent increase in ridership . honolulu plans to implement the bus rapid transit system in the same corridor by providing exclusive lanes where heavy traffic congestion impedes the transit operation . according to the public transit chief , the plan calls for bus rapid transit to include transit centers , signal prioritization , and traveler information systems . a fully constructed bus rapid transit system would produce an estimated 46,000 additional daily riders on mass transit in 2025 . total capital cost is estimated at $1.06 billion over 25 years . bus rapid transit would result in estimated time savings of approximately 35 percent . the major investment study / draft environmental impact statement recommended bus rapid transit over light rail . furthermore , it stated that the bus rapid transit alternative forecasts the highest level of transit usage compared with other alternatives . the study deleted the rail option through a collaborative process after the analyses indicated that bus rapid transit would provide an equal level of service and performance with less cost and impacts . the honolulu city council selected bus rapid transit as the locally preferred alternative in november 2000 . according to the public transit chief , it expects to complete the final environmental impact study in 2001 . upon competition of the study , the chief said that honolulu plans on seeking new starts funding assistance from fta . the south miami - dade busway project is an 11.5-mile expansion of the existing busway south to the cities of homestead and florida city . in 1997 , the miami - dade transit agency implemented the original 8.5-mile busway . according to a transit agency official , this was to facilitate increased economic development to the region in the aftermath of hurricane andrew . the system features exclusive lanes , signal priority , low - floor buses , and automated vehicle location and real - time announcements . the original busways resulted in significant growth in transit use , with ridership rising by 40 percent , according to the management chief . the miami - dade transit agency states that the total estimated cost for the extension is $85.5 million , according to the management chief . currently , the miami - dade transit agency states that the scheduled time savings is less than 10 percent . the agency states that the time savings is minimal because buses operate at - grade and are interrupted at intersections located at half - mile intervals . thus , service is not much faster than when the buses operate on u.s. highway 1 . the management chief stated that the miami - dade transit agency evaluated various modes of transit before building the south miami - dade busway . it found other options too expensive: heavy rail would have cost 10 times as much to build , while light rail would cost 4 times as much in comparison with a busway . in addition to the cost disparities , the agency concluded that light rail would be too disruptive to existing surface traffic .