assistance to multilateral organizations . this includes but is not limited to u.s. global health funds provided to the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria ( the global fund ) and the joint united nations program on hiv / aids ( unaids ) . in a may 2017 briefing on the plgha policy , state noted that humanitarian assistance , including state department migration and refugee assistance activities , usaid disaster and humanitarian relief activities , and u.s. department of defense disaster and humanitarian relief were also all excluded from the policy . state also noted that the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of hhs , may authorize additional case - by - case exemptions to the policy . congress provided about $8.7 billion for the global health programs account ( ghp ) in fiscal year 2018 , most of which supported hiv / aids assistance managed by state and implemented through transfers of funds to several agencies and contributions to multilateral organizations ( see table 1 ) . because of the various exclusions described above , not all global health funds are subject to the plgha policy . in particular , state's fiscal year 2018 contribution of $1.35 billion to the global fund is not subject to the policy because it is a multilateral institution . usaid and cdc had the most global health assistance awards subject to the plgha policy , representing more planned funding than other agencies ( see table 2 ) . in total , u.s. agencies reported that they applied the plgha policy to 1,309 prime awards active in may 2017 or made through september 2018 . there were 761 active awards when agencies implemented the policy in may 2017 , and 548 new awards that began after they implemented the policy . cdc identified one prime award in which an ngo declined to accept the plgha terms and conditions . most awards started in fiscal year 2016 or later , although some started earlier . average award duration varied among agencies . the estimated total value of these 1,309 awards was almost $29 billion across multiple fiscal years , of which about $12 billion was planned funding that had not yet been obligated as of september 30 , 2018 , and is subject to the plgha policy upon acceptance of the plgha terms and conditions . usaid awards represented 50 percent of planned funds that were not yet obligated for awards subject to the plgha policy , while cdc awards represented 46 percent of such funds . other hhs component agencies' awards subject to the policy combined represented almost 4 percent of planned funds that were not yet obligated . dod and state awards represented less than 1 percent of these funds . state's awards were relatively numerous but shorter - term and of smaller dollar value than other agencies' awards . agencies reported that , as of september 30 , 2018 , over $8 billion of the more than $12 billion in estimated planned funding ( over 66 percent ) for awards subject to plgha that were active between may 2017 and september 2018 was for hiv / aids assistance ( see table 3 ) .