mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . another possible mitigation policy is a tax on greenhouse gas emissions . a tax would establish a direct price on emissions by levying a charge on every ton of carbon dioxide emitted , creating an economic incentive for emitters of greenhouse gases to decrease their emissions by , for example , using fossil fuels more efficiently . unlike a cap - and - trade program , a tax would provide more certainty as to the cost of emitting greenhouse gas emissions , but the precise effect of the tax in reducing emissions would depend on the extent to which producers and consumers respond to higher prices . in discussing the emissions data required for a climate change mitigation program , it also is useful to distinguish between emissions inventories and emissions registries . emissions inventories aggregate emissions data on a high level — for example , by state , industrial sector or country . inventories generally account for greenhouse gases emitted and removed from the atmosphere over a specific timeframe . an emissions registry , on the other hand , is a tool for collecting , verifying , and tracking emissions data from individual facilities or projects . because registries can serve a variety of purposes , their structures may vary substantially . for example , registries may vary in terms of the gases monitored , the timing of data collection , and the method of data verification . in this context , my testimony today discusses ( 1 ) the need for high quality data on emissions in the context of a program intended to limit greenhouse gas emissions , and ( 2 ) key considerations in developing reliable data on greenhouse gas emissions . monitoring , reporting , and verification needs for reliable data on greenhouse gas emissions depend first on the purpose and intended use of the data ; for example , the data required for a mandatory program to limit emissions may vary substantially from that required for a business or governmental entity that voluntarily tracks its emissions for public relations or other purposes . first , as we have previously reported , the scope of a data collection effort — i.e . monitoring , reporting , and verification activities — is determined by the program's point of regulation . an upstream mitigation program would affect a relatively small population of regulated entities , such as fuel importers and producers , whose products could be less difficult to measure and report . the quantity of emissions associated with those products could be calculated using available emissions factors . under a cap - and - trade program , each importer or producer would have to hold an allowance for each ton of carbon dioxide emissions associated with its products . alternatively , under an emissions tax , each regulated entity would have to pay the government a pre - determined amount of money for each ton of emissions associated with the combustion of its products . under either system , accurate reporting and verification of emissions would help ensure the integrity of the program , and accurate and reliable baseline data would be necessary to track progress .