mr. chairman , this concludes our statement . if you have any questions regarding this testimony , please contact gregory c. wilshusen , director , information security issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov , or nabajyoti barkakati , acting chief technologist , at ( 202 ) 512-4499 or barkakatin@gao.gov . other key contributors to this testimony include nancy defrancesco and lon chin ( assistant directors ) ; angela bell ; bruce cain ; mark canter ; heather collins ; west coile ; kirk daubenspeck ; neil doherty ; vijay d'souza ; nancy glover ; sairah ijaz ; myong kim ; stephanie lee ; lee mccracken ; duc ngo ; sylvia shanks ; john spence ; and chris warweg . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . numerous opportunities exist for tva to improve the security of its control systems . specifically , strengthening logical access controls over agency networks can better protect the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of control systems from compromise by unauthorized individuals . the tva is a federal corporation and the nation's largest public power company . tva's power service area includes almost all of tennessee and parts of mississippi , kentucky , alabama , georgia , north carolina , and virginia . it operates 11 coal - fired fossil plants , 8 combustion turbine plants , 3 nuclear plants , and a hydroelectric system that includes 29 hydroelectric dams and one pumped storage facility . as a result of not fully developing and implementing these elements of its information security program , tva had limited assurance that its control systems were adequately protected from disruption or compromise from intentional attack or unintentional incident . tva's inventory of systems did not include all of its control systems as required by agency policy . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . information security is a critical consideration for any organization that depends on information systems and computer networks to carry out its mission or business . of particular importance is the security of information and systems supporting critical infrastructures — physical or virtual systems and assets so vital to the nation that their incapacitation or destruction would have a debilitating impact on national and economic security and on public health and safety . although the majority of our nation's critical infrastructures are owned by the private sector , the federal government owns and operates key facilities that use control systems , including oil , gas , water , electricity , and nuclear facilities . in the electric power industry , control systems can be used to manage and control the generation , transmission , and distribution of electric power . for example , control systems can open and close circuit breakers and set thresholds for preventive shutdowns .