providing training . the office offers an annual training class that provides a basic overview of the act , as well as hands - on courses about the procedural requirements involved in processing a request from start to finish . in addition , it offers a seminar outlining successful litigation strategies for attorneys who handle foia cases . preparing administrative and legal annual reports . oip prepares two major reports yearly — one related to agencies' annual foia processing and one related to agencies' foia litigation and compliance . the first report , compiled from agencies' annual foia reports , contains statistics on the number of requests received and processed by each agency , the time taken to respond , and the outcome of each request , as well as other statistics on foia administration such as number of backlogs , and the use of exemptions to withhold information from a requestor . the second report describes justice's efforts to encourage compliance with the act and provides a listing of all foia lawsuits filed or determined in that year , the exemptions and / or dispositions involved in each case , and any court - assessed costs , fees , and penalties . nara's ogis was established by the open government act of 2007 to oversee and assist agencies in implementing foia . issuing guidance . oip has developed guidance , available on its website , to assist federal agencies by instructing them in how to ensure timely determinations on requests , expedite the processing of requests , and reduce backlogs . the guidance also informs agencies on what should be contained in their annual foia reports to justice's attorney general . the office also has documented ways for federal agencies to address backlog requests . in march 2009 the attorney general issued guidance and related policies to encourage agencies to reduce their backlogs of foia requests . in addition , in december 2009 , omb issued a memorandum on the open government act , which called for a reduction in backlogs and the publishing of plans to reduce backlogs . further , in august 2014 , oip held a best practices workshop and issued guidance to agencies on reducing foia backlogs and improving timeliness of agencies' responses to foia requests . the oip guidance instructed agencies to obtain leadership support , routinely review foia processing metrics , and set up staff training on foia . overseeing agencies' compliance . oip collects information on compliance with the act by reviewing agencies' annual foia reports and chief foia officer reports . these reports describe the number of foia requests received and processed in a fiscal year , as well as the total costs associated with processing and litigating requests . ogis's responsibilities include reviewing agency policies and procedures , reviewing agency compliance , recommending policy changes , and offering mediation services . the 2016 foia amendments required agencies to update response letters to foia requesters to include information concerning the roles of ogis and agency's foia public liaisons . as such , ogis and justice worked together to develop a response letter template that includes the required language for agency letters . in addition , ogis , charged with reviewing agency's compliance with foia , launched in 2014 a foia compliance program .