this project was accepted and funded . the project is three fourths completed . the naval facilities engineering service center , pacific submitted this project proposal for a total cost of $1.2 million , with $80,000 requested from the corrosion office . its estimated roi was 5:1 . the project was to demonstrate the effectiveness of a discrete galvanic anode cathodic protection system as a means of mitigating corrosion and increasing the service life during the repair of the reinforced concrete kilo wharf at the naval base guam . this project was accepted and funded . the project is still being implemented . engineers told us that the project ran into some complications . for example , the sites where the project was installed are not the originally planned sites . the contractor estimates at the originally planned sites were much higher than the government estimates . because of this the facilities command had to find a different site to use for project implementation . the naval facilities engineering service center , pacific submitted this project proposal for a total cost of $450,000 , with 56 percent requested from the corrosion office . the estimated roi was 2:1 . the project was to test results of a technical paper reporting that an improved backfill and / or galvanic anode system may provide better cathodic protection than current impressed systems . a center official noted that the navy removed this from funding consideration because ( 1 ) it could not find any matching funds and ( 2 ) there was no site selected to demonstrate the technology . the naval air systems command submitted this project proposal for a total cost of $940,000 , with 29 percent requested from the corrosion office . the project's estimated roi was 2:1 . the project was to evaluate alternative paint removal technology that could be used ( 1 ) where spot paint removal is necessary for non - destructive inspections and ( 2 ) at intermediate and depot - level facilities where larger scale removal of coating is required for inspections and repairs . this project was not accepted and not funded by the corrosion office . a command official noted that funding was obtained from other sources to complete this project . in addition to the contact name above , the following staff members made key contributions to this report: ann borseth , assistant director ; janine cantin ; foster kerrison ; charles perdue ; terry richardson ; michael shaughnessy ; and erik wilkins - mckee . defense management: observations on department of defense and military service fiscal year 2011 requirements for corrosion prevention and control . gao - 10-608r . washington , d.c.: april 15 , 2010 . defense management: observations on the department of defense's fiscal year 2011 budget request for corrosion prevention and control . gao - 10-607r . washington , d.c.: april 15 , 2010 . defense management: observations on dod's fiscal year 2010 budget request for corrosion prevention and control . gao - 09-732r . washington , d.c.: june 1 , 2009 . defense management: observations on dod's analysis of options for improving corrosion prevention and control through earlier planning in the requirements and acquisition processes . gao - 09-694r . washington , d.c.: may 29 , 2009 .