scholarships . the 12 regional corporations support a variety of educational scholarships to their shareholders and , in some cases , to descendants of shareholders . in general , the corporations provide funding to closely affiliated nonprofit organizations , such as foundations endowed by the corporations , which then award scholarships to qualifying undergraduate , graduate , or vocational students . during the corporations' 2010 reporting period , each of the 12 corporations reported to us that they provided funding to support individual scholarship awards made by the nonprofit organizations , in amounts varying by corporation and by type of scholarship award ( see table 7 ) . in some cases , scholarships are competitive ; in other cases , corporate officials said they try to provide funding to as many eligible applicants as possible . memorial benefits . most regional corporations provide financial assistance to their shareholders and , in some cases , to shareholder descendants or other family members to help with funeral - related expenses related to the death of a shareholder , spouse , or descendant . financial assistance can be used for burial or funeral - related expenses , including travel by family members , which may allow shareholders to maintain alaska native burial traditions and help offset the high costs of travel in alaska . most corporations reported that they set a cap on the amount of financial assistance available per individual or family , ranging from $500 to $3,000 , depending on the corporation . shareholders' equity . shareholders' equity has been described by some of the regional corporations as a benefit , but because shareholders cannot currently sell their shares for a monetary return , they may not view such equity as a benefit . shareholders' equity is the net assets of the company , that is , the value of a company's assets minus its liabilities . according to a department of the interior study on alaska native corporations , the values of the regional corporations are difficult to estimate in the absence of a market for their shares . moreover , absent a market value , shareholders cannot in effect express confidence or lack of confidence in the corporation's management of the shareholders' assets by buying or selling their shares . nevertheless , in their 2010 reporting period , the 12 regional corporations reported total shareholders' equity values ranging from $15 million to about $1.1 billion ( 6 regional corporations reported equity per share , which ranged from about $83 to nearly $1,000 per share ) . in contrast to the corporations' view , a number of shareholders we heard from said that shareholders' equity has little real value to them since they cannot sell shares for a tangible monetary benefit . charitable donations . the regional corporations each make a variety of charitable monetary and in - kind donations to regional nonprofit organizations and other entities that offer services to corporation shareholders and others in the communities . for instance , most of the corporations reported that they provide funding or other support to housing authorities , health organizations , or vocational schools located in their regions .