vi ) . based on our analysis , we believe dod's cost and savings estimates to implement the brac 2005 recommendations are likely to continue to evolve in future brac budget submissions . first , dod's estimates for some key recommendations are uncertain because they are based on implementation details that are still evolving , especially for some complex recommendations such as establishing 12 new joint bases . second , military construction costs could increase due to various economic factors and a possible readjustment of army construction costs . third , environmental cleanup costs for brac implementation are preliminary and are likely to increase . furthermore , we believe that dod's annual recurring savings estimates may be overstated , largely because 46 percent of this savings is due to questionable military personnel savings . many details involved in the implementation of several key brac recommendations were uncertain when the department submitted its fiscal year 2008 brac budget submission to congress in february 2007 ; thus , these estimates are likely to continue to change in succeeding brac budget submissions . osd officials told us that some estimates could change as implementation planning progresses and that initial planning for many recommendations was very difficult but they wanted to provide congress with the best budget data available at the time of the budget submission . however , until dod resolves implementation details surrounding its brac recommendations , it will continue to have difficulty in more precisely estimating costs and savings and the resolution of these details could cause the department's cost and savings estimates to change . for example: realigning walter reed army medical center , washington , d.c . multiple groups reviewed current and future medical care for wounded soldiers , and dod officials told us that cost estimates in dod's next brac budget submission to congress could change pending the outcomes of these various review groups . osd officials told us implementation costs will likely increase from the reported $1.7 billion estimate if the time frame to complete the recommendation is accelerated , as recommended by osd's independent panel to review current rehabilitative care at walter reed . co - locating miscellaneous osd , defense agency , and field activity leased locations to fort belvoir , virginia . the army had planned to relocate these agencies and activities to fort belvoir's engineering proving ground , but in august 2007 the army announced it is considering a nearby location currently belonging to the u.s. general services administration in springfield , virginia . then , in october 2007 , the army announced it is also considering another site in northern virginia for relocating about 6,000 personnel . the reported cost estimate of $1.2 billion to implement this recommendation is likely to change depending on the army's site location for relocating these osd offices , defense agencies , and defense field activities . establishing army centers of excellence at several locations . the army was not certain about the number of personnel it expected to eliminate as a result of combining several army schools and centers at the time of the fiscal year 2008 brac budget submission to congress .