( see app . cms is in the process of revising the cmn for power wheelchairs , but has not implemented a version that provides sufficient information to allow dme regional carriers to correctly adjudicate power wheelchair claims . until it does so , its dme regional carriers will continue to be hampered in their efforts to properly pay power wheelchair claims . third , fraud that occurred among suppliers in harris county , texas , highlights significant weaknesses in the supplier enrollment process — especially standards covering suppliers' physical locations , required inventory , and marketing . other than constraining suppliers' communications with beneficiaries by telephone , the 21 supplier standards do not provide guidance on appropriate marketing practices . for example , they do not include language reflecting the statutory provision that prohibits suppliers from waiving beneficiaries' co - payments when offered as part of an advertisement or solicitation . while cms is working on more specific guidance relating to a supplier's physical location and inventory , it has not modified the 21 supplier standards to ensure that marketing practices are not misleading or abusive . such marketing practices include offering to waive beneficiaries' co - payments , using the words “free” or “no cost to you” in relation to provision of medicare items to beneficiaries , and using door - to - door solicitations . fourth , site visits , which can help ensure compliance with supplier standards , are less effective in screening potential suppliers because they are highly predictable . despite evidence that out - of - cycle site visits proved useful in identifying fraudulent suppliers in harris county , texas , cms does not require its contractor to conduct such site visits on a routine basis across the country . to help ensure that improper payments are identified and addressed in a timely manner and that medicare pays properly for power wheelchairs and other items of dme , we recommend that the administrator of cms take four actions: develop a process within cms to focus on trends in medicare spending and disproportionate or suspicious medicare payments ; develop strategies to address the trends that may indicate possible improper payments for dme ; and take timely action , when warranted . implement a revised cmn that incorporates key elements of power wheelchair coverage criteria to help dme regional carriers properly adjudicate claims . strengthen the standards for medicare dme suppliers to include prohibiting certain misleading or abusive marketing practices . in addition to conducting the currently required initial and reenrollment site visits , direct nsc to routinely conduct out - of - cycle site visits to suppliers that are suspected of billing improperly and to maintain data on these visits and their results . in its written comments on a draft of this report , cms agreed with our recommendations and stated that it had undertaken several efforts to curb the abuse of the power wheelchair benefit in the medicare program within the last year . cms mentioned its september 2003 power wheelchair initiative , which focused on aggressive claims review , enforcement , and supplier training , and its april 2004 initiative , which targeted coverage , payment , and the quality of suppliers of power wheelchairs .