it does this for each transaction it finances . however , according to ex - im officials , because ex - im provides different types of financial products , it uses two different methods to determine the export values . for some financial products , such as direct loans and loan guarantees , ex - im determines the export value after authorization — but before disbursement — by using information provided on the exporter's certificate . specifically , ex - im determines the export value by using the net contract price — the aggregate price of all goods and services to be exported ( i.e. , u.s. content plus eligible foreign content that does not include local costs ) . ex - im includes the value of the purchase of goods and services that were financed by entities other than ex - im . in other words , the export value is the value of exports in purchase orders that were at least partially financed by ex - im . according to ex - im officials , they generally provided approximately 83 percent of the financing for medium and long - term transactions for fiscal year 2010 through fiscal year 2012 . for other financial products , such as short - term insurance or working capital , ex - im uses the entire value of the credit or the insurance policy as the proxy for the export value . because the export value is not known at the time of authorization , ex - im cannot use the net contract price to determine the export value . these products include revolving lines of credit that may be drawn down multiple times during the available period . under this type of support , a domestic exporter can access the credit to make purchases and later repay the debt , thereby making additional credit available . according to ex - im , this approach may result in an understatement of the total value of the exports , as multiple purchases can occur without ever reaching the limit . however , ex - im also confirmed that using the entire value of the credit or insurance policy could result in an overstatement , if all the credit is not used . at the end of step 2 , ex - im creates a summary table , where each row contains the sum of export value in an industry . in step 3 , ex - im multiplies the export values for each industry by the appropriate jobs ratio from the ert . finally , in step 4 it sums across all of the industries to obtain a single estimate for the number of jobs it supports . using this process , ex - im estimated 255,000 jobs supported in 2012 . to illustrate , on average , ex - im used the following steps: ex - im determined that it supported approximately $40 billion of exports . on average , in fiscal year 2012 , every million dollars of exports supported by ex - im was associated with 6.5 jobs ( based on the industries that used ex - im financing , and the ert ) .