pub . 89-73 , 79 stat . 218 ( codified as amended at 42 u.s.c . past work , we noted that the national funding formula used to allocate funding to states does not include factors to target older adults in greatest need , such as low - income older adults , although states are required to consider such factors when developing the intrastate formulas they use to allocate funds among their local agencies . we found that certain formula changes to better target states with elderly adults with the greatest need would have disparate effects on states , depending on their characteristics . we have also found that lack of federal guidance and data make it difficult to know whether those with the greatest need are being served . our findings underscore how retirement security can be affected by changing circumstances in the american household and the economy . as the composition of the american family continues to evolve and as our retirement system transitions to one that is primarily account - based , vulnerable populations in this country will face increasing risk of saving sufficiently and potentially outliving their assets . for those with little or no pension or other financial assets , ensuring income in retirement may involve difficult choices , including how long to wait before claiming social security benefits , how long to work , and how to adjust consumption and lifestyle to lower levels of income in retirement . poor or imprudent decisions may mean the difference between a secure retirement and poverty . planning for these needs will be crucial if we wish to avoid turning back the clock on the gains we have achieved over the past 50 years from social security in reducing poverty among seniors . chairman nelson , ranking member collins , and members of the committee , this completes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you might have . in addition to the above , charlie jeszeck , director ; michael collins , assistant director ; jennifer cook , erin m. godtland , rhiannon patterson , and ryan siegel made significant contributions to this testimony and the related report . in addition , james bennett , david chrisinger , sarah cornetto , courtney lafountain , kathy leslie , amy moran lowe , sheila mccoy , susan offutt , marylynn sergent , frank todisco , and shana wallace made valuable contributions . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . participants who elect a lump sum forgo a lifetime annuity . some db plan sponsors have also begun offering special , one - time lump sum elections to participants who are already retired and receiving monthly pension benefits . taken together , the trends in marriage and workforce participation have implications for the receipt of social security retirement benefits , especially for women .