we are reviewing the status of this effort as part of our ongoing work . based on concerns from the agencies' secretaries about ides delays , dod and va have undertaken initiatives to achieve time savings for servicemembers . the agencies have begun a business process review to better understand how ides is operating and identify best practices for possible piloting . va then starts to award monthly disability compensation to the veteran . dod and va established timeliness goals for the ides process to provide va benefits to active duty servicemembers within 295 days of being referred into the process , and to reserve component members within 305 days ( see fig . dod and va also established interim timeliness goals for each phase and stage of the ides process . these time frames are an improvement over the legacy disability evaluation system , which was estimated to take 540 days to complete . in addition to timeliness , dod surveys servicemembers on their satisfaction at several points in the process , with a goal of having 80 percent of servicemembers satisfied . enrollment in ides continued to grow as ides completed its worldwide expansion . in fiscal year 2011 , 18,651 cases were enrolled in ides compared to 4,155 in fiscal year 2009 ( see fig 2 ) . when examining timeliness across the four phases that make up ides , data show that timeliness regularly fell short of interim goals for three — meb , transition , and va benefits ( see fig . in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the ides process begins at a military treatment facility when a physician identifies one or more medical conditions that may interfere with a servicemember's ability to perform his or her duties . the process involves four main phases: the medical evaluation board ( meb ) , the physical evaluation board ( peb ) , transition out of military service ( transition ) , and va benefits . meb phase: in this phase , medical examinations are conducted and decisions are made by the meb regarding a servicemember's ability to continue to serve in the military . this phase involves four stages: ( 1 ) the servicemember is counseled by a dod board liaison on what to expect during the ides process ; ( 2 ) the servicemember is counseled by a va caseworker on what to expect during the ides process and medical exams are scheduled ; ( 3 ) medical exams are conducted according to va standards for exams for disability compensation , by va , dod , or contractor physicians ; and ( 4 ) exam results are used by the meb to identify conditions that limit the servicemember's ability to serve in the military . also during this stage , a servicemember dissatisfied with the meb assessment of unfitting conditions can seek a rebuttal , or an informal medical review by a physician not on the meb , or both .