ceq generally agreed with our recommendation . some of our other recent climate change - related reports offer additional examples of the types of actions federal agencies and the congress could take to assist states and communities in their efforts to adapt . our august 2007 report , for example , recommended that certain agencies develop guidance advising managers on how to address the effects of climate change on the resources they manage . furthermore , our may 2008 report on the economics of policy options to address climate change identified actions congress and federal agencies could take , such as reforming insurance subsidy programs in areas vulnerable to hurricanes or flooding . our may 2011 report on federal climate change funding found that ( 1 ) agencies do not consistently interpret methods for defining and reporting the funding of climate change activities , ( 2 ) key factors complicate efforts to align such funding with strategic priorities , and ( 3 ) options are available to better align federal funding with strategic priorities , including governmentwide strategic planning . any effective federal climate change adaptation strategy will need to ensure that federal funds are properly tracked and that funding decisions are aligned with strategic priorities . given the interdisciplinary nature of the issue , such alignment is a challenge as formidable as it is necessary to address . in our report , we identified three methods for defining and reporting climate change funding , foremost of which is guidance contained in omb's circular a - 11 . the circular directs agencies to report funding that meet certain criteria in three broad categories — research , technology , and international assistance . according to omb staff , circular a - 11 is the primary method for defining and reporting long - standing “cross - cuts” of funding for climate change activities . interagency groups , such as usgcrp have collaborated in the past with omb to clarify the definitions in circular a - 11 , according to comments from ceq , omb , and ostp . our work suggests that existing methods for defining and reporting climate change funding are not consistently interpreted and applied across the federal government .  lack of clear roles and responsibilities . adaptation efforts are constrained by a lack of clear roles and responsibilities among federal , state , and local agencies . of particular note , about 70 percent ( 124 of 178 ) of the federal , state , and local officials who responded to a questionnaire we prepared for our october 2009 report on adaptation rated the “lack of clear roles and responsibilities for addressing adaptation across all levels of government” as very or extremely challenging . for example , according to one respondent , “there is a power struggle between agencies and levels of government…everyone wants to take the lead rather than working together in a collaborative and cohesive way.” these challenges make it harder for officials to justify the current costs of adaptation efforts for potentially less certain future benefits . a 2009 report by the national research council discusses how officials are struggling to make decisions based on future climate scenarios instead of past climate conditions .