we focused our review on those actions . to determine the progress made toward establishing the network , we examined documentation provided by hhs that reported the steps the department has taken to address the actions described in the implementation plan , including the development of systems and information - sharing tools intended to enhance public health situational awareness . we also reviewed documentation that provided detailed information about the systems , such as stakeholders and sources of the data collected and shared by the systems . we compared hhs's implementation plan to departmental guidance for managing enterprise it resources and investments . such guidance included requirements reflected in the statutory provisions commonly referred to as the federal information technology acquisition reform act ( fitara ) . to supplement our analysis of the documentation collected from hhs , we held discussions with officials in hhs's office of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) . these officials were responsible for completing the strategy and implementation plan and , thus , were knowledgeable of the actions that had been taken to establish the network capabilities required by pahpra . to supplement the information we collected from examination of documentation , we held discussions with hhs officials to better understand the processes they followed and steps they took to develop the strategy and implementation plan . we also discussed with them their responsibilities for establishing the network and the status of any progress that had been made toward completing actions to address the mandate . in addition , we interviewed an official of the national preparedness and response science board to gain an understanding of the recommendations made to hhs related to planning efforts to address the modernization and enhancement of biosurveillance systems , as required by pahpra . we assessed the reliability of the data we obtained from documented descriptions of hhs systems by reviewing related technical documentation and interviewing department officials knowledgeable of the efforts taken to address the electronic information - sharing requirements of pahpra . in particular , the committee does not include a project manager , business owner , or the cio ; rather , it is made up of policy and planning officials from hhs and other federal agencies . as such , hhs has not established the management structure needed to oversee the use of it resources in any efforts taken to enhance electronic information sharing in accordance with pahpra . further , in developing the department's public health situational awareness implementation plan , aspr officials did not take other steps required by departmental guidance for managing it projects . for example , hhs's enterprise performance life cycle framework guidance calls for an it project manager to develop a full project management plan to include costs , schedule , and resource requirements for actions to be taken . however , an it project manager was not designated to take responsibility for defining and implementing any system improvements needed to enhance electronic public health situational awareness network capabilities , and no such plan was developed . additionally , the framework requires an it project's business owner to establish and approve changes to performance metrics and a project manager to report variances and delays in meeting performance milestones .