gao - 11-621 . washington , d.c.: june 20 , 2011 . washington , d.c.: july 11 , 2003 . homeland defense: dod needs to take actions to enhance interagency coordination for its homeland defense and civil support missions . gao - 10-364 . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2010 . fleet forces command did not provide such a supporting plan . dod and the department of homeland security also provided separate technical comments , which we have incorporated into the report where appropriate . we are sending copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of homeland security , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5431 or dagostinod@gao.gov . contact information for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . to determine the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) has conducted maritime homeland defense planning , we examined dod's strategy for homeland defense and civil support as well as joint doctrine on contingency planning , operational exercises , and the execution of maritime homeland defense operations . we also interviewed officials of the office of the under secretary of defense for policy , the joint staff , u.s. joint forces command , north american aerospace defense command / u.s . northern command , u.s. fleet forces command , and the u.s. coast guard . further , we received written responses from u.s. pacific command and u.s. pacific fleet related to maritime homeland defense planning efforts in the pacific command area of responsibility . for the purposes of this report , we focused on the extent to which required maritime homeland defense planning documents had been developed by northern command and other dod organizations . we compared these planning documents to joint doctrine and other dod planning guidance . to assess the extent to which dod has identified and addressed maritime homeland defense capability gaps , we analyzed maritime homeland defense - related gaps identified in dod's homeland defense and civil support capabilities - based assessment and a 2009 dod joint requirements oversight council memorandum on the assessment . we also interviewed officials in the office of the under secretary of defense for policy , the joint staff , and northern command to discuss the maritime homeland defense - related components of the study and the status of actions taken to address relevant capability gaps .