cbp concurred with the recommendation . in response , cbp sent a memorandum to all ports of entry requiring that they incorporate new guidance into their operating procedures and ensure that the guidance be a part of their on - the - job training . in 2016 , we again reviewed the rigor of nrc's radiological materials licensing program . for that review , we obtained a genuine license to possess radiological material by establishing fictitious companies , and we later altered that license in order to procure additional quantities of radiological material . using both the genuine and altered licenses , we secured commitments from radiological material distributors to sell us a dangerous quantity of radiological material considered attractive for use in a dirty bomb . in response to that report , nrc is considering making enhancements to its pre - licensing process . in 2016 , we also found that cbp faces limitations in the air cargo radiological screening environment . in 2017 , we found weaknesses in nrc's and the department of transportation's processes for ensuring compliance with ground transportation security requirements for dangerous radiological shipments . that report recommended , among other things , that nrc should collect information on the number of shipments and mode of transport for shipments of radiological material . we found that during this time frame , cbp officials stationed at airports nationwide did not make the required calls to verify licenses for a significant number of shipments of radiological material identified by cbp as requiring license verification — leaving many licenses unverified over this 21-month period . these shipments came through airports across the united states and , according to cbp officials we interviewed , arrived by both express courier and air cargo companies . at two of the four airports we visited , we observed that cbp officials were taking actions that were consistent with cbp policy . specifically , we noted the following: at one airport , officials responsible for reviewing shipments of imported radiological material told us that they call the teleforensic center whenever they receive an alert from cbp's data system , consistent with cbp policy . we discussed the reliability of these data with knowledgeable cbp and nrc officials , and we found the data sufficiently reliable for counting the number of shipments of radiological material . we conducted this performance audit from september 2016 to january 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . radiological material is used throughout the world for medical and industrial purposes . possession of this material within the united states requires a license from nrc or from one of the 37 agreement states to which nrc has relinquished regulatory responsibility . nrc and agreement states issue two types of licenses authorizing the possession and use of radiological materials: specific licenses and general licenses .