nor is it clear how and when these analyses will be done . sb / se officials said that given resource limitations , they have not done the necessary workforce analyses for tec or developed an implementation schedule for when the analyses would be done . as of april 2003 , irs or sb / se analyses have dealt with other workforce issues . while useful , the analyses do not address the tec workforce gap in terms of the skills needed now or in the future to meet program goals , particularly newer ones such as promoting electronic filing or negotiating voluntary compliance agreements . for example , irs has analyzed 12 mission - critical positions in terms of potential losses ( eg , retirement ) from the current number of positions . these analyses have not focused on tec because the analyses , as well as the eventual irs - wide workforce plan , are intended to be done at a high level with minimal references to tec . sb / se asked officials in tec and its other units in february 2003 to use a checklist to self - assess their current workforce and planning capabilities against opm criteria . sb / se has not indicated how it will verify and use the subjective check marks made by the officials to determine workforce gaps in tec , particularly in skills needed . no analyses have been provided to justify plans for fiscal year 2004 to hire 250 additional staff in tec to combat abusive tax schemes and to not hire any additional staff to address three other tec goals . irs and sb / se workforce officials had told us that the 250 staff estimate came from the budget and finance staff in sb / se . in a subsequent meeting during may 2003 , tec and sb / se officials said that irs has decided against any staff expansion in tec due to other budget considerations . finishing the analyses of tec workforce gaps is important for the rest of the workforce plan . the other two critical elements involving strategies and evaluation cannot be finished until irs and sb / se know the specific needs of the current and future tec workforces . as irs and sb / se officials develop and implement a workforce plan for tec , major challenges are likely to arise . for example , these officials cited the challenge of balancing daily operational demands with the capacity to forecast workforce needs in terms of staff numbers , skills , and locations . another challenge is gathering reliable data on the attrition , retirement , and skills of the current workforce to do analyses that are critical to workforce planning . irs and sb / se officials also pointed to budget fluctuations that could limit their strategies to close gaps in the workforce needed by tec over time . for example , the budget may be insufficient to replace losses of tec workforce skills due to retirement . finally , they said that if the workforce plan could adversely affect current tec employees , dealing with employee unions to address the concerns could be a challenge .