accountability . the organization's human capital decisions are guided by a data - driven , results - oriented planning and accountability system . strategic workforce planning , an integral part of human capital management and the strategic workforce plan , involves systematic assessments of current and future human capital needs and the development of long - term strategies to fill the gaps between an agency's current and future workforce requirements . agency approaches to such planning can vary with each agency's particular needs and mission ; however , our previous work suggests that irrespective of the context in which workforce planning is done , such a process should incorporate five key principles: ( 1 ) involve management and employees , ( 2 ) analyze workforce gaps , ( 3 ) employ workforce strategies to fill the gaps , ( 4 ) build the capabilities needed to support workforce strategies , and ( 5 ) evaluate and revise strategies . figure 2 provides a fuller description of each of the five principles . sec has shown progress on a number of strategic human capital management initiatives that could help strengthen sec's efforts in workforce planning and is developing its strategic human capital plan . these initiatives include splitting its office of administrative and personnel management into the office of administrative services and ohr in order to improve efficiency and effectiveness in both and creating a more structured and institutionalized human capital council by expanding the role of the erb , now called the hcrb . furthermore , sec is in the process of creating its first strategic human capital plan . according to sec , this plan is to be based on opm's hcaaf . in 2003 , after the passage of sarbanes - oxley , sec undertook an extensive workforce and work - flow review , and the erb became the vehicle through which sec leadership met to align its programmatic goals and new responsibilities with its human capital approaches and existing and new resources . the erb — composed of senior division managers , the managing executive for operations , and the head of ohr ( after the creation of that office ) — met monthly and on an ad hoc basis to deal with special issues , and produced recommendations for the chairman's approval . the 2003 workforce and work - flow review process required division and office directors to present justifications for resource requests to the erb for the board's approval . one outcome of the 2003 review was the decision to split sec's office of administrative and personnel management into two offices — the office of administrative services and ohr . according to ohr , the separation of the office's administrative and personnel functions was made to improve efficiency and effectiveness in these functions , which was necessitated by the agency's growth of approximately 1,000 individuals after the implementation of sarbanes - oxley . in addition , the split created an opportunity for sec to hire an associate executive director for ohr , who is tasked with assessing , developing , and implementing human resources programs .