timeliness . since 2011 , the aps has required grant applicants to explain whether in - kind food aid or prepositioned stocks can arrive in a sufficiently timely manner through the regular ordering process to address urgent or emergency needs . cost - effectiveness . since 2011 , the aps has required grant applicants to provide cost - effectiveness information that affected their choice of modality . further , according to the aps , in certain cases the cost of cash - based food assistance may be lower than that of in - kind assistance , while in other cases the difference may be negligible . appropriateness . since 2011 , the aps has required grant applicants to explain why cash transfers or food vouchers , or both , may be more appropriate than in - kind food distributions . for example , potential beneficiaries may have physical access to functioning markets but lack sufficient purchasing power . ( fig . 3 shows other examples of reasons that efsp grant applicants have cited for deeming cash transfer or food voucher projects to be most appropriate. ) the 2015 aps states that , depending on market conditions , cash - based food assistance may be deemed more or less appropriate than in - kind food aid to address specific emergency food security needs . since 2015 , the aps has required applicants to justify their selection of either cash transfers or food vouchers as the preferred modality . acf international , with funding from the cash learning partnership and the european commission on humanitarian aid and civil protection . usaid released a draft revision of the aps in may 2016 for public comment ; according to usaid officials , the revised version will be finalized in the autumn of 2016 . hoddinott , john , daniel gilligan , melissa hidrobo , amy margolies , shalini roy , susanna sandström , benjamin schwab , and joanna upton . enhancing wfp's capacity and experience to design , implement , monitor and evaluate vouchers and cash transfer programmes . study summary . international food policy research institute , 2013 . husain , arif , jean - martin bauer , and susanna sandstrӧm . economic impact study: direct and indirect impact of the wfp food voucher programme in jordan . world food programme , 2014 . kardan , andrew , ian macauslan , and ngoni marimo . evaluation of zimbabwe's emergency cash transfer ( zect ) program — final report . oxford policy management , supported by wfp and concern worldwide , 2010 . majewski , brian , lois austin , katherine george , carol ward , and kurt wilson . wfp's 2008 cash and voucher policy ( 2008-2014 ) : a policy evaluation . evaluation report — volume 1 . konterra group paper for world food programme . margolies , amy , and john hoddinott , “costing alternative transfer modalities,” ifpri discussion paper 01375. international food policy research institute , september 2014 . maunder , nick , victoria de bauw , neil dillon , gabrielle smith , and sharon truelove . “evaluation of the use of different transfer modalities in echo humanitarian aid actions , 2011-2014.” analysis for economic decisions . evaluation commissioned by the european commission .