( see app . ii for a listing of the 47 investments and subsidiary projects that are meeting their commitments. ) the remaining 21 investments had one or more subsidiary projects that were not meeting cost and / or schedule commitments ; the total planned cost for all projects in development for the 21 investments is approximately $1 billion . table 2 lists the investments experiencing cost and / or schedule shortfalls , and the total planned project cost for each investment . a list of the investments and their subsidiary projects experiencing cost and / or schedule shortfalls is included in appendix iii . of the 21 investments with a shortfall , 5 had one or more subsidiary project with a cost shortfall , 18 had one or more project with a schedule shortfall , and 2 had a project with both a cost and schedule shortfall . these shortfalls potentially impact the total cost of investments and can delay the implementation of key systems . for example: tsa's federal air marshal service mission scheduling and notification system: project to modernize the core scheduling software component of the system , which , among other things , determines the allocation of federal air marshals to flights and coordinates and communicates mission assignments , was delayed . nppd's critical infrastructure technology and architecture investment: project to develop an information - sharing application to be used by federal , state , and local stakeholders to increase their capability to combat terrorist use of improvised explosive devices had cost overruns of approximately 16 percent ( $296,000 ) . we focused on these investments and their subsidiary projects because omb considers them to be at an increased level of risk of not being able to deliver promised capabilities on time and within budget , and thus requiring special attention from management . to assess the reliability of the it dashboard data we analyzed , we corroborated the data by interviewing investment and other dhs officials to determine whether the information on the dashboard was consistent with that reported by dhs . cbp's northern border , remote video surveillance system investment: project to incorporate it security improvements to the remote video surveillance systems in buffalo , new york , and detroit , michigan , was delayed by approximately 2 months . fema's disaster assistance improvement plan: a subsidiary project — site usability enhancements — that included enhancements to the disasterassistance.gov website to improve usability by making it easier and more intuitive for users to apply for and find information about disaster assistance from federal , state , local , tribal , and private nonprofit organizations was delayed . the primary causes of the shortfalls in cost and schedule associated with dhs's 21 major it investments were ( in descending order of frequency ) : inaccurate preliminary cost and schedule estimates , technical issues in the development phase , changes in agency priorities , lack of understanding of user requirements , and dependencies on other investments that had schedule shortfalls .