we are not making any recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of this report to the kc - 46 program office for review and comment . the program office provided technical comments , which we incorporated into this report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the air force ; and the director of the office of management and budget . the report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . we visited boeing production facilities . finally , we interviewed officials from the air force's kc - 46 program office , other defense offices , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , and boeing on progress made in 2015 . we assessed the reliability of cost , schedule , test , and manufacturing data by interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data , and we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted this performance audit from july 2015 to april 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in february 2011 , boeing won the competition to develop the air force's next generation aerial refueling tanker aircraft , the kc - 46 . boeing was awarded a fixed price incentive ( firm target ) contract for development because kc - 46 development was considered to be a relatively low - risk effort to integrate military technologies onto a 767 aircraft designed for commercial use . the contract is designed to hold boeing accountable for costs associated with the design , manufacture , and delivery of four test aircraft and includes options to manufacture the remaining 175 aircraft . it features two key delivery dates , requiring boeing to first deliver four development aircraft between april and may 2016 , and second , if the air force exercises the first two production options , deliver a total of 18 operational aircraft by august 2017 . it also specifies that boeing must correct any deficiencies and bring development and production aircraft to the final configuration at no additional cost to the government.in addition , all required aircrew and maintainer training must be complete and the required support equipment and sustainment support must be in place by august 2017 . the contract includes firm - fixed - price contract options for the first and second production lots in 2016 , and options with “not - to - exceed” ceiling prices for lots 3 through 13 . barring any changes , the development contract specifies a target price of $4.4 billion and a ceiling price of $4.9 billion , at which point boeing assumes responsibility for all additional costs . by december 2015 , both boeing and the program office estimated that boeing would incur additional costs to complete development of the aircraft of about $769 million and $1.4 billion , respectively .