loan . currently , the federal housing administration ( fha ) of hud offers the currently , the federal housing administration ( fha ) of hud offers the only active federal loan guarantee program that includes an option for a only active federal loan guarantee program that includes an option for a “home - only” product ; that is , a personal property loan for the purchase of “home - only” product ; that is , a personal property loan for the purchase of a manufactured home without the land on which the home will be located . a manufactured home without the land on which the home will be located . fha noted that it recently initiated a review of the credit subsidy calculation for the title i manufactured home loan program and that the results of the study will be used to develop models to test underwriting and premium pricing options . as we noted in our report , this type of analysis or an analysis similar to the one we performed could provide an indication of the risks for losses to fha's general insurance fund . hud also agreed with our recommendation to develop an approach for collecting the information needed to manage the program . as we mentioned in our report , hud stated it began collecting additional data , such as borrower information on age and income in 2004 . hud stated that it did not collect information on the location of the homes ( owned or leased land ) because the program requirements for both types of homes were essentially the same ; however , hud plans to collect these data under a revised program to track loan characteristics . hud also agreed to collect appropriate credit and application variables such as credit scores . insurance premiums may include an up - front payment and annual payment . finally , the agency noted that it intended procedures for originating and underwriting title i loans to mimic those of fha's real estate financing programs . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the ranking member , senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; ranking member , subcommittee on housing , transportation , and community development , senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; chairman and ranking member , house committee on financial services ; and chairman and ranking member , subcommittee on housing and community opportunity , house committee on financial services . we will also send copies to the secretary of housing and urban development and will make copies available to other interested parties upon request . to assess the potential costs and benefits of the proposed changes to the title i program , we interviewed fha officials , fha lenders , ginnie mae officials , and officials from federal and other lending programs , such as fannie mae and freddie mac , the u.s. department of agriculture rural housing service and the department of veterans affairs , community banks , industry and consumer groups , and a rating service .