copyright office . positioned within the legislative branch , the library carries out its operations through a number of service and support units: the office of the librarian had overall management responsibility for the library and carried out certain executive functions . the congressional research service ( crs ) is responsible for providing congress with nonpartisan legislative research and analysis . copyright office is responsible for administering the copyright act , including copyright registration , recordation , mandatory deposit , and certain statutory licenses . the law library provides congress with ready access to reliable legal materials . library services develops and preserves the library's collections and also included the national library service for the blind and physically handicapped ( nls ) , which directs the production of books and magazines in braille and recorded formats . at the time of our review , the office of strategic initiatives was responsible for the overall digital strategic planning for the library and included the office of information technology services ( its ) , which was to support the library's it systems and infrastructure . the head of the office of strategic initiatives also served as the agency's chief information officer . we also reviewed documentation provided by officials on these efforts . in addition , five different people had filled the cio position temporarily since 2012 . the absence of strong , sustained leadership hampered the library's ability to make needed improvements in the face of long - standing it management challenges . like other federal agencies , the library relies on a host of it systems to carry out its mission . these include standard hardware ( eg , desktop and laptop computers , printers , and servers ) and software ( eg , e - mail , word processing and spreadsheet programs , and internet resources ) , as well as administrative and business systems , such as accounting , financial planning and budgeting , and human resources systems . the work on which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . specifically , the office is required by law to , among other things , receive and examine copyright registration applications , collect and maintain deposited copies of copyrighted works , produce certificates of registration and certified copies of applications , and maintain records of the transfer of copyright ownership . these responsibilities drive the office's use of it to facilitate , for example , the electronic registration of works , examination of copyright registrations , and recording transfers of copyright . in particular , the copyright office relies heavily on its eco system to support the registration process . this system provides a public interface for submitting applications as well as a back - end system for copyright staff to process these applications . while the office relies on other legacy systems to support its recordation and licensing functions , copyright staff told us that the office plans to consolidate functionality from all registration and recordation systems into eco . however , eco has had significant technical issues , both with the system itself , which is managed by the copyright office , and its underlying infrastructure managed by the library .