( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of this report to education for its review and comment . these monthly payments do not need to be consecutive . in january 2012 , education began offering a voluntary process to certify borrowers' public service employment and loans as eligible for pslf . borrowers can request to have their employment and loans certified at any time to make sure they are meeting basic program requirements and are on track towards qualifying for loan forgiveness ( see fig . once a borrower submits a request , the pslf servicer reviews the borrower's employment and loans to determine if they qualify , and if so , counts how many qualifying payments the borrower has made . in september 2017 , 10 years after the pslf program was established , education began accepting loan forgiveness applications from borrowers . the application is similar to the form borrowers use to request certification of their employment and loans for pslf , but is intended for borrowers that have already made 120 qualifying payments ( see fig . the pslf servicer reviews a borrower's application and incorporates information from any previously approved certification forms to determine if the borrower's employment and loans qualify and if they have made 120 qualifying payments . if the borrower meets all of these requirements , the pslf servicer forwards the application to education for final review . if education determines the borrower has met all eligibility requirements , it directs the pslf servicer to forgive the remaining balance on the borrower's loans . over 890,000 borrowers have taken an initial step towards qualifying for the pslf program by voluntarily having their employment and loans certified as eligible for pslf , according to data from the pslf servicer as of april 2018 . of these , over 520,000 borrowers had recorded at least one qualifying payment that counted towards the 120 required to be eligible for loan forgiveness ( see fig . in total , almost 1.2 million borrowers requested to have their employment and loans certified but over 280,000 were denied , primarily due to missing information on the form , or because they did not have qualifying federal loans or work for a qualifying employer , according to data from the pslf servicer . the number of new borrowers whose employment and loans have been certified as eligible for pslf has increased in each of the past 6 years , according to pslf servicer data ( see fig . officials with the pslf servicer said they anticipated that the volume would continue to increase as the program gains visibility . in the first 8 months that borrowers were able to apply for loan forgiveness ( september 2017 through april 2018 ) , education had approved 55 borrowers and forgiven a total of almost $3.2 million in outstanding student loan balances , an average of almost $58,000 per borrower . the amount of loan forgiveness for individual borrowers ranged from almost $800 to almost $290,000 . over 19,300 borrowers had submitted loan forgiveness applications as of april 2018 ( see fig . we conducted this performance audit from august 2017 to september 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .