objectives . usaid and state awards and contracts to cuba - specific ngos and to worldwide or regional organizations have generally funded similar types of program activities , such as efforts to provide training and material assistance on the island . awards to universities have tended to have different objectives . for ongoing awards , partners submit proposed subpartners for approval to the committee . the committee may ask for information on proposed subpartner activities , among other things , to ensure that the programmatic content of the work to be performed by subpartners fits in the scope of the overall award . state's bureau of administration is responsible for approving subawards and subcontracts under state / drl and state / wha awards , and has requirements similar to usaid's . however , state does not clearly inform its cuba program partners of these requirements in written guidance and , as a result , some partners have not provided the required information . according to language in state's standard terms and conditions , prior written approval is required for any subawards or subcontracts unless they are described in the application and funded in the approved award . specifically , state officials told us that the bureau of administration requires certain information and documentation to approve subpartners , including a copy of the draft agreement with the subpartner , the amount of and budget for the agreement , the name of the subpartner organization , a description of the subpartner's role . the period of performance , and according to state officials , state's requirements are currently the same whether a partner obtains preapproval during the preaward phase or during the course of the award . they added that , for consultants under state / drl awards , the bureau of administration does not require their names because of security and sensitivity concerns . instead , according to officials , the bureau of administration requires information on the amount of the consultancy contract , the consultant's budget , and a description of the consultant's role and qualifications . nevertheless , the detailed information that state told us is required to preapprove subawards , subcontracts , and consultants is not specified in written guidance to all partners . for example , in state's handbook for grant recipients , state informs recipients to provide in award proposals details on any subpartners , but does not specify the type of information to provide . in addition , based on our review of fiscal year 2010 and 2011 award documents , we found that in cases when state / drl is made aware of a prospective partner's intention to have a subpartner through review of their proposal , state / drl included a requirement in the partner's award to provide a copy of the agreement with that specific subpartner to state within 10 days of its execution . however , state / drl omitted this requirement from awards for which it was not clear the partner intended to use a subpartner . as a result , we found that many partners only received the broad written guidance in state's standard terms and conditions and recipient handbook .