this challenge is not new . in our july 2013 report on using data analytics for oversight and law enforcement and in our march 2017 report on using data analytics to address fraud and improper payments , we reported on similar perceived challenges from other agencies and organizations regarding data sharing among agencies . some agencies at the roundtable discussion also stated that they did not receive information from their respective office of inspector general that would help them manage fraud risks and implement frdaa . the fraud risk framework highlights the role of the office of inspector general in agencies' fraud risk management activities . according to the framework , the office of inspector general itself should not lead or facilitate fraud risk assessments , in order to preserve its independence when reviewing the program's activities . however , the framework notes that program managers and their office of inspector general should collaborate and communicate to help improve understanding of fraud risks and identify emerging fraud risks , in order to proactively enhance fraud - prevention activities . while one agency at the roundtable discussion identified the lack of information from their office of inspector general limiting their ability to address fraud risks , some agencies appear to be reaching out to their respective offices of inspector general for this information . we spoke with the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency , which comprises representatives of offices of inspector general in the executive branch . during the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency meeting , representatives from three agency inspectors general told us that their agencies reached out to them to discuss fraud , such as how an agency can use databases to look for fraud . at least one representative expected to coordinate with the representative's agency to strengthen internal controls as the agency continues to implement frdaa . omb has taken steps to establish guidelines and a working group for agencies , as required by frdaa , but limited guidelines and working - group coordination hindered some agencies' implementation of the act . specifically , omb issued guidelines for agencies to implement frdaa's requirement to establish controls and report on their progress and has established a frdaa working group , but agencies indicated the need for additional guidance and involvement in working - group activities . ” uncertainty about the difference between erm and frdaa requirements . many agencies are leveraging existing erm processes to implement fraud risk activities , according to our survey results , but omb guidelines were unclear on the relationship between frdaa and erm requirements , according to our review of the guidelines and roundtable discussion responses . under erm , agencies are required to assess the full spectrum of an organization's risks , and identify those that are enterprise - level risks . for enterprise risks , agencies are expected to rate those risks in terms of impact and build internal controls to monitor and assess the risk developments at various time points and incorporate risk awareness into the agencies' culture and operations . our survey results indicate that more agencies ( 56 percent ) are currently incorporating fraud risk activities into broader erm compared with before frdaa enactment in june 2016 ( 34 percent ) .