cio ratings . unlike the cost and schedule ratings , the dashboard's “investment evaluation by agency cio” ( also called the cio rating ) is determined by the agency cio . according to omb's instructions , each agency cio is to assess his or her it investments against a set of pre - established evaluation factors and then assign a rating of 1 ( high risk ) to 5 ( low risk ) based on the cio's best judgment of the level of risk facing the investment . additionally , agencies generally followed omb's instructions for assigning cio ratings , although defense's ratings were unique in reflecting additional considerations , such as the likelihood of omb review . most of the selected agencies reported various benefits associated with producing and reporting cio ratings , such as increased quality of their performance data and greater transparency and visibility of investments . we recommended that omb analyze and report on agencies' cio ratings over time , and that defense ensure that its cio ratings reflect available investment performance assessments and its risk management guidance . both agencies concurred with our recommendations . subsequently , omb reported on cio rating trends . the department partially concurred with our recommendation to update cio ratings monthly , stating that omb's fiscal year 2017 it budget guidance addresses the required frequency of updates in several places , and the section specific to cio evaluations only requires agencies to update their ratings as soon as new information becomes available . while we agree that omb's fiscal year 2017 guidance does address dashboard reporting frequency in several places , the requirement for monthly updates is nonetheless explicitly stated and was confirmed by omb staff . however , as noted earlier , we recognize omb's plans to remove the monthly reporting requirement for cio ratings and have modified this recommendation to reflect that planned change . we acknowledge that when this new policy is finalized , education's reporting may be in compliance with the new requirement . until such time , agencies are still required by existing policy to report monthly and consequently , we believe that our recommendation is appropriate . education's written comments are provided in appendix vi . in written comments , energy concurred with our recommendations and noted that the office of the cio would work collaboratively with it executives to address the recommendations . energy also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . energy's written comments are provided in appendix vii . in written comments , hhs concurred with our recommendations , but noted that the recommendations were based on a now - outdated department methodology and that a new methodology , which went into effect in january 2016 , addresses our recommendations . hhs also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . hhs's written comments are provided in appendix viii . in written comments , dhs concurred with our recommendation to reflect the level of risk facing an investment relative to that investment's ability to accomplish its goals .