use of headings . according to the usability consultant , disclosure documents from three of the four issuers analyzed contained headings that were difficult to distinguish from surrounding text . headings , according to the consultant , provide a visual hierarchy to help readers quickly identify information in a lengthy document . good headers are easy to identify and use meaningful labels . figure 12 illustrates two examples of how the credit card disclosure documents failed to use headings effectively . in the first example , the headings contained an unnecessary string of numbers that the consultant found would make locating a specific topic in the text more difficult . as a result , readers would need to actively ignore the string of numbers until the middle of the line to find what they wanted . the consultant noted that such numbers might be useful if this document had a table of contents that referred to the numbers , but it did not . in the second example , the consultant noted that a reader's ability to locate information using the headings in this document was hindered because the headings were not made more visually distinct , but instead were aligned with other text and printed in the same type size as the text that followed . as a result , these headings blended in with the text . for example , a consumer wrote that disclosure documents were “loaded with booby traps designed to trip consumers , and written in intentionally impenetrable and confusing language.” one of the consumer advocacy groups stated the disclosures were “full of dense , impenetrable legal jargon that even lawyers and seasoned consumer advocates have difficulty understanding.” in addition , the consultant noted that many of the disclosures , including solicitation letters and cardmember agreements , contained overly long and complex sentences that increase the effort a reader must devote to understanding the text . figure 14 contains two examples of instances in which the disclosure documents used uncommon words and phrases to express simple concepts . in addition , the disclosure documents regularly presented too much or irrelevant detail . according to the usability consultant's analysis , the credit card disclosures often contained superfluous information . for example , figure 15 presents an example of text from one cardmember agreement that described the actions the issuer would take if its normal source for the rate information used to set its variable rates — the wall street journal — were to cease publication . including such an arguably unimportant detail lengthens and makes this disclosure more complex . according to sec best practices for creating clear disclosures , disclosure documents are more effective when they adhere to the rule that less is more . by omitting unnecessary details from disclosure documents , the usability consultant indicated that consumers would be more likely to read and understand the information they contain . many of the credit cardholders that were tested and interviewed as part of our review exhibited confusion over various fees , practices , and other terms that could affect the cost of using their credit cards .