i for a summary of the provisions ) . for example , sba made several changes to programs , policies , and procedures to enhance its capabilities to prepare for major disasters . section 12063 states that sba should improve public awareness of disaster declarations and application periods , and create a marketing and outreach plan . for further information on this testimony , please contact william b. shear at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are marshall hamlett ( assistant director ) , christine ramos ( analyst in charge ) , john mcgrail , and barbara roesmann . appendix i: summary of provisions in the small business disaster response and loan improvements act of 2008 this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . private disaster assistance program ( pdap ) would make guaranteed loans available to homeowners and small businesses in an amount up to $2 million . it is also the only form of sba assistance not limited to small businesses . sba's plan stated that it would ( 1 ) develop webinars for specific regional risks and promote these before the traditional start of the season for certain types of disasters such as hurricanes ; and ( 2 ) establish a recurring schedule for outreach with stakeholders when no disaster is occurring . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . administered by sba's office of disaster assistance ( oda ) , the disaster loan program is the primary federal program for funding long - range recovery for nonfarm businesses that are victims of disasters . small business development centers ( sbdc ) are sba's resource partners that provide disaster assistance to businesses . sba officials said that sbdcs help sba by doing the following: conducting local outreach to disaster victims , assisting declined business loan applicants or applicants who have withdrawn their loan applications with applications for reconsideration or re - acceptance , assisting declined applicants in remedying issues that initially precluded loan approvals , and providing business loan applicants with technical assistance , including helping businesses reconstruct business records , helping applicants better understand what is required to complete a loan application , compiling financial statements , and collecting required documents . sba can make available several types of disaster loans , including two types of direct loans: physical disaster loans and economic injury disaster loans . physical disaster loans are for permanent rebuilding and replacement of uninsured or underinsured disaster - damaged property . they are available to homeowners , renters , businesses of all sizes , and nonprofit organizations .