ii ) . for example , fdic has enhanced physical security controls , instructed personnel to use more secure e - mail methods to protect the integrity of certain accounting data transferred over an internal communication network , updated the nfe security plan to clearly identify all common security controls , developed procedures to report computer security incidents , and updated the nfe contingency plan . while the corporation has made significant progress in resolving known weaknesses , it has not completed actions to mitigate the remaining five weaknesses . specifically fdic has not effectively generated nfe audit reports ; maintained a complete listing of all nfe configuration items , including application software , data files , software development tools , hardware , and documentation ; properly segregated incompatible system - related functions , duties , and capacities for an individual associated with the nfe ; effectively implemented or accurately reported the status of its remedial properly updated the nfe risk assessment . fdic stated it has initiated and completed some actions to mitigate the remaining five prior year weaknesses . however , we have not verified that these actions have been completed . not addressing these actions could leave the corporation's financial data vulnerable to an increased risk of unauthorized access and manipulation . appendix ii describes the previously reported weaknesses in information security controls that were unresolved at the time of our prior review and the status of the corporation's corrective actions . although fdic has made significant progress improving its information system controls , old and new weaknesses could limit the corporation's ability to effectively protect the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of its financial systems and information . in addition to the five previously reported weaknesses that remain unresolved , newly identified weaknesses in access controls and configuration management controls introduce risk to two key financial systems . a key reason for these weaknesses is that fdic did not always fully implement key information security program activities . as a result , increased risk exists of unauthorized disclosure or modification of financial information . a basic management objective for any organization is to protect the resources that support its critical operations and assets from unauthorized access . organizations accomplish this objective by designing and implementing controls that are intended to prevent , limit , and detect unauthorized access to computer resources ( data , programs , equipment , and facilities ) , thereby protecting them from unauthorized disclosure , modification , and loss . fdic developed policies and procedures on access control which , among other things , stated that login id and password combinations should not be shared , access to application source code should be restricted unless users have a legitimate business need for access , and passwords should be adequately encrypted . however , fdic did not always implement certain access controls , as the following examples show: multiple fdic users in a production control unit in one division and multiple users in another division share the same nfe logon id and password . as a result , increased risk exists that individual accountability for authorized , as well as unauthorized system activity could be lost .