none . none . desktop , “back of envelope” environment . research to prove feasibility . none . paper studies indicate components ought to work together . academic environment . the emphasis here is still on understanding the science but beginning to think about possible applications of the scientific principles . research to prove feasibility . no system components , just basic laboratory research equipment to verify physical principles . no attempt at integration ; still trying to see whether individual parts of the technology work . lab experiments with available components show they will work . uses of the observed properties are postulated and experimentation with potential elements of subsystem begins . lab work to validate pieces of technology without trying to integrate . emphasis is on validating the predictions made during earlier analytical studies so that we're certain that the technology has a firm scientific underpinning . demonstrate technical feasibility and functionality . ad hoc and available laboratory components are surrogates for system components that may require special handling , calibration , or alignment to get them to function . not fully functional but representative of technically feasible approach . available components assembled into subsystem breadboard . interfaces between components are realistic . tests in controlled laboratory environment . lab work at less than full subsystem integration , although starting to see if components will work together . demonstrate technical feasibility and functionality . fidelity of components and interfaces are improved from trl 4 . some special purpose components combined with available laboratory components . functionally equivalent but not of same material or size . may include integration of several components with reasonably realistic support elements to demonstrate functionality . fidelity of subsystem mock up improves ( eg , from breadboard to brassboard ) . integration issues become defined . laboratory environment modified to approximate operational environment . increases in accuracy of the controlled environment in which it is tested . demonstrate applicability to intended project and subsystem integration . ( specific to intended application in project. ) subsystem is high fidelity functional prototype with ( very near same material and size of operational system ) . probably includes the integration of many new components and realistic supporting elements / subsystems if needed to demonstrate full functionality . partially integrated with existing systems . components are functionally compatible ( and very near same material and size of operational system ) . component integration into system is demonstrated . relevant environment inside or outside the laboratory , but not the eventual operating environment . the testing environment does not reach the level of an operational environment , although moving out of controlled laboratory environment into something more closely approximating the realities of technology's intended use . demonstrate applicability to intended project and subsystem integration . prototype improves to preproduction quality . components are representative of project components ( material , size , and function ) and integrated with other key supporting elements / subsyste ms to demonstrate full functionality . accurate enough representation to expect only minor design changes . prototype not integrated into intended system but onto surrogate system . ( specific to intended application in project. ) operational environment , but not the eventual environment . operational testing of system in representational environment .