state . officials from state's office of the director of foreign assistance provided data from the foreign assistance coordination and tracking system ( facts ) database , which houses funding data on u.s. foreign assistance programs . the facts funding data included amounts from fiscal year 2006 through 2011 from the following foreign assistance accounts: andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) ; foreign military financing ( fmf ) ; international military education and training ( imet ) ; international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) ; and nonproliferation , anti - terrorism , demining and related programs ( nadr ) . we requested the funding amounts for these accounts after determining , through discussions with state officials , that these accounts were the most relevant to our scope . in addition , we requested specific amounts allotted for security sector reform and combating transnational crime in the region from the development assistance ( da ) and economic support fund ( esf ) accounts . in addition , state's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement ( inl ) provided records on appropriations , allotments , obligations , expenditures , and other budget categories . we used these records to provide data on funding allotted for assistance in ecuador through dod's section 1207 assistance program ; we did not obtain any additional data on 1207 program funding in the region . usaid . usaid's office of latin america and the caribbean consulted internal records and submitted a spreadsheet that combined ( 1 ) amounts of aci assistance provided in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 , which were not included in the state / f data and ( 2 ) data pulled by a query of the facts database to provide amounts allotted for counternarcotics assistance through the da and esf accounts for fiscal years 2008 through 2011 . because state's facts database was in the process of being created and launched in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 , some data may be missing for those years . in addition , state officials told us that although assistance provided through the fmf and imet accounts is often used for counternarcotics purposes , the main intent of these accounts is to provide assistance to partner nation militaries . some of the fmf and imet assistance included in this report may not have provided direct support to counternarcotics efforts of andean countries . in addition , state / inl's records on the allotments for the 1207 program may not be complete , because the program was originally managed by dod ; authority for the 1207 program expired on september 30 , 2010 . according to state , because state does not maintain separate records for the uses of funds in the aci account , state was not able to provide complete data specific to this account . according to usaid , usaid's office for latin america and the caribbean relied on internal records that had been maintained by the staff since 2006 to provide gao with data on aci funding amounts allotted by usaid in each country for counternarcotics programs .