( see fig . most of these positions , including those of the cfo and the chief administrative officer , were vacant because of retirements and resignations . to help aoc better meet the needs of its customers , aoc also created and filled two new leadership positions — the director of congressional and external relations and the director of planning and project management . in addition to these nine positions , aoc has filled seven other management positions over the past year , such as the deputy director for the office of the chief administrative officer , deputy director of the project management division , and director of the information technology division . while these new managers can bring new energy and ideas to the agency , the introduction of so many new managers within a short period makes it challenging to integrate them into aoc while sustaining the progress made thus far . the turnover in aoc's senior leadership over the past year resulted in a loss of leadership continuity , institutional knowledge , and expertise — a loss that could adversely affect aoc's ability to continue its progress , at least in the short term . aoc has taken steps to mitigate these factors and integrate the new managers into the agency by , for example , holding weekly senior leadership meetings and monthly detailed briefings on various aoc construction projects . these managers are also part of aoc's senior executive performance management system , which links the managers' performance plans to aoc's mission - critical goals and holds the managers accountable for results . aoc officials also noted that 4 of the 9 new managers have been promoted from within the agency and have the institutional knowledge and expertise gained from several years of experience at aoc . the current vacancy in the architect's position further challenges aoc's ability to sustain progress . the process for hiring the new architect is in the early stages , and according to the coo , hiring the previous architect took over a year . until a new architect is in place , the coo is authorized to act as the architect and is assuming the architect's duties along with his own . in general , the architect's responsibilities include overall management of aoc , support and representation on boards and commissions — including the capitol police board — and management of the cvc project , while the coo's responsibilities involve developing the agency's strategic and performance plans , proposing organizational and staffing changes needed to carry out aoc's mission , and reviewing and directing the operational functions of aoc . the coo identified the management of the cvc project as one of the agency's major challenges to becoming more strategic and accountable , because the cvc requires significant management attention that could otherwise be focused on aoc's transformation initiatives . the management responsibilities for the cvc project could increase if , as scheduled , the cvc reaches a critical juncture in the next year as the construction phase ends and operations begin . for example , before the cvc becomes operational , the roles and responsibilities for managing cvc operations , including those of aoc , will need to be determined .