( see app . i for the items on the master list. ) the demonstration ended in february 2018 . these steps could include: resuming the paused home health services demonstration ; extending current demonstrations ; or , identifying new opportunities for expanding prior authorization to additional items and services with high unnecessary utilization and high improper payment rates . ( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to hhs for comment , and its comments are reprinted in appendix iii . hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . hhs neither agreed nor disagreed with the recommendations but said it would continue to evaluate prior authorization programs and take our findings and recommendations into consideration in developing plans or determining appropriate next steps . in addition , in response to our recommendation to take steps to continue prior authorization , hhs noted that the president's fiscal year 2019 budget for hhs included a legislative proposal to extend its statutory authority to permanently require prior authorization for specified medicare fee - for - service items and services to all medicare fee - for - service items and services . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , the administrator of the centers for medicare & medicaid services , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact a. nicole clowers at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or clowersa@gao.gov or kathleen m. king at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or kingk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . in december 2015 , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) established a permanent prior authorization program for certain durable medical equipment , prosthetics , orthotics , and supplies ( dmepos ) . home health services demonstration: in august 2016 , cms implemented prior authorization for home health services in illinois . the demonstration , established under section 402 ( a ) of the social security amendments of 1967 , is intended to develop or demonstrate improved methods for the investigation and prosecution of fraud in providing care or services under medicare . the demonstration was originally scheduled to incorporate other states the agency has identified with high rates of fraud and abuse: florida , massachusetts , michigan , and texas . however , as of april 2017 , cms paused the demonstration while it considered making improvements . we conducted this performance audit from november 2016 through april 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .