iii. ) family leave policies in the countries we studied were generally funded through tax revenues and general revenues . because some of these countries are social welfare states , their tax revenues represent a greater share of their gdp , allowing for the funding of various policies . for example , canada , the uk , and the netherlands fund paid leave policies in part through national insurance programs , which use payroll taxes paid by employers and employees . denmark's paid maternity , paternity , and parental leaves are financed by income tax revenues through an 8 percent tax on all earned income . eligibility provisions are a part of most leave policies we reviewed , and sometimes the service time with an employer determines the amount of leave a parent can take . many national leave policies in our study countries require employees to work for a period of time before they can take leave , giving employers assurances that employees are committed to their jobs . for example , in denmark , employed women with a work history of at least 120 hours in the 13 weeks prior to the leave are allowed 18 weeks of paid maternity leave . in some countries , though , all parents are entitled to take family leave , which in some cases is paid . in sweden , all parents are entitled to parental benefits whether or not they are working . in the uk , by law , all expectant employees can take up to 52 weeks of maternity leave , regardless of how long they have worked for their employer . to enhance workers' ability to take leave , the countries we studied replace all or part of the wages they forgo while on leave . dutch employees on maternity leave are entitled to receive 100 percent of their wages , up to a maximum ; their partners receive their regular rate of pay from their employers . in the uk , women who meet qualifying conditions of length of service and who earn a minimum amount for the national insurance system — or , on average , 87 british pounds per week — can receive payment generally equal to 90 percent or less of their average weekly earnings . in ireland , women can generally be paid at 80 percent of earnings , subject to her contributions into the social insurance system . however , employers may offer more leave than legally required . because leave is intended to help parents balance career responsibilities with caring — not just for newborns , but for children in general — many countries allow parents to take their allotted parental leave all at once or to divide it into parts . in the netherlands , sweden , denmark , and the uk , parents have the option of using their leave flexibly by dividing it into discrete parts , sometimes with the consent of an employer . in the netherlands , for example , parents may divide the leave into a maximum of three parts and can take the leave simultaneously or following one another .