nifa . nifa oversees a competitive grant program called the agriculture and food research initiative ( afri ) that awards grants for research , extension , and / or education activities . grant money is also awarded for “integrated” projects that incorporate two or more of these activities . some integrated projects , known as coordinated agricultural projects ( cap ) , support large - scale projects that promote collaboration , open communication and the exchange of information , and reduce duplication of effort . in addition , nifa funds “standard” grants on climate change adaptation and mitigation in agriculture that consist of targeted research , education , extension , or integrated projects . to help communicate information to farmers , nifa distributes funding to the cooperative extension system . extension disseminates science - based information and decision support tools through meetings , written publications , and via the internet . for example , the cooperative extension system supports the extension website , which can be used to access information and education resources on a wide range of topics from land - grant university staff and experts , such as entrepreneurship and growing certain crops . in fiscal year 2013 , nifa provided approximately $296 million for agricultural extension at land - grant universities , or slightly less than one quarter of nifa's total budget , to supplement state and county funds for the extension system . ars . usda's principal in - house research agency , performs both basic and applied research and presents the results through various sources , including academic papers , fact sheets , and conference presentations . climate change research conducted by ars takes place under the national resources and sustainable agricultural systems program , one of its four national research programs . in fiscal year 2013 , ars spent about $38 million on climate change research , about 65 percent of which went to adaptation research projects , according to an internal usda document . for example , ars researchers are experimenting with different crop varieties to show which of these can withstand drought or higher temperatures . ers . ers also devotes a smaller amount of research money to developing information for decision makers on climate policy , such as examining the costs and benefits of adapting to climate change . in 2012 , ers released a report that examined how farmers might adapt to changing climate conditions to reduce the impact of changes in local weather , resource conditions , and price signals . the study found that , while changing climate conditions are uncertain , farmers have the opportunity to adapt to weather , resource , and price changes by altering crops and adjusting their production practices . in the area of climate change mitigation , usda has set a goal for 2015 of a 40 million metric ton reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from the agricultural sector compared with 2005 levels and an 80 million metric ton increase in carbon sequestration compared with 2005 . according to usda's 2010-2015 strategic plan , usda will work to achieve these goals through its existing conservation and energy programs .