the department concurred with our recommendation . we reviewed the results of the joint service electronic combat systems tester development testing and determined program status through discussions with program office officials and a review of appropriate documentation . we discussed the status of the air force's aircraft electronic combat systems with air combat command officials responsible for these systems on all air force operational aircraft . we held discussions regarding logistics support and maintenance with officials at warner robbins air logistics center responsible for air force electronic combat systems . we held similar discussions with officials at jacksonville naval air station regarding navy aircraft electronic combat systems . we also observed and discussed the testing of operational f - 15c aircraft with officials at the 33rd wing at eglin air force base and discussed the results of similar tests with officials of the 1st wing at langley air force base . these two wings have about 40 percent of the air force's f - 15c aircraft . we also relied on our previous reviews of electronic warfare for background information on the existing logistics and maintenance problems with electronic combat systems . we conducted our review from august 2000 to august 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this letter to the secretaries of the air force and navy ; to interested congressional committees ; and to the director , office of management and budget . if you have any questions , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4841 . major contributors to this report were michael aiken , terry parker , and charles ward . we recently reported that current suppression capabilities are not adequate . to the extent that the new tester discloses reliability problems with existing electronic combat self - protection systems , the need to improve suppression capabilities would only be that much greater . given the experience from using the new tester on the f - 15c and f / a - 18c , it is likely that using the new tester will find a number of undisclosed faults in electronic combat systems . many of the electronic combat systems on current aircraft are older systems that are already experiencing obsolescence problems , such as difficulty in acquiring spares due to vendors that go out of business or are no longer producing old technology equipment ( referred to as “vanishing vendors” ) . the air force's special test program , called combat shield , is used periodically to test a variety of types of operational aircraft for readiness . typically , even without using the new tester , testing via combat shield has found that some aircraft in every wing tested have faults in their electronic combat systems , regardless of the aircraft type . for example , combat shield found undisclosed faults when testing was conducted at wings equipped with the f - 16 . in fact , air force and navy officials have already identified emerging problems regarding readiness , logistics , and maintenance for other electronic combat systems . this applies to systems both internally carried or externally mounted on an aircraft .