this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact jayetta hecker at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or by e - mail at heckerj@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include paul aussendorf , tom gilbert , grant mallie , steve martin , richard swayze , and pamela vines . ( 3 ) what is the financial condition of the airline industry ? my statement today focuses on the seven legacy and seven low - cost airlines that accounted for 90 percent of all domestic airline industry seat capacity in 2003 . legacy airlines are essentially those airlines that were in operation before airline deregulation in 1978 and whose goal is to provide service from “anywhere to everywhere.” to meet this goal , these airlines support large , complex hub - and - spoke operations with thousands of employees and hundreds of aircraft ( of various types ) with service to domestic communities of all sizes as well as international points at numerous fare levels . legacy airlines contract with , or separately operate , smaller regional airlines to provide service to smaller communities . low - cost airlines , except southwest , entered the market after deregulation and generally operate point - to - point service using fewer types of aircraft . these airlines typically offer a simplified fare structure and generally do not offer international service outside of canada , central america , and the caribbean . although there is variation among the airlines in each of these groups , there are far more similarities than differences . most importantly , the seven low - cost airlines consistently had lower unit costs than the seven legacy airlines between 1998 and 2003 . ( 2 ) what cost cutting measures have airlines reported taking to remain financially viable ? to determine the cost - cutting measures airlines took and to assess the industry's financial condition , we analyzed financial and operating data reported by airlines to the department of transportation ( dot ) . to assess the reliability of those data , we reviewed the quality control procedures that dot applies and subsequently determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . u.s. airlines , particularly legacy airlines , have faced a sweeping set of challenges since 1998 . these challenges are both internal factors reshaping the airline industry and external events that sharply reduced the demand for air travel . within the airline industry , even before september 11th , the growth of the internet as a means to sell and distribute tickets and the emergence of well - capitalized low - cost airlines as a powerful market force created tremendous competitive pressures on airlines . subsequent to p.l . 108-11 , in december 2003 , congress provided a similar mandate under the vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act for gao to report on the financial condition of the u.s. airline industry . later this year gao will provide a report to congress in response to these mandates .