( see app . i for a copy of the 2004 mmwr article. ) the first analysis was conducted to identify trends in blls in district residents before and after the changes in the water disinfection process . the second analysis was conducted to determine whether residents in homes with the highest water lead levels ( 300 ppb or greater ) had blls at or above cdc's level of concern of 10 μg / dl . the summary statement of the 2004 mmwr article's findings noted that the elevated water lead levels might have contributed to a small increase in blls among district residents . this change likely contributed to elevated water lead levels . by late 2001 , the water and sewer authority became aware that the levels of lead in the district's tap water were above epa's limit of 15 ppb , and it notified epa of that fact in august 2002 . the main target for lead toxicity is the nervous system . publish an article in an mmwr recommendations and reports that conveys what is known and not known about tap water as a source of lead exposure and communicates the potential health effects in children of elevated lead levels in water in consultation with epa , as appropriate . develop procedures to review previously published information and determine whether additional information should be published to help ensure the correct understanding of the public health message . the procedures could include criteria to use when deciding how to respond in certain situations , such as the event in the district , in which cdc learns of confusion about the public health message and determines that clarification or additional information should be published or cdc issues or releases a product in an expedited time frame or based on uncertain or incomplete information and determines additional information should be published to clarify the original public health message , even if there is no evidence of confusion . cdc reviewed a draft of this report and provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix v. cdc generally concurred with our recommendations and submitted general comments on the draft . cdc agreed with our first recommendation to publish an article in an mmwr recommendations and reports . while cdc previously stated that it had no plans to publish such an article , it stated in its written comments that it now plans to publish an article in an mmwr recommendations and reports that will focus on what is known about tap water as a source of lead exposure and summarize the potential health effects in children from lead exposures . related to our second recommendation to develop procedures to review previously published information and determine whether additional information should be published to help ensure the correct understanding of the public health message , cdc said it planned to adopt several procedures for taking action when the agency becomes aware of confusion about its message . cdc's written comments indicated that these procedures will be effective when approved by the cdc director . specifically , cdc stated that when appropriate , it may take actions to address significant errors of understanding or perception resulting from public health information disseminated by the agency .