termination era . on august 1 , 1953 , congress adopted house concurrent resolution 108 , which established a policy of making indians “subject to the same laws and entitled to the same privileges and responsibilities” that apply to other citizens and declared that indian tribes and their members “should be freed from federal supervision and control.” subsequently , in the 1950s and 1960s , the federal government terminated its government - to - government relationships with a number of tribes . congress has since restored government - to - government relationships with 38 tribes that were terminated during the termination era ( see app . ii for more information about terminated and restored tribes ) . self - determination era . since the 1970s , the federal government has adopted policies to promote the practical exercise of tribes' inherent sovereign powers , including fostering economic development of indian land and encouraging self - determination of indian affairs . for example , the indian self - determination and education assistance act of 1975 enables federally recognized indian tribes to administer certain federal programs for indians , which were previously administered by the federal government on their behalf . in 1977 , the american indian policy review commission reported that “he distinction the department of the interior draws between the status of recognized and unrecognized tribes seems to be based merely on precedent — whether at some point in a tribe's history it established a formal political relationship with the government of the united states.” the commission identified 133 non - federally recognized tribes . at that time , no administrative process was in place for these non - federally recognized tribes to seek federal recognition . in 1978 , interior established an administrative acknowledgment process by which indian groups could submit a petition to seek federal recognition . interior maintains a list of entities that have submitted a letter of intent to petition for federal recognition or have initiated the administrative acknowledgment process by submitting a complete petition . this list includes at least 350 entities , according to interior's office of federal acknowledgment . the process of developing a complete petition is expensive and may take years . consequently , as we reported in november 2001 , and as of april 2011 , most of these entities have not yet submitted a complete petition . information on seven criteria established in the regulations governing interior's administrative acknowledgment process . for example , the entity must submit evidence that it has been identified as an american indian entity on a substantially continuous basis since 1900 and that it has maintained political influence or authority over its members as an autonomous entity from historic times until the present . gao , indian issues: improvements needed in tribal recognition process , gao - 02-49 ( washington , d.c.: nov. 2 , 2001 ) . making it the 566th federally recognized indian tribe . non - federally recognized tribes can generally seek federal recognition through interior's administrative acknowledgment process or through other means , such as congressional action . for example , the lumbee tribe of north carolina — which was the subject of legislation but not federally recognized in 1956 — petitioned interior for recognition and has also sought recognition through legislation .