the white house did not comment on these recommendations . in july 2012 , the white house released the national strategy for biosurveillance to describe the u.s. government's approach to strengthening biosurveillance . the strategy describes guiding principles , core functions , and enablers for strengthening biosurveillance . the strategy states that its approach emphasized teamwork between and within federal departments , across all layers of government , and with private sector partners . a strategic implementation plan is to be completed within 120 days of the strategy issuance . the strategy does not fully meet the intent of our june 2010 and october 2011 recommendations , as discussed later in this statement , but it is possible that it will when the implementation plan is complete . dhs approved the gen - 3 acquisition in october 2009 without fully developing critical knowledge that would help ensure sound investment decision making , pursuit of optimal solutions , and reliable performance , cost , and schedule information . specifically , dhs did not engage the initial phase of its acquisition life - cycle framework , which is designed to help ensure that the mission need driving the acquisition warrants investment of limited resources . in the acquisition life cycle framework design , it is not the purpose of the mission needs statement to specify a technical solution . rather it is to serve as a touchstone for subsequent acquisition efforts by focusing on the capability gap to help articulate and build consensus around the goals and objectives for a program . dhs's biowatch program is an example of such an effort . it aims to reduce the time required to recognize and characterize potentially catastrophic aerosolized attacks by detecting the presence of five biological agents — considered to be at a high risk for weaponized attack — in the air . the currently deployed biowatch technology — generation - 2 ( gen - 2 ) — can take 12 to 36 hours to confirm the presence of pathogens . dhs has been pursuing gen - 3 with the goal of implementing a system that will perform automated testing , potentially generating a result in under 6 hours and eliminating certain labor costs . dhs officials in multiple departments described a climate , in the wake of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks and the subsequent amerithrax attacks , in which the highest levels of the administration expressed interest in quickly deploying the early generation biowatch detectors and improving their functionality — as quickly as possible — to allow for faster detection and an indoor capability . biowatch officials stated that they were aware that the mission needs statement prepared in october 2009 did not reflect a systematic effort to justify a capability need , but stated that the department directed them to proceed because there was already departmental consensus around the solution . accordingly , the utility of the mission needs statement as a foundation for subsequent acquisition efforts was limited . additionally , dhs did not use the processes established by its acquisition life - cycle framework to systematically ensure that it was pursuing the optimal solution — based on cost , benefit , and risk — to mitigate the capability gap identified in the mission needs statement .