there is no treatment for smallpox . however , it can be prevented through use of the smallpox vaccine . streptococcal disease ( invasive group a ) is a bacterial disease transmitted through direct contact with an infected person's mucus or through contact with wounds or sores on the skin . invasive group a streptococcus ( gas ) infections occur when bacteria get into parts of the body where they are not usually found , such as the blood , muscle , or lung . gas infections can be treated with many different antibiotics . streptococcal toxic shock syndrome ( stss ) is one of the most severe , but least common forms of invasive gas diseases . stss , which is not spread from human - to - human , causes blood pressure to rapidly drop and organs to fail . symptoms include fever , dizziness , confusion and a flat red rash over large areas of the body . early treatment of gas infections with antibiotics may reduce the risk of death from invasive gas disease . streptococcus pneumoniae is a bacterium that includes more than 90 strains and is transmitted through human - to - human contact . it is the cause of multiple diseases , including pneumonia , bacteremia , meningitis , and sinusitis . some strains of this bacterium are becoming resistant to one or more antibiotics . cdc and several states are currently conducting additional surveillance for the resistant forms of this bacterium . syphilis is a bacterial std with signs and symptoms that are indistinguishable from those of other diseases . syphilis is passed from person - to - person through direct contact with a syphilis sore and progresses through three stages . the primary stage is usually marked by the appearance of a single sore . the second stage is involves a skin rash and mucous membrane lesions . finally , the late stage begins when secondary symptoms disappear . many people infected with syphilis do not have any symptoms for years yet remain at risk for late complications if they are not treated . syphilis is easy to treat in its early stages , usually with antibiotics . tetanus ( lockjaw ) is caused by a bacterium found in the intestines of many animals and in the soil . it is transmitted to humans through open wounds . symptoms include generalized rigidity and convulsive spasms of the skeletal muscles . tetanus can be treated with an antitoxin , and there is an effective vaccine . toxic shock syndrome is a bacterial disease that develops when the disease - causing bacterium colonizes skin and mucous membranes in humans . this disease has been associated with the use of tampons and intravaginal contraceptive devices in women and occurs as a complication of skin abscesses or surgery . characterized by sudden onset of fever , chills , vomiting , diarrhea , muscle aches , and rash , toxic shock syndrome can rapidly progress to severe and intractable hypotension and multisystem dysfunction . treatment usually includes the use of antibiotics and supportive treatment to prevent dehydration and organ failure . trichinosis ( trichinellosis ) is food - borne illness caused by eating raw or undercooked pork and wild game products infected with a species of worm larvae .