it management . dhs has fully addressed one of the six it management outcomes and partially addressed the remaining five . in particular , the department has strengthened its enterprise architecture program ( or blueprint ) to guide it acquisitions by , among other things , largely addressing our prior recommendations aimed at adding needed architectural depth and breadth , thus fully addressing this outcome . however , the department needs to continue to demonstrate progress in strengthening other core it management areas . for example , while the department is taking the necessary steps to enhance its it security program , such as finalizing its annual information security performance plan , further work will be needed for dhs to eliminate the department's current material weakness in its information security . it will be important for the department to fully implement its plan , since dhs's financial statement auditor reported in december 2013 that flaws in the security controls such as access controls , contingency planning , and segregation of duties were a material weakness for financial reporting purposes . while important steps have been taken to define it investment management processes generally consistent with best practices , work is needed to demonstrate progress in implementing these processes across dhs's 13 it investment portfolios . in july 2012 , we recommended that dhs finalize the policies and procedures associated with its new tiered it governance structure and continue to implement key processes supporting this structure . dhs agreed with these recommendations ; however , as of april 2014 , the department had not finalized the key it governance directive , and the draft structure has been implemented across only 5 of the 13 investment portfolios . fully addressing these actions would also help dhs to address key it operations efficiency initiatives , as well as to more systematically identify other opportunities for savings . for example , as part of the office of management and budget's data center consolidation initiative , we reported that dhs planned to consolidate from 101 data centers to 37 data centers by december 2015.officials told us that the department had achieved actual cost savings totaling about $140 million in fiscal years 2011 through 2013 , and that it estimates total consolidation cost savings of approximately $650 million through fiscal year 2019 . further , dhs dhs has also made progress in establishing and implementing sound it system acquisition processes , but continued efforts are needed to ensure that the department's major it acquisition programs are applying these processes and obtaining more predictable outcomes . in 2013 , dhs's office of the chief information officer led an assessment of its major it programs ( against industry best practices in key it system acquisition process areas ) to determine its capability strengths and weaknesses , and has work under way to track programs' progress in addressing identified capability gaps , such as requirements management and risk analysis . while this gap analysis and approach for tracking implementation of corrective actions are important steps , dhs will need to show that these actions are resulting in better , more predictable outcomes for its major it system acquisitions .