appropriate . ( we note that an exception would be if a committee were considering an issue that would impact a particular group , for example , physicists or biologists — a case in which a group of experts would be stakeholders in the matter being considered. ) instead , oge's response is to state that it is not logical to say that a field or area of expertise is a “group of persons” and to disagree that clarification to its guidance may be warranted to eliminate this practice . it is possible , as oge suggests , that some agencies understand the guidance and are simply disregarding it . however , we believe ambiguities in the oge guidance may provide agencies with some “cover” to support their interpretations . in such cases , clear guidance would make it more difficult for them to continue to misapply it . in addition , we direct oge's attention to the responses to this report from interior , nasa , and energy ( see apps . xv , xvi , and xvii ) , which suggest that clarifications to the guidance regarding the appointment of representatives to represent fields of expertise may be necessary . on the basis of our work at several agencies and our review of the oge guidance , we continue to believe some clarification is needed vis - à - vis the use of the term “represent” and its cognate forms . as the draft and final reports state , oge's direction to agencies in making decisions regarding representative appointments is to use “words to characterize them as the representatives of individuals or entities outside the government who have an interest in the subject matter assigned to the committee.” notably missing from oge's specific direction to agencies is a focus on the nature of the advice they will be giving — that is , that they are to represent stakeholder views . this is in contrast to oge's direction to agencies regarding special government employees that does focus on the fact that they are to exercise individual and independent judgment . although oge's guidance does provide helpful examples to agencies in examining statutory language to determine whether committee members are actually intended to serve as representatives of interest groups , we believe that language in the conclusions section of the guidance that directs agencies how to indicate the type of appointment contradicts the examples that oge cites . we have clarified the final report to indicate that we were specifically discussing the conclusions section of the oge guidance . we also note that oge developed these conclusions in 1982 — that is , it is not citing the 1962 guidance the agency is hesitant to revise . overall , we believe that clarifications , but not departures from the criteria regarding appointments , are needed . we point oge also to the comments from the interior ( see app . xv ) on the matter of the term representative . interior stated that “gao agrees that the statute authorizing the national cooperative geologic mapping advisory committee' calls for the committee to include…representatives,' but then goes on to say that the statute does not “clearly and unambiguously call for these members to be appointed as representatives rather than special government employees.