hhs and nsf had no comment . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense , the secretary of health and human services , the director of the office of management and budget , the secretary of education , the director of the national science foundation , and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by e - mail at needhamjk1@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . because this survey was not designed to produce reliable estimates for simplified method schools , the 95 percent confidence intervals are wider than for other survey estimates and are noted along with each table . dallas ( central ) new york ( northeastern ) san francisco ( western ) washington , dc ( mid - atlantic ) . other staff making key contributions to this report were penny berrier augustine , sharron candon , pamela davidson , morgan delaney ramaker , anne - marie fennell , art james , janet mckelvey , ruben montes de oca , amy moran lowe , susan neill , kenneth patton , angela pleasants , scott purdy , mark ramage , sylvia schatz , and suzanne sterling . the objectives of this study were to examine the following issues related to higher education institutions performing basic research for the department of defense ( dod ) : ( 1 ) the variation in proposed and negotiated indirect cost rates and factors that may contribute to variations ; ( 2 ) how and to what extent the administrative cap and the dod basic research cap limit reimbursement of indirect costs ; and ( 3 ) the methods dod uses for overseeing compliance with indirect cost reimbursement for grants and the extent to which each method was used . to identify the proposed and negotiated indirect cost rates of schools performing basic research for dod and factors that may contribute to variation in the rates , we collected and analyzed information from a probability sample of schools that performed basic research for dod in fiscal year 2007 , according to dod - provided data . detailed information on the survey is available below . we also interviewed government officials at dod and other government agencies on regulations and policies relating to the reimbursement of indirect costs for research . this included cognizant rate - setting officials in dod's office of naval research and the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) division of cost allocation ; dod officials in offices awarding and overseeing basic research , such as the air force office of scientific research ; the army research office ; the office of the director , defense research and engineering ; the defense threat reduction agency ; and the defense advanced research projects agency ; and regulatory officials overseeing indirect cost policy in the office of management and budget ( omb ) .