education might be reduced or eliminated . to determine whether there have been any changes in student access to to determine whether there have been any changes in student access to arts education since nclba , the congress asked us to examine the arts education since nclba , the congress asked us to examine the following questions: ( 1 ) has the amount of instruction time for arts following questions: ( 1 ) has the amount of instruction time for arts education changed and , if so , have certain groups been more affected than others , ( 2 ) to what extent have state education agencies' requirements and funding for arts education changed since nclba , ( 3 ) what are school officials in selected districts doing to provide arts education since nclba and what challenges do they face in doing so , and ( 4 ) what is known about the effect of arts education in improving student outcomes ? to identify changes in students' access to arts education , if any , we analyzed data on changes in instruction time between school years 2004-2005 and 2006- 2007 for all subjects , including the arts , from the department of education's ( education ) national longitudinal study of no child left behind ( nls - nclb ) . because this study collected data on changes in instruction time only from elementary school teachers , the nationally representative findings on students' access to arts education apply only to elementary schools . although nls - nclb data did not allow us to answer the study question for middle and secondary schools , they were the only existing data on changes in instruction time available that met gao's data quality standards . our findings also apply only to the time between school years 2004-2005 and 2006-2007 and not to the full period of time since nclba's passage . as a further step in identifying changes in students' access to arts education by identifying any changes in state arts education requirements and funding , we surveyed arts officials in 49 states and the district of columbia . for the survey , an arts official was an official in a state department of education or other designated state agency who was knowledgeable about the states' role in shaping the provision of arts education in public schools . before deciding to use the nls - nclb data , we conducted a data reliability assessment . we discuss our assessment procedures and steps we took to mitigate any data limitations below , as part of the methodology for analyzing changes in instruction time . we provided specifications to education for descriptive analyses of the nls - nclb data , and we conducted a descriptive analysis of our state survey data , a synthesis of our site visit data , and a methodological assessment of existing research on arts education . because we were not able to obtain raw data files from education to do a comprehensive analysis of the data ourselves , we asked education to provide us with summary information from the survey of teachers component of the school year 2006-2007 nls - nclb . these data are from a nationally representative survey of teachers , as well as of schools and school districts .