such flexibilities , provided under 42 u.s.c . we also found that employees converted to title 42 from other pay systems generally earned higher compensation than in their previous position . employees converted in 2010 earned , on average , $34,000 more in base salary than earned in their previous position . however , many did not receive the same amount of nonsalary payments ( including retention incentives ) received while employed under the general schedule or other pay system . therefore , the average increase in total compensation ( base salary and incentive or other nonsalary payments ) was about $14,000 in 2010 . under hhs policy , title 42 employees are eligible to receive performance bonuses ; recruitment , retention , and relocation incentives ; and other nonsalary payments that are available to other hhs employees . in 2010 , hhs issued nonsalary payments to 6,336 of its 6,697 title 42 employees . seventy - one percent of title 42 employees earned ratings - based individual cash awards . less than 1 percent ( 60 ) of title 42 employees received nonsalary payments in the form of recruitment , retention , or relocation incentives . according to senior officials at hhs's human resource office and nih , title 42 authority provides two primary benefits — appointment agility and compensation flexibility . these officials said appointment agility enables the agency to hire scientists , doctors , and other consultants to quickly fill knowledge , skill , and ability gaps so that medical research can move forward and to respond to medical emergencies . for example , according to hhs officials , the agency used title 42 authority to quickly hire experts needed to develop a vaccine in response to the h1n1 flu pandemic of 2009 . appointment agility is also important because many research projects , particularly those at nih , are not meant to be long - term and title 42 appointments can align with project time frames better than hiring full - time permanent staff under regular hiring authorities . in some cases , the temporary appointment of a researcher with highly - specialized skills to assist with a limited - scope , limited - duration study may be more appropriate than a permanent position . according to officials , compensation flexibility helps hhs compete with the private sector and academia to hire and retain highly qualified employees with rare and critical skill sets , such as neuroscientists , applied researchers in dietary intakes , and engineers that can operate particle accelerators . hhs human resource officials stated the salaries hhs can offer to its top researchers are often not commensurate with private sector salaries . however , they said the higher compensation limits under title 42 combined with other benefits — such as name recognition and access to advanced research equipment and technology not often available in the private sector or academia — can help offset compensation disparities and make hhs attractive to researchers , doctors , and scientists . because hhs does not consistently electronically record the authority under which many of its title 42 employees were appointed , the number of employees hired under either section 209 ( f ) or ( g ) could not be determined .