mediation . according to cadre , mediation is viewed as less adversarial than due process hearings , in part , because parties work together to try to reach an agreement . cadre also reports that mediation is generally believed to be less costly than due process hearings because it typically requires less time and may require less involvement from attorneys and other experts . the number of mediation requests increased from school year 2004-05 to 2016-17 as education and the states encouraged dispute resolution options that stakeholders told us were less costly and confrontational . in school year 2016-17 , there were 11,413 mediations requested , the largest number of requests from school year 2004-05 to 2016-17 . in addition , mediation requests resulted in mediation meetings at least 60 percent of the time in each of these school years . those meetings resulted in agreements at least two - thirds of the time in every year but one ( see fig . furthermore , more than half of the mediation meetings held stemmed from due process complaints that had been filed , which suggests that parties involved in the complaints may have been using mediation meetings to try to avoid a due process hearing . state complaints . state complaints were the least commonly used dispute resolution option . there were 5,239 state complaints filed in school year 2016-17 , down from 6,201 in school year 2004-05 ( see fig . on average , from school year 2004-05 to 2016-17 , approximately two - thirds of complaints filed resulted in the state issuing a report , and about two - thirds of those reports included findings of noncompliance with some aspect of idea on the part of the school district . according to state officials we spoke with , a state that receives a complaint will issue a report unless the filer withdraws the complaint , the state determines that the complaint is not about an issue covered under idea , or the complaint is resolved through other means . the rate at which all three dispute resolution options were used varied widely across states . some states and territories had much higher rates of dispute resolution activity than others . in school year 2016-17 , due process complaints were generally used at a higher rate nationwide than mediation requests and state complaints , according to cadre data ( 27.2 , 16.8 , and 7.7 per 10,000 idea students served , respectively ) . however , the rate of due process complaints filed in states ranged from a high of 252.1 in the district of columbia to a low of fewer than 1 per 10,000 idea students served in nebraska , respectively . similarly , some states had much higher rates of mediation requests and state complaints filed than others . within states , the mix of dispute resolution options used also varied . in some states , due process complaints were used much more frequently than mediation requests and state complaints , while other states saw mediation requests or state complaints used most frequently .