iii. ) the gpd providers that we visited established partnerships with state and local government agencies , other federal agencies , and local community organizations . further , several of the providers that we visited participated in the local continuum of care funded by hud or in other community coalitions , taking advantage of community networks that serve homeless individuals . while most providers offered a range of services , not all veterans received each service . to identify the specific services a veteran may need , providers typically worked with veterans to develop individual treatment plans that identified the veteran's needs on entering the program . table 2 lists examples of services and partners of gpd providers we visited . gpd programs often collaborated with va and others to provide health care - related services — such as mental health and substance abuse treatment , and family and nutritional counseling — to help veterans become more self - sufficient in their day - to - day activities . several programs hosted alcoholics anonymous meetings and other counseling services , while some gpd programs expected veterans to attend regular meetings elsewhere in the community . at least two gpd providers we visited provided their own substance abuse treatment and did not rely on community partners to provide such services . at least two other providers that referred veterans to va for substance abuse treatment expressed concerns about waiting lists for that service , making it hard for veterans to access care immediately . typically , a va local medical center provided veterans with primary and specialized health care . however , gpd providers sometimes expressed concerns about difficulties obtaining dental care . to meet the needs of veterans who were not eligible for va health care , gpd providers made other arrangements . for example , a program in the boston area partnered with the local hospital which provided free health care to homeless veterans who were in the gpd program but were ineligible for va health care . we also found that many providers either used their own staff or used partners' staff to provide mental health services and family and nutritional counseling services . all providers we visited tried to help veterans obtain financial benefits or employment . some had staff who assessed a veteran's potential eligibility for public benefits such as food stamps , supplemental security income , or social security disability insurance . other providers relied on relationships with local or state officials to provide this assessment . for example , a wisconsin gpd provider worked with a county veterans' service officer who reviewed veterans' eligibility for state and federal benefits . the provider also had a relationship with a county employment representative who came to the gpd facility to discuss job searches , training , and other employment issues with veterans . several providers were receiving dol grants to provide employment training services , worked with local colleges , or relied on other local programs to help veterans to increase skills . however , a lack of available jobs in an area may sometimes pose problems to finding employment for veterans .