this is the nature of any product development program . the case studies in this report illustrate a strong relationship between requirements , systems engineering , and program outcomes . they show that one key to avoid poor outcomes in major weapon system development programs is not necessarily to eliminate all risks , but instead to invest in detailed systems engineering analysis to understand the design implications of requirements and reconcile them with the resources that can be reasonably expected . at a minimum , this reconciliation , or match , should be evidenced by an allocated baseline — that is , a preliminary design — before committing to a product development program . our cases indicate that regardless of the challenge posed by initial requirements , systems engineering , if done well , can be a key enabler of a sound business case for starting a new development program . however , it is not clear whether they provide adequate detail about progress against those plans , such as whether a functional baseline has been established or when an allocated baseline will be established . in addition , those certifications and reports are linked to program milestone reviews and are not specifically aligned to inform program budget decisions . documents such as the systems engineering plan are “living documents” that are updated as needed throughout the acquisition process and could be made available to inform the budget process . they had established neither a performance specification nor a functional baseline . as a result , the ch - 53k program did not have a sound , executable business case . the marine corps and the prime contractor disagreed on what specific systems engineering tasks were needed , and initial plans showed that key analyses would not be complete until the system was well into development . the marine corps expected the ch - 53k to provide improvements relative to the ch - 53e in range and payload , survivability and force protection , reliability and maintainability , coordination with other assets , and overall cost of ownership . as a result and in order to meet requirements , an entirely new aircraft design was needed . a sound business case provides credible evidence that ( 1 ) the warfighter's needs are valid and that they can best be met with the chosen concept ; and ( 2 ) the chosen concept can be developed and produced within existing resources — that is , proven technologies , sufficient design knowledge , adequate funding , and adequate time exist to deliver the product when it is needed . a program should not go forward into product development , nor should this step be funded , unless a sound business case can be made . therefore , congress , which is responsible for making that funding decision , should also have insight into the soundness of the business case . however , given current budget processes and mechanics in dod today , these congressional decisions must be made well in advance of the start of product development and establishment of the final business case . systems engineering is essential to establishing a sound business case .