2454 , 111th cong . ( 2009 ) , uses the criteria of trade intensity and energy intensity or greenhouse gas intensity , among others , to determine eligibility for the emission allowance rebate program , which is part of the legislation . 2454 specifies how to calculate the two criteria . trade intensity is defined as the ratio of the sum of the value of imports and exports within an industry to the sum of the value of shipments and imports within the industry . first , if domestic production were to shift abroad to countries where greenhouse gas emissions are not regulated , emissions in these countries could grow faster than expected otherwise . through this mechanism , some of the expected benefits of reducing emissions domestically could be offset by faster growth in emissions elsewhere , according to aldy and pizer ( 2009 ) . second , carbon leakage may also arise from changes in world prices that are brought about by domestic emissions pricing . for example , u.s. emissions pricing could cause domestic demand for oil to fall . because the united states is a relatively large consumer of oil worldwide , the world price of oil could fall when the u.s. demand for oil drops . the quantity of oil consumed by other countries would rise in response , increasing greenhouse gas emissions from the rest of the world . these price effects may be a more important source of carbon leakage than the trade effects previously described . two key indicators of potential vulnerability to adverse competitiveness effects are an industry's energy intensity and trade intensity . proposed u.s. legislation specifies that ( 1 ) either an energy intensity or greenhouse gas intensity of 5 percent or greater ; and ( 2 ) a trade intensity of 15 percent or greater be used as criteria to identify industries for which trade measures or rebates would apply . since data on greenhouse gas intensity are less complete , we focused our analysis on industry energy intensity . most of the industries that meet these criteria fall under 4 industry categories: primary metals , nonmetallic minerals , paper , and chemicals . however , there is significant variation in specified vulnerability characteristics among different product groups ( “sub - industries” ) . although our report examined the four industry categories , figures 1 through 4 or the following pages illustrate the variation among different sub - industries within the primary metals industry , as well as information on the type of energy used and location of import and export markets . the data shown in these figures are for the latest year available . as shown by sub - industry examples in figure 1 , energy and trade intensities differ within primary metals . for example , primary aluminum meets the vulnerability criteria with an energy intensity of 24 percent and a trade intensity of 62 percent . ferrous metal foundries meets the energy intensity criteria , but not the trade intensity criteria . steel manufacturing — products made from purchased steel — and aluminum products fall short of both vulnerability criteria .