oversight of it contractors . for example , one respondent stated that contractors not directly assigned to it security reported to their sponsor program offices , and consequently oversight activities had to be coordinated through program managers , contracting officers , or their representatives . another stated that the ciso did not have control over the cybersecurity contract that supports the information security organization . another respondent stated that the ciso's ability to drive the agency to resolve poa&ms in a timely manner is limited in part due to financial constraints . one respondent stated that his financial resources are insufficient for the human resources , training , and necessary tools and technologies needed to provide sufficient oversight of security authorization decisions made by component agencies . other cisos stated that efforts to test security controls and remediate weaknesses are hampered due to budgetary constraints . in accordance with their statutory responsibilities under fisma , omb and nist have taken steps to assist federal agencies in implementing information security activities , and have instituted initiatives that can assist federal agencies in addressing challenges related to human and financial resources . for example: the national initiative for cybersecurity education: this is an interagency effort coordinated by nist to improve cybersecurity education , including efforts directed at training , public awareness , and the federal cybersecurity workforce . this initiative is intended to support the federal government's evolving strategy for education , awareness , and workforce planning and provide a comprehensive cybersecurity education program . cybersecurity national action plan: announced by the white house in february 2016 , the cybersecurity national action plan is intended to foster long - term improvements in the cybersecurity across the federal government , the private sector , and individuals . among other things , the plan announces ( 1 ) the establishment of the commission on enhancing national cybersecurity , which is to make recommendations on actions to enhance cybersecurity awareness and protections throughout the private sector and at all levels of government , to protect privacy , to maintain public safety and economic and national security , and to empower americans to take better control of their digital security ; ( 2 ) the creation of the federal chief information security officer position to drive cybersecurity policy , planning , and implementation across the federal government ; ( 3 ) efforts to enhance cybersecurity education and training nationwide and hire more cybersecurity experts to secure federal agencies ; and ( 4 ) a proposal for $19 billion of funding for cybersecurity in fiscal year 2017 , a 35 percent increase over fiscal year 2016 . cybersecurity strategy and implementation plan: issued in october 2015 , the cybersecurity strategy and implementation plan was created as a result of the 30-day cybersecurity sprint initiated in june 2015 . the plan is intended to identify and address critical cybersecurity gaps and emerging priorities , and make specific recommendations to address those gaps and priorities .