id . at 170-73. consequently , article 15 is inapplicable . finally , article 24 of the convention does not apply to the emissions trading system because trading allowances are “fundamentally different from customs duties.” additionally , the opinion finds policy support for these legal findings in icao resolution a35-5 and bilateral air transport agreements . additionally , countries outside the european community have joined the united states in an expression of concerns regarding the imposition of the r ets on non - eu carriers . we also met with representatives of icao — a united nations agency . we interviewed representatives of industry groups , environmental groups , airlines , aircraft manufacturers , aircraft engine manufacturers , alternative fuels manufacturers , economists , and academics . we interviewed officials based in the united states and abroad . we interviewed representatives of the eu and associations about the eu ets . we completed a literature search and reviewed relevant documentation , studies , and articles related to our objectives . to specifically address commercial aviation's contribution to emissions , we asked our interviewees to identify the primary studies that estimate current and future emissions . as a result , we reviewed and summarized the findings of the 1999 international panel of climate change aviation and the environment report and its 2007 fourth assessment report , which were most frequently named as the most authoritative sources on global aviation emissions . to specifically address technological and operational options to reduce commercial aviation's contribution to greenhouse gases and other emissions that can have an impact on the climate , we contracted with the national academy of sciences to identify and recruit experts in aviation and environmental issues . we interviewed 18 experts identified by the academy , including those with expertise in aeronautics , air traffic management , atmospheric science , chemistry , climate change modeling , economics , environmental science , and transportation policy . in conducting these interviews , we used a standardized interview guide to obtain consistent answers from our experts and had the interviews recorded and transcribed . based on these interviews , we assembled a list of options for reducing aviation emissions , and we asked our experts to assess these options on several dimensions . we provided each of our experts with a standardized assessment tool that instructed the experts to assess the potential of each technological and operational option on the following dimensions: potential fuel savings and emissions reductions , potential research and development costs , potential cost to the airline industry , potential for public acceptance , and time frames for adoption . for each dimension , we asked the experts to assess each option on a three - point scale . for example , we asked the experts to rate each option as having “low potential” , “medium potential” , or “high potential” for fuel savings and carbon dioxide emissions reductions . we directed the e not to answer questions about areas in which they did not have specific knowledge or expertise . as a result , throughout our report , the number o expert responses discussed for each emissions reduction option is sma than 18 , the number of experts we interviewed .