gao - 11-318sp . washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2011 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . washington , d.c.: june 16 , 1980 . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . fema: action needed to improve administration of the national flood insurance program . gao - 11-297 . large disasters are increasingly complex and costly . for example , in fiscal year 2014 congress appropriated $6.2 billion for fema's disaster relief fund . as we reported in 2012 , fema obligated over $80 billion in federal assistance for major disasters declared from fiscal years 2004 through 2011 . in addition , the increasing number and size of disasters require an increasingly large federal disaster assistance workforce . in our march 2013 report , we examined how fema's reservist workforce training compared with training of other similar agencies , and the extent to which fema had examined these agencies' training programs to identify useful practices . we found that fema had not examined other agencies' training programs , and therefore , we recommended that fema examine the training practices of other agencies with disaster reservist workforces to identify potentially useful practices ; dhs concurred with our recommendation and described plans to address it . as part of our ongoing review , we are gathering information on fema's efforts to address our recommendation . at the request of this committee , we are also currently assessing the impact of workforce management and development provisions in the post - katrina act on fema's response to hurricane sandy . we also have plans to conduct additional work to assess the impact of a variety of other emergency management related provisions in the post - katrina act ( for example , provisions related to fema's contracting efforts , information technology systems , and disaster relief efforts ) . among other things , the post - katrina act directed fema to implement efforts to enhance workforce planning and development , standards for deployment capabilities , including credentialing of personnel , and establish a surge capacity force ( scf ) to deploy to natural and man - made disasters , including catastrophic incidents . some of these efforts were highlighted during hurricane sandy when fema executed one of the largest deployments of personnel in its history . for example , the agency's response to hurricane sandy marked the first activation of the dhs scf , with nearly 2,400 dhs employees deploying to new york and new jersey to support response and recovery efforts . the agency also launched the new fema qualification system ( fqs ) on october 1 , 2012 , just in time for fema employees' deployment to areas affected by hurricane sandy . in 2012 , fema also created a new disaster assistance workforce component called the fema corps . forty - two fema corps teams , consisting of approximately 1,100 members , were deployed to support hurricane sandy response and recovery efforts in the fall of 2012 .