the time for action is now . mr. chairman , mr. ryan , members of the committee , let me repeat my appreciation for your commitment and concern in this matter . we at gao stand ready to assist you in this important endeavor . the time to act to save our future is now ! when fiscal year 2006 ended a great deal of attention was paid to the fact that at $248 billion “the deficit” came in lower than originally predicted and lower than in 2005 . and just this week press reports have noted that — as figure 1 shows — the ( unified ) deficit as a share of the economy is not terribly high . this is all true — and it is also misleading . first , a single year's unified budget deficit is not the critical issue here . certainly this improvement in the 1-year fiscal picture is better than a worsening in that picture , but it did not fundamentally change our long - term fiscal outlook . in fact , the u.s. government's total reported liabilities , net social insurance commitments , and other fiscal exposures continue to grow and now total approximately $50 trillion , representing approximately four times the nation's total output , or gross domestic product ( gdp ) in fiscal year 2006 , up from about $20 trillion , or two times gdp in fiscal year 2000 . further , the long - term challenge is fast becoming a short - term one as the first of the baby boomers become eligible for early retirement under social security on january 1 , 2008 — less than one year — and for medicare benefits in 2011 — less than 4 years from now . the budget and economic implications of the baby boom generation's retirement have already become a factor in the congressional budget office's ( cbo ) 10-year baseline projections and will only intensify as the baby boomers age . simply put , our nation is on an imprudent and unsustainable fiscal path . herbert stein once said that something that is not sustainable will stop . that , however , should not give us comfort . it is more prudent to change the path than to wait until a crisis occurs . and that brings me to my next point . while restraint in the near term and efforts to balance the budget over the next 5 years can be positive , it is important that actions to achieve this also address the long - term fiscal outlook . the real problem is not the near - term deficit — it is the long - term fiscal outlook . it is important to look beyond year 5 or even year 10 . both the budget and the budget process need more transparency about and focus on the long - term implications of current and proposed spending and tax policies . in this testimony i will suggest a number of things that i believe will help in this area . a great deal of budget reporting focuses on a single number — the unified budget deficit , which was $248 billion in fiscal year 2006 .