the results of our analyses follow . during fiscal years 1999 through 2003 , 20 agencies undertook 254 espc projects to finance investments in energy - efficiency improvements . the espcs commit the federal government to annual payments totaling about $2.5 billion over the terms of these contracts , conditional on either the savings guaranteed in the contracts being verified or as stipulated in the contracts . because energy services companies are accountable for guaranteeing the performance of the equipment installed , if savings are reduced due to equipment performance , the company must correct any related problems . in some instances , the contract may stipulate an amount of savings that will be achieved . in the event that this stipulation overstates actual savings , the agency must still make payments based on the amount of savings stipulated . however , if stipulation understates savings , the agency obtains the additional savings at no additional cost . table 1 shows the numbers and costs of espcs the 20 agencies undertook , as well as the percentage of total espcs attributable to each agency . we did not analyze the likelihood nor the costs of such delays . during fiscal years 1999 through 2003 , numerous agencies undertook espcs to finance energy - efficiency improvements , committing the federal government to annual payments totaling about $2.5 billion over the terms of these contracts . the use of espcs has been geographically widespread , with many types of equipment installed , and the extent of use has varied across the agencies . during our review , we found that there is no source of comprehensive data on federal agencies' use of espcs , either in doe , the contracting centers , or the agencies . numerous types of energy - efficiency improvements were financed , including replacement of boiler and chiller plants for heating and cooling , energy management control systems , geothermal heat pumps , and lighting . in the largest espc project during the 5-year period , the marine corps committed to spend almost $138 million at a facility in california to install a cogeneration plant , solar hot water and photovoltaic systems , heating , ventilating , and air conditioning at various sites , and waste water pump upgrades . this espc project , awarded in july 2002 , has a contract term of 18 years . the extent to which agencies have used espc financed projects has varied , as shown in table 1 . dod agencies have used the contracts the most , undertaking about 153 espcs to finance about $1.8 billion in costs at about 100 military installations during the 5-year period . dod officials told us they relied heavily on espcs to achieve energy infrastructure improvements , in part because of difficulties they encountered in obtaining adequate upfront funding for energy projects that were not categorized as being mission - critical . they noted that these improvements also helped the agencies meet other national energy goals as well . after dod , the general services administration ( gsa ) and veterans affairs ( va ) used espcs the most during the 5-year period , undertaking 30 and 24 projects , respectively . together these agencies account for about 21 percent of projects .