ii ) . in addition , they acknowledged that we recognized that the financial markets have made significant progress in increasing their ability to withstand wide - scale disasters . regarding our recommendation that these regulators consider taking additional actions regarding pandemic preparedness — including issuing specific instructions that organizations plan for severe pandemics and setting a date by which business continuity plans for pandemics should be completed , the officials noted that the critical organizations and key market participants subject to the interagency sound practices paper are planning for a pandemic , including a severe outbreak , and identifying measures to reduce their vulnerabilities to such events . they also noted that all of these organizations have been subject to supervisory review over the past several months , and that these organizations' contingency plans generally address the four elements recommended in our report . the officials also indicate that their agencies have incorporated reviews of organizations' pandemic planning efforts into their ongoing supervision and oversight processes to ensure that the critical market organizations are updating their plans as new information becomes available and incorporating lessons learned from market exercises . in their letter , the officials indicate that they will follow up to ensure any weaknesses in the ongoing pandemic - planning process are appropriately addressed by the organizations , and if the regulators find that organizations' efforts are lagging , they will consider taking additional actions , including those that we have suggested . we are encouraged that the regulators plan to actively monitor the progress that critical organizations and key market participants are making to plan and prepare for a pandemic . although the regulators maintain that organizations have prepared plans that address all expected elements , during the agency comments process we obtained the draft pandemic plan for one of the critical organizations . based on our review , this organization's plan addressed some of the expected elements , but did not include the specific procedures that would be used to ensure that its critical operations would continue during a pandemic . the organization indicated these procedures would be described in business unit plans that were still being prepared . in addition , we recently recontacted representatives at five of the six key market participants that we had reviewed , and while most indicated that they had received sufficient instruction from regulators regarding pandemic expectations , staff at one firm told us that , although they had attended meetings with regulators on pandemic issues , they have not received any guidance on specific scenarios to plan for , such as transportation shutdowns . because at least some organizations may not yet be fully prepared or potentially may fail to consider the potential pandemic scenarios associated with a severe outbreak , particularly if mitigating them is difficult and discourages or delays firms' willingness to fully prepare , we continue to believe that having regulators give greater consideration to providing specific instructions to market participants and setting a date for having pandemic continuity plans complete would increase the likelihood that organizations fully prepare and have adequate time to test and adjust any planned responses in advance of the outbreak of an actual pandemic .