( see app . i for a summary of fda actions taken in response to these recommendations. ) the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa ) provided the agency with additional responsibilities intended to improve its oversight of postmarket drug safety . for example , fdaaa provided fda with new authority to require drug sponsors to complete postmarketing studies to identify a serious risk or assess a known serious risk . prior to the enactment of fdaaa , fda only had the authority in limited circumstances to require drug sponsors to conduct a postmarket drug safety study ; outside of these circumstances , the agency could request that drug sponsors voluntarily agree to conduct such studies . fdaaa also provided fda with new authority to require drug sponsors to complete risk management plans . while we agree that both funding and staff are important to the successful transfer of these regulatory authorities , we believe that fda has the flexibility to align its resources in such a way as to ensure that postmarket drug safety receives appropriate attention . furthermore , we believe that the development of a comprehensive plan and time line is an important step towards ensuring that necessary funding levels and staffing needs are identified and secured . previously , fda issued guidance to drug sponsors to assist in the development of voluntary risk management plans . fda may now require drug sponsors to implement a risk management plan through specific approaches , known as a risk evaluation and mitigation strategy ( rems ) . fdaaa also provided the agency with authority to impose civil monetary penalties on drug sponsors who violate these requirements . fdaaa also requires fda to conduct several other postmarket drug safety activities . for example: fda must , in collaboration with public , academic , and private entities , develop a postmarket risk identification and analysis system that can be used to analyze safety data from multiple sources . fda is required to screen aers biweekly and publish quarterly reports of new safety information or potential signals of serious risks associated with the use of a drug . fda is required to use dsarm to seek input on certain activities , such as elements of rems and the analysis of drug safety data . in addition to increasing fda's authorities , fdaaa also reauthorized the prescription drug user fee act of 1992 ( pdufa ) . originally , pdufa authorized fda to collect user fees from drug sponsors in order to support the review of drug applications and it established performance goals , such as time frames for the review of applications . the increase in attention to timely drug approval decisions led to greater awareness of the need for fda to strengthen its monitoring of postmarket drug safety , which was reflected in the 2002 reauthorization of pdufa . the most recent authorization of pdufa , in september 2007 as part of fdaaa , expanded the postmarket drug safety activities for which fda is authorized to apply user fees . for example , the law identified the development of adverse event data collection systems as an activity that could be funded through user fees .