( recommendation 2 ) . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the administrator of gsa ; and the secretaries of the department of health and human services and department of the treasury , and the attorney general of the department of justice . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or rectanusl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff that made key contributions to this report is listed in appendix iii . this report addresses: ( 1 ) how the 23 civilian chief financial officer ( cfo ) act agencies reported using telework in office space planning ; ( 2 ) the specific ways selected agencies and gsa used telework in their office space planning ; and ( 3 ) any challenges the 23 civilian cfo act agencies faced in using telework in office space planning . to determine how the 23 civilian cfo act agencies reported using telework in office space planning , we surveyed the agencies . the survey asked questions about agency - wide efforts to use telework in the human - capital and space - planning areas ; whether agencies had achieved any cost savings as a result ; the challenges agencies faced in using telework in space planning ; and asked agencies to identify additional information , resources , or guidance that might be helpful . in addition to the survey questions , we asked each agency real property officer to provide copies of agency - wide space - planning documents and the real property efficiency plans agencies prepared for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 pursuant to the requirements of the office of management and budget's ( omb ) reduce the footprint policy . this allows agencies to plan for fewer workstations than the number of employees . we pre - tested the survey instrument with three federal agencies to ascertain: ( 1 ) the clarity of survey questions ; ( 2 ) the precision of language ; and 3 ) the availability of information queried . as a result of the pre - tests we made changes to the content and format of the survey where appropriate . concurrently , ojp officials explained that they introduced smaller workstations and used tenant - improvement allowance funds to reconfigure space for more flexible use . physical reconfigurations included changing hard - walled office spaces with dedicated workstations to a primarily open office with few walls or dedicated workstations . according to ojp , it complemented these changes with investments in mobile it for individual employees , improved it capabilities in conference rooms and other collaborative spaces , and an emphasis on training employees to work well in a mobile office environment . for example , ojp officials said they installed wi - fi throughout the space , issued laptops and smart phones to employees , upgraded video - conferencing capabilities in conference rooms and collaborative spaces , and expanded tools for informal employee communication .