not systematically tracked . in general , guidance documents are not typically assigned tracking numbers and , as a result , are difficult to identify and quantify . for example , as previously mentioned , most vha program offices in our review said that identifying and quantifying the total number of their memos would be difficult because they do not systematically track them . as a result , program offices do not know whether some of these documents are duplicative or whether they conflict with one another or with other policy documents . at the local level , officials from three visns and five vamcs in our review noted difficulties with finding program office memos . officials explained that they sometimes rely on staff's institutional knowledge to find a specific memo , or they may contact the relevant program office . oraa officials told us they would like to work with the deputy ush for operations and management to assign tracking numbers to 10n memos so that they can be referenced and searched . inconsistent dissemination . vha program offices may disseminate guidance to visn staff for distribution to vamcs or to both visn and vamc staff at the same time . each program office in our review told us they maintain their own e - mail groups for communication with the local level . however , officials from one vamc expressed concern that receiving guidance depends on staff being included in a specific program office's e - mail group . according to standards for internal control in the federal government , management should internally communicate the necessary quality information to achieve the entity's objectives . in doing so , management selects appropriate methods to communicate internally and considers how that information will be made readily available to its staff when needed . without a standard process for consistently maintaining and disseminating guidance documents to visns and vamcs , the agency lacks assurance that staff members receive and follow the same guidance , as intended . vha has not consistently solicited input on national policies either prior to issuance or after implementation from visns and vamcs . officials from the four visns and eight vamcs in our review outlined a variety of challenges they face when implementing national policy , including insufficient or undefined time frames and conflicting policies on the same topic . not subject to recertification . unlike national policy documents , memos are not subject to recertification and are therefore typically not rescinded . officials from the eight vamcs in our review told us that they generally issue facility - wide local policies ( for example , policy management and medical appointment scheduling ) and service - line - specific standard operating procedures for front line clinical care . these vamcs generally develop local policies for different reasons , including when more specificity is needed for national policy implementation or to meet joint commission requirements . vamcs might also create a policy for a local circumstance , such as transportation or building issues . the number of local policies for the eight vamcs ranged from 151 to 561 . officials from all eight vamcs told us they generally renew their local policies every 3 years due to joint commission requirements or as needed .