gao - 09-338 . washington , d.c.: march 13 , 2009 . defense acquisitions: charting a course for improved missile defense testing . gao - 09-403t . washington , d.c.: february 25 , 2009 . dod generally concurred with all 11 of our recommendations . dod has taken some initial steps to plan for long - term operations and support of ballistic missile defense operations , but planning efforts to date are incomplete because of difficulties in transitioning responsibilities from mda to the services and in establishing operation and support cost estimates . our prior work has shown that clear roles and responsibilities can improve outcomes by identifying who is accountable for various activities . however , in september 2008 , we reported that dod had not identified clear roles and responsibilities among mda and the services for long - term support planning . in our september 2008 report we recommended that dod establish a process for long - term support planning that adheres to key principles for life cycle management . this includes establishing timelines for planning that must be completed before each element is fielded , involving services in support and transition planning and deciding when support responsibilities will be transitioned to the services , specifying roles and responsibilities for mda and the services for life cycle management , and identifying who is accountable for ensuring these actions are accomplished . since our september 2008 report was issued , dod has made some progress in planning for transition of some ballistic missile defense elements . for example , in january 2009 mda and the army agreed on the overarching terms and conditions for the transition and transfer of elements from mda to the army , including ground - based midcourse defense , terminal high altitude area defense , and the an / tpy - 2 forward - based radar . however , the agreement neither identifies when these elements are expected to transfer to the army , nor addresses the specific details on how operations and support costs will be funded following the transfer . until dod establishes a transition and transfer process that adheres to key principles for life cycle management , dod will be unable to ensure that individual elements will be sustained in the long term , and dod's long - term support planning will continue to face challenges . moreover , dod has established limited operation and support cost estimates for ballistic missile defense elements , and the estimates that have been developed are not transparent to dod senior leadership and congressional decision makers . dod has not required that full cost estimates for ballistic missile defense operations and support be developed , validated , and reviewed . as a result , the future years defense plan — dod's 6-year spending plan — does not fully reflect these costs . prior gao work has shown that operations and support costs are typically 70 percent of a weapon's life cycle costs . specifically , our work found that dod has not addressed ballistic missile defense operation and support costs in the following three ways: first , in our september 2008 report , we found that mda and the services have jointly developed and agreed on cost estimates for only two of the seven elements we examined .