inappropriate access privileges . all cefms users , regardless of their job functions , had access privileges to certain tables on their local databases that allowed them to make changes to cefms data outside the cefms application . as a result , the risk is increased that cefms users could make inappropriate changes to cefms data . command line access . cefms users continued to have the ability to log in directly to the operating system , giving users the ability to execute many commands that are not necessary to access cefms , as well as the opportunity to take advantage of vulnerable programs , files , and directories . further , since user commands were not audited , there was no method to identify whether users were attempting to issue unauthorized commands . inadequate monitoring of audit logs . audit logs were not used to detect and monitor security violations , thereby increasing the risk that violations could occur undetected . informal procedures for access requests . access request procedures for privileged or dial - in access to the cefms servers were not adequately enforced , thereby increasing the risk that employees without a legitimate or authorized need could gain such access . weak passwords on corps dial - in servers . corps dial - in modems at one site ( non - cefms ) contained easily guessed usernames and passwords . such access places corps network assets at risk . lack of monitoring of web server activity . the corps was not monitoring cefms web server activity or reviewing and analyzing log files , thereby increasing the risk that attempted intrusion or potential degradation of service could go unnoticed . to protect the overall integrity and reliability of information systems , it is essential to control access to and modifications of system software . system software controls , which limit and monitor access to the powerful programs and sensitive files associated with computer operations , are important in providing reasonable assurance that access controls are not compromised and that the operating system will not be impaired . to protect system software , a standard computer control practice is to ( 1 ) configure system software to protect against security vulnerabilities , ( 2 ) periodically review sensitive software to identify potential security weaknesses , and ( 3 ) ensure that only authorized and fully tested system software is placed in operation . while the corps had corrected many of the system software weaknesses that we identified in our fiscal year 1999 audit , we identified other weaknesses where the corps was not adequately controlling system software . these weaknesses included the following . unencrypted usernames and passwords over the network . corps usernames and passwords continued to be sent unencrypted over the network . incompatible duties that should be segregated include application and system programming , production control , database administration , computer operations , and data security . once policies and job descriptions supporting the principles of segregation of duties have been developed , it is important to ensure that adequate supervision is provided and adequate access controls are in place to ensure that employees perform only compatible functions .