this concludes my prepared testimony statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that members of the subcommittee may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact richard m. stana at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or stanar@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . dhs agreed with our recommendation and is taking steps to implement it . in addition , ice developed a plan to expand the visa security program to additional high - risk visa - issuing posts , but ice had not fully adhered to the plan or kept it up to date . the program's 5-year expansion plan , developed in 2007 , identified 14 posts for expansion between 2009 and 2010 , but 9 of these locations had not been established at the time of our march 2011 report , and ice had not updated the plan to reflect the current situation . furthermore , ice had not fully addressed remaining visa risk in high - risk posts that did not have a visa security program presence . ice , with input from the department of state , developed a list of worldwide visa - issuing posts that are ranked according to visa risk . ice had not established a time frame for completing this assessment . we reported in april 2011 that by developing such a time frame and utilizing the assessment findings , as appropriate , ice could strengthen its planning efforts and be better positioned to hold staff accountable for completing the assessment . we recommended that ice establish a target time frame for assessing the funding and resources ero would require in order to assume responsibility for civil overstay enforcement and use the results of that assessment . dhs officials agreed with our recommendation and stated that ice planned to identify resources needed to transition this responsibility to ero as part of its fiscal year 2013 resource - planning process . dhs tracked some data on passengers that travel under the visa waiver program without verified esta approval but did not track other data that would help officials know the extent to which noncompliance poses a risk to the program . we contacted consular sections at 13 overseas posts , and officials from 5 of the 13 consular sections we interviewed stated that they had received no training from the visa security program agents in the last year , and none of the agents we interviewed reported providing training on specific security threats . we recommended that the commissioner of cbp analyze the costs and benefits of developing a standard mechanism for collecting these forms at land ports of entry , and develop a standard mechanism to collect them , to the extent that benefits outweigh the costs . cbp agreed with our recommendation and stated it planned to complete a cost - effective independent evaluation . individuals overstaying their authorized periods of admission could pose homeland security concerns . further , in march 2011 we reported that visa security program agents performed a variety of investigative and administrative functions beyond their visa security responsibilities , including criminal investigations , attaché functions , and regional responsibilities .