in addition , h.r . 3121 would require the director of fema to carry out studies and investigations to determine appropriate wind hazard prevention measures . table 1 . comparison of combination of state wind program and h.r . 3121 flood insurance policy and state wind policy limits with h.r . 3121 flood and wind policy limits ( c ) ( b ) combined nfip flood and state wind program ( d ) ( a - b ) ( c - d ) . adverse selection and limited participation could , in turn , force fema to raise rates still higher for the projected program , leading to escalating premiums . this possibility further complicates the rate - setting process . in general , having only a small pool of very high - risk insureds requires insurers to charge premium rates at levels above what could be charged if the risk were spread among a larger pool of insureds of varying risk levels . as we have discussed , high premium rates can , in turn , further reduce the number of property owners who are able and willing to pay for coverage and force insurers to raise rates yet higher . this cycle , referred to as an adverse selection spiral , can make it very difficult for insurers to find a premium rate that is adequate to cover losses . finally , although h.r . 3121 stipulates that a distinction between flood and wind damage would not be required for a policyholder's claim to be paid by a federal flood and wind program , a determination of the cause of damage would likely still be necessary for rate - setting purposes . according to several insurance industry officials we spoke with , separate determinations would be required because data on the losses associated with each type of damage are used to help determine future rates . for example , data on wind losses would be used to validate the losses predicted by wind models . while the officials said that such determinations would not need to be as accurate as when the distinction between flood and wind damage would determine under which policy a claim was covered , they would still need to be made . as a result , fema would need to determine whether and how such a determination might be made by fema staff , or if it would need to establish another process for doing so . while a combined federal flood and wind program would entail costs , it could benefit some property owners and market participants . first , property owners could benefit from reduced delays in payments and assured coverage in high - risk areas . in addition , taxpayers in some states could benefit to the extent that the exposure to loss of state wind insurance programs is reduced . at the same time , these benefits could be limited by a borrowing restriction that could terminate the program after a catastrophic event , and comparatively low coverage limits could leave some property owners underinsured . third , private sector insurers could also benefit if high - risk properties moved to a federal program , reducing the companies' risk of loss . but this shift would further limit private sector participation .