these crss were owned by ( i.e. , vertically integrated with ) the airlines . american airlines and ibm jointly developed a system called sabre ( semi - automatic business research environment ) to automate american's bookings . united airlines and twa followed with apollo and pars , respectively . how have these changes in the airline ticket distribution industry affected travel agents and consumers ? what does the relationship between global distribution systems' booking fees and booking - related costs suggest about the presence and use of market power ? to determine how the airline ticket distribution industry has changed and the effects on airlines since the late 1990s , we analyzed aggregated proprietary industry booking trend and cost data ; examined dot documents ; and interviewed officials with the global distribution systems , several major airlines , and other industry experts . to describe how changes in the airline ticket distribution industry have affected travel agents and consumers , we analyzed travel agent and consumer ticketing fee data ; reviewed major airline and various travel agency consumer fee policies ; and interviewed travel agents , industry group representatives , and dot officials . to determine what the relationship between global distribution systems' booking fees and related costs indicated about the presence and use of market power , we analyzed and compared data on global distribution system operating cost data , certain booking - related costs , and booking fees . to protect the confidential proprietary nature of individual global distribution system and airline information , we reported all costs and fees in terms of averages calculated from the companies that provided data . we limited the scope of this review to the three major u.s. global distribution systems - - galileo , sabre , and worldspan . these three systems handle 92 percent of the u.s. bookings . we were limited in our review because we did not have full access to proprietary airline , global distribution system , and travel agent data . however , we reviewed the comments submitted to dot as part of its crs rulemaking , including those of the department of justice's ( doj ) antitrust division - - government antitrust experts who conducted a market structure analysis of the ticket distribution system . we also discussed those comments with officials from the antitrust division . because of a lack of historical data , we limited our review to the 4 years covering the period 1999 through 2002 . appendix i contains additional information on the objectives , scope , and methodology of this review . an airline “booking” occurs when a passenger reserves and purchases a seat for a trip . in 2002 in the united states , an estimated 255 million passengers flew more than 611 million flight segments ( eg , a traveler who flew between baltimore , maryland , and portland , oregon , who connected over chicago both outbound and inbound represents a single passenger that flew four flight segments ) . information included in the booking consists of the traveler's name ; an address ; price and billing information ; the full itinerary origins , destinations , and possible connecting airport with flight numbers and times ; and perhaps other information as well , such as loyalty program ( i.e.