think . connect.” awareness campaign . according to commerce's national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) , it serves as the president's principal adviser on telecommunications policies pertaining to economic and technological advancement and to the regulation of the telecommunications industry , including mobile telecommunications . ntia is responsible for coordinating telecommunications activities of the executive branch and assisting in the formulation of policies and standards for those activities , including considerations of interoperability , privacy , security , spectrum use , and emergency readiness . federal law and policy tasks dhs with critical infrastructure protection responsibilities that include creating a safe , secure , and resilient cyber environment in conjunction with other federal agencies , other levels of government , international organizations , and industry . the national strategy to secure cyberspace tasked dhs as the lead agency in promoting a comprehensive national awareness program to empower americans to secure their own parts of cyberspace . consistent with that tasking , dhs is currently leading the awareness component of nice . the federal communications commission's ( fcc ) role in mobile security stems from its broad authority to regulate interstate and international communications , including for the purpose of “promoting in addition , fcc has established the safety of life and property.” communications , security , reliability , and interoperability council ( csric ) . csric is a federal advisory committee whose mission is to provide recommendations to fcc to help ensure , among other things , secure and reliable communications systems , including telecommunications , media , and public safety . a previous csricincluded a working group that was focused on identifying cybersecurity best practices ( including mobile security practices ) , and had representation from segments of the communications industry and public safety communities . the current csric has focused on the development and implementation of best practices related to several specific cybersecurity topics . fcc has also established a technological advisory council , which includes various working groups , one of which has been working since march 2012 to identify , prioritize , and analyze mobile security and privacy issues . the federal trade commission ( ftc ) promotes competition and protects the public by , among other things , bringing enforcement actions against entities that engage in unfair or deceptive acts or practices . an unfair act is an act or practice that causes or is likely to cause substantial injury to consumers that is not reasonably avoidable by consumers and is not outweighed by countervailing benefits to consumers or to competition . a deceptive act or practice occurs if there is a representation , omission , or practice that is likely to mislead the consumer acting reasonably in the circumstances , to the consumer's detriment . according to ftc , its authority to bring enforcement actions covers many of the entities that provide mobile products and services to consumers , including mobile device manufacturers , operating system developers , and application developers . ftc's jurisdiction also extends to wireless carriers when they are not engaged in common carrier activities . for example , mobile phone operators engaging in mobile payments functions such as direct - to - carrier billing are under ftc's jurisdiction .