we disagree . we did not comment on such a solution in our draft report because this type of assessment was outside the scope of our review . ultimately , the president and congress will determine the future role of dod , if any , in domestic response missions . dod commented that our draft report does not mention the planned changes to the defense readiness reporting system . according to dod , the system's changes are designed to assess the impact of homeland defense and civil support missions on the readiness of forces to execute their warfighting mission . at dod's request , we have incorporated information about this system on page 17 . however , in march 2003 , we reported that as of january 2003 , dod had not developed an implementation plan for the defense readiness reporting system that contained measurable performance goals , identified resources , suggested performance indicators , or included an evaluation plan to assess progress in developing this system . dod commented that our draft report used non - standard terminology , referring to military missions ( what dod calls homeland defense ) and nonmilitary missions ( support to civil authorities ) . we added language on page 1 ( see footnote 1 ) to establish the meaning of the terms used in our report . dod stated that it believes it is not clear that homeland defense and support to civil authorities missions are key factors in high personnel tempo . on the contrary , our draft report acknowledges that overseas missions as well as domestic missions contribute to high personnel tempo . indeed , current personnel tempo could be even higher than is depicted in our draft report because the data displaying high personnel tempo stemming from participation in homeland defense missions or other deployments after december 2002 , or from operation iraqi freedom , were not yet fully available at the time of our review . in addition , the personnel tempo data we received from dod did not record a servicemember's assigned operation — for example , operation noble eagle . however , we added a statement to footnote 28 in our report that acknowledges this limitation in the personnel tempo data we received . dod also commented that since 9 / 11 / 01 , increased requirements have been driven more significantly by overseas operations in afghanistan , iraq , and elsewhere in the war on terrorism . while dod may be correct , our report discussed personnel tempo , not requirements . personnel tempo refers to the amount of time during which a member of the armed forces is engaged in official duties at a location that makes it infeasible to spend off duty time at the servicemember's home , homeport ( for navy servicemembers ) , or civilian residence ( for reserve components' personnel ) . therefore , we stand by our finding that high personnel tempo is an indicator that present force structure may not be sufficient to address the increase in domestic and overseas military missions and could lead to an erosion of unit readiness . lastly , because the assessment of rotating units to maintain combat readiness was outside the scope of our review , we could not evaluate dod's statements .