see table 1 . faa's existing requirements for the center weather service units are broadly outlined in an interagency agreement that is updated every few years . the interagency agreement specifies that nws is to provide meteorological advice and consultation to en route center operations personnel and other designated faa air traffic facilities within the en route area of responsibility . this agreement establishes specific terms that govern the number of nws staff , their working hours , and cost reimbursement details . it does not specify the contents , quality , or frequency of weather products . an nws directive , signed in may 2006 and intended for nws's weather forecast offices and center weather service units , provides more specific information regarding the content of weather products and services , including center weather advisories , daily briefings , on - demand consultations , and meteorological impact statements . these products and services are described in table 2 . in addition , center weather service unit meteorologists can provide input every 2 hours to the aviation weather center's creation of the collaborative convective forecast product ; train faa personnel on how to interpret weather information ; and , if warranted , provide weather briefings to nearby terminal radar approach control facilities . in recent years , faa has sought to assess and improve the performance of the center weather service units . for example , faa performed multiple studies on the current services provided by the center weather service units that noted the lack of standardization of products and services . in addition , faa conducted a study to determine if remote operations were feasible , and requested that nws restructure its aviation weather services to provide improved services more efficiently . in response to this request , nws conducted a prototype of remote operations in which center weather service unit products and services were prepared by the closest weather forecast office . nws proposed expanding this prototype to faa , but the agency declined this proposal . instead , faa stated that it would redefine its requirements for the functions provided by center weather service units . table 3 provides more information about the agency's assessment and improvement efforts . when faa declined nws's proposal for restructured aviation weather services , it did so in part because it considered its existing requirements governing nws's center weather service units to be too broad to ensure the efficiency and cost - effectiveness of the services . faa then worked for several months to redefine these requirements . in april 2007 , faa's air traffic organization began refining its requirements for aviation weather services at the en route centers . to do this , faa collected relevant nws and faa orders and directives and developed a list of over 100 products and services that the different service units provide . faa then sent this list to traffic managers in each of the en route centers , asking them to specify the products and services that they need , the ones they do not need , and any new products or services that they would like . traffic managers were also able to determine if they would want some of the more customized weather products that are currently available at selected en route centers .