i will be happy to address any questions you may have . the procurement service is currently under interim management . the ability of oios to carry out independent , effective oversight is impeded by the un's budgeting processes for the regular budget and funds from the assessed peacekeeping budget and voluntary contributions from funds and programs subject to oios's oversight , which are known as extrabudgetary resources . the secretariat's budget office — over which oios has oversight authority — exercises control over oios's regular budget , which may result in potential conflicts of interest . un budgeting processes make it difficult for oios to shift resources among oios locations or divisions to meet changing priorities . in addition , oios lacks control over extrabudgetary resources from un funds and programs . oios negotiates its terms of work and payment for services with the manager of the program it intends to examine . however , if the entity does not agree to an oios examination or does not provide requested funding for oios to perform its work , oios cannot adequately perform its oversight responsibilities . these regular budget and extrabudgetary processes have impeded oios in its ability to complete some of its identified oversight priorities and raise serious questions about oios's independence . oios's ability to carry out independent , effective oversight is hindered by the un's budgeting processes for its regular budget . a general assembly resolution in the creation of oios stated that the new internal oversight body shall exercise operational independence and that the secretary - general , when preparing the budget proposal for oios , should take into account the independence of the office . oios receives its funding from two sources , the un's regular budget and funds from the assessed peacekeeping budget and voluntary contributions from funds and programs subject to oios's oversight — known as extrabudgetary resources . we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to conduct our work on un procurement , we reviewed past gao , un audit , and expert reports on un procurement practices . we also reviewed the un's procurement manual , training materials , ethics rules , and financial rules and regulations . in addition , we interviewed un and u.s. government officials . we made the department of state and un officials aware of the contents of our testimony . we performed our work between april 2005 and october 2005 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . established in 1994 to serve as the un's main oversight body , oios operated with a budget of $63.9 million in fiscal biennium 2004-2005 and employs a workforce of 256 staff in 20 locations around the world . oios was established to assist the secretary - general in fulfilling internal oversight responsibilities over un resources and staff .