rul . this ruling decided whether db plans bought out by third - party sponsors complied with or violated the “exclusive benefit” rule of the internal revenue code ( irc ) . this rule provides that in order to constitute a qualified plan , a pension plan must be operated for the exclusive benefit of a sponsor's employees and their beneficiaries . the ruling declared that the transfer of a pension plan to “an unrelated taxpayer,” without the concurrent transfer of significant business assets , operations , or employees , such as in a merger or business acquisition , would jeopardize a plan's tax qualification . irs contrasted the transfer of a sole pension plan with the transfer of a plan in connection with the acquisition of business assets or operations , and held that since a plan in the first instance would no longer be maintained by an employer to provide retirement benefits for its employees and their beneficiaries , it would not satisfy the rule . the ruling further held that this would still be the case if the purchasing company has “some employees…or some business assets or operations transferred , where substantially all of the business risks and opportunities” relate solely to the buyout of the plan itself . this means that under current law any plans transferred to a nonemployer sponsor would not receive the same tax benefits an employer - sponsored plan would , such as the tax deferral on sponsor contributions to the plan and on the return on plan assets . according to treasury , as a result of this ruling , companies will be unable to take over any pension plans , frozen or active , except as part of a business merger or acquisition . advocates of buyouts said that they believed the irs ruling was broader in its coverage of all third - party buyouts than it needed to be under the law and inconsistent with prior rulings on plans that change sponsors . instead , they thought the ruling should have left open the possibility of case - by - case irs approval pending an evaluation of whether a buyout benefited participants or the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) . concurrent with the ruling , the department of the treasury issued a set of principles , with input from the department of labor , department of commerce , and pbgc , that might guide congress should it decide to write legislation that would permit pension plan buyouts .