as a result , we recommended that doe and dhs conduct such an evaluation . according to doe officials , the planes and helicopters can gather information on a wide area , in a shorter amount of time , without placing ground teams at risk . without this capability , doe could not quickly obtain comprehensive information about the extent of contamination . the helicopters can also be used by search teams to locate nuclear or radiological devices in u.s. cities . the helicopters can cover a larger area in a shorter amount of time than teams on foot or in vehicles . the ground search teams can conduct secondary inspections of locations with unusual radiation levels identified by the helicopters . this information can be used to determine which areas need to be cleaned and to what levels . in 2004 , dod funded a survey of the area around the pentagon in northern virginia in order to assist with cleanup efforts in case of nuclear or radiological attack . while no study has reliably determined the cleanup costs of a dirty - bomb explosion in an urban area , doe estimates that cleaning up after the detonation of a small to medium - size radiological device may cost tens or even hundreds of millions of dollars . doe officials estimated that information from background radiation surveys could save several million dollars in cleanup costs because cleanup efforts could be focused on decontaminating buildings and other areas to pre - existing levels of radiation . without a baseline radiation survey , cleanup crews would not know the extent to which they would have to decontaminate the area . efforts to completely clean areas with levels of pre - existing radiation , such as granite buildings or hospitals , would be wasteful and expensive . doe officials cautioned that background radiation surveys have limitations and cannot be relied upon to detect all nuclear or radiological devices . onboard computers record radiation levels and the position of the helicopter . this initial , or baseline , survey allows doe technicians and scientists to produce maps of a city showing the locations of high radiation concentrations , also known as “hot spots.” doe uses helicopters rather than airplanes because their lower altitude and lower speed permit a more precise reading . while conducting the baseline survey , doe ground teams and law enforcement officials can investigate these hot spots to determine whether the source of radiation is used for industrial , medical or other routine purposes . doe officials told us that this baseline information would be beneficial for all major cities because law enforcement officials could immediately investigate any potentially dangerous nuclear or radiological source and doe could later use the data in the event of an emergency to find a device more quickly or assist in cleanup efforts . for example , in 2002 , doe conducted a survey of the national mall in washington , d.c. , just prior to july fourth celebrations . law enforcement officials used the survey to investigate unusual radiation sources and ensure the mall area was safe for the public . data from the baseline survey would help doe and law enforcement detect new radiological threats more quickly .