essential . in this context , our objective in this report was to determine the in this context , our objective in this report was to determine the challenges or obstacles that inhibit the implementation of the information challenges or obstacles that inhibit the implementation of the information security provisions of fisma at the departments of defense , homeland security provisions of fisma at the departments of defense , homeland security , justice , and state . to achieve our objective , we analyzed various security , justice , and state . to achieve our objective , we analyzed various department policies and procedures and examined agency and inspectors department policies and procedures and examined agency and inspectors general ( ig ) reports related to their information security programs . we general ( ig ) reports related to their information security programs . we also interviewed information security program officials from each also interviewed information security program officials from each department and selected component agencies of the departments . department and selected component agencies of the departments . we performed our work in washington , d.c. , from july 2006 through we performed our work in washington , d.c. , from july 2006 through may 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing may 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for additional details on our objective , scope , standards . see appendix i for additional details on our objective , scope , and methodology . and methodology . federal agencies rely extensively on computerized information systems and electronic data to carry out their missions . the security of these systems and data is essential to prevent data tampering , disruptions in critical operations , fraud , and inappropriate disclosure of sensitive information . protecting federal computer systems and the systems that support critical infrastructures has never been more important , owing to the ease of obtaining and using hacking tools , the steady advances in the sophistication and effectiveness of attack technology , and the emergence of new and more destructive attacks . without proper safeguards , there is enormous risk that individuals and groups with malicious intent may intrude into inadequately protected systems and use this access to obtain sensitive information , commit fraud , disrupt operations , or launch attacks against other computer systems and networks . enacted into law on december 17 , 2002 , as title iii of the e - government act of 2002 , fisma authorized and strengthened information security program , evaluation , and reporting requirements . it assigns specific responsibilities to agency heads , chief information officers ( cio ) , and igs . it also assigns omb and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) with responsibilities with regard to oversight and guidance . among other things , omb is responsible for overseeing agency information security policies and practices , including developing and overseeing guidance on information security and overseeing compliance . nist is tasked with developing standards and guidance for implementation of fisma requirements by federal agencies . however , 4 years into the implementation of fisma , many agencies continue to exhibit weaknesses in carrying out the act's requirements .