 oig . performs its combined assessment program reviews at vamcs , including clcs , about every 3 years . under this program , oig reviews selected vamc activities , including clc activities , to assess the effectiveness of patient care administration ( the process of planning and delivering patient care ) and quality management ( the process of monitoring quality of care to identify and correct harmful and potentially harmful practices and conditions ) . clcs typically are part of each combined assessment program review . upon completion of each review , oig issues a report to va headquarters , the network , and the vamc , which identifies the vamc's deficiencies , including any deficiencies identified in the clc . va requires vamcs , including clcs , to fully resolve deficiencies within a year of the completion of a combined assessment program review .  va office of the medical inspector ( omi ) . conducts investigations to determine the validity of allegations made by complainants regarding the care provided to veterans , including residents of clcs . va headquarters' current approach relies significantly on the analysis of findings from ltci reviews of clcs . va headquarters also relies on analysis of the findings from the joint commission accreditation surveys and the artifacts of culture change tool . ( see app . i for a detailed description of these analyses. ) while these three separate analyses enable va headquarters to identify trends in each source of information , such as the most frequently cited deficiencies across all clcs or the average number of deficiencies per clc , they do not provide a complete assessment of the risks that would be identified by evaluating all nine sources . information va headquarters receives about the quality of care and the quality of life in clcs from the remaining six sources — oig , omi , soars , quality measures and quality indicators , issue briefs , and complaints — could also be valuable in identifying patterns in clc - related findings . va headquarters officials we interviewed said they do not typically analyze information they receive about clcs from these six sources because they do not always believe that doing so would be valuable for identifying trends and patterns regarding the quality of care and quality of life in clcs . for example , va headquarters officials said that they do not extract clc - related findings from oig combined assessment program reviews because the reviews typically do not include enough clc - related findings to warrant analysis . however , when we analyzed findings from the 77 oig combined assessment program reviews that were completed at vamcs that have clcs between october 1 , 2009 , and june 20 , 2011 , we found that 49 of the reviews — or about 64 percent — included at least one finding related to the quality of care or quality of life in a clc . without analyzing information from all available sources about the quality of care and quality of life in clcs , va headquarters' assessments of risks in clcs are incomplete . va headquarters does not compare information across all sources to identify patterns of findings for an individual clc , clcs within a network , or all clcs nationwide .