in rosslyn . the building was constructed to state's security specifications , including a hardened lobby and exterior and extra security features in the parking garage . in addition , according to state officials , state invested an additional $80 to $100 million in secure technology and conference rooms with technologically advanced security features . however , gsa signed this as a 10 year lease , mostly , according to gsa officials , so that it would score as an operating lease . in this case , a 10 year lease scored at 83 percent of the fair market value — and , according to gsa officials , was the longest term gsa could get for the lease without risking that the lease would score as a capital lease . as the 10-year lease's expiration came up in 2012 , gsa initially opened the competition for this requirement to a wider geographical area than rosslyn . however , due to state's concerns about potentially having to move farther away from state's headquarters — which state sees as compromising to its mission — plus the difficulty and expense of replicating all of the security - related technology invested in this building , state asked that the competition be canceled . in june 2013 , gsa renewed this lease for 5 years , with an option to purchase the building at a market rate after the 3rd year . according to state officials , the 5-year extension with purchase option will provide the government time to find and evaluate government - owned solutions to this long - term requirement . gsa officials agreed that the government should consider ownership when a large investment is required to move or replicate the current space . in another example , a high - value lease for two smaller agency headquarters — the federal maritime commission and the national archives and records administration , in washington , d.c. , took up much of an entirely federally - leased building across the street from the government printing office . as the january 2013 expiration date for this lease approached , gsa decided that going forward , each agency would have its own lease , each of which would be below the prospectus threshold . however , both agencies ended up staying in the same building . according to gsa officials , because the national archives and records administration communicates remotely via laser links with the government printing office in order to complete a mission - required activity of daily printing of the federal register , it needed to remain within a half mile of the government printing office . when the lease came up for expiration , gsa did a competitive bidding process within a very narrowly defined geographical area that resulted in no satisfactory offers from anyone other than the current landlord — resulting in difficult renegotiations with the landlord to remain in the same building at a rate gsa considered acceptable . another element that represents a risk for the government and may be relevant in considering which of the high - value leases would be the most cost - effective to target for ownership but that is not explored in the prospectus process is the extent to which gsa is leasing entire buildings .