set measurable performance standards . standards should be set in terms of quality , timeliness , and quantity among other things . agencies should ensure that each standard is necessary , carefully chosen , and not unduly burdensome . failure to do so can result in unnecessarily increased contract costs . as a result , they missed out on an opportunity to achieve better outcomes with their spending for services . the remaining contracts were for services that were either unique to government , very complex and technical , and / or high risk . interim rule revises the far to implement section 821 of the fiscal year 2001 defense authorization act establishing a preference for agencies to conduct service acquisitions using performance - based contracting . federal acquisition circular 2001-07 ( april 30 , 2002 ) . adopted the interim far rule as a final rule and amended far part 7 ( acquisition planning ) to require contracting officers to provide a rationale ( in the written acquisition plan ) if performance - based service contracting is not used . in addition to the person named above , cristina chaplain , odilon cuero , michelle dresben , christopher galvin , adam vodraska , william woods , and john yakaitis made key contributions to this report . the manner in which the work is to be performed is left up to the contractor . contractors are given as much freedom as possible in figuring out how best to meet the government's performance objective . traditionally , government service contracts have tended to emphasize inputs rather than outcomes . for example , contracts typically have detailed the procedures and processes to be used in delivering a service ; amount and type of equipment ; and / or time and labor to be used . performance - based contracts offer significant benefits . primarily , they encourage contractors to be innovative and to find cost - effective ways of delivering services . by shifting the focus from process to results , they also promise better outcomes . in view of the potential benefits , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has been encouraging greater use of performance - based contracting — setting a general goal of making performance - based contracts 20 percent of all eligible service contracting dollars . in 2001 , agencies reported using performance - based contracting methods on about $28.6 billion , or 21 percent of the $135.8 billion total obligations incurred for services . specifically , of about 360,000 service contract actions during fiscal year 2001 , agencies reported that about 41,000 ( approximately 11 percent ) were performance - based . according to office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) guidance , performance - based contracts should have the following attributes . describe the requirements in terms of results required rather than the methods of performance of the work . agencies should structure performance work statements in contracts around the purpose of the work to be performed , that is , what is to be performed rather than how to perform it .