gao - 02-113t . washington , d.c.: october 4 , 2001 . data gathered is kept current . agency leaders use this information to manage risk by spotlighting areas for attention before crises develop and to identify opportunities for improving agency results . performance measures for the agency's human capital programs have been distilled to a vital few , and are an integral part of the agency's strategic planning , performance measurement , and evaluation efforts . data on the agency's workforce profile , performance goals and measures for human capital approaches , and areas requiring agency attention are reflected in strategic workforce planning documents . agency leaders approach human capital expenditures ( eg , professional development and knowledge management , recruiting programs , pay and benefits , performance incentives , and enabling technology ) as costs that should be minimized rather than as investments that should be managed to maximize value while minimizing risk . funding decisions may be ad hoc , without clearly defined objectives or adequate consideration of their implications for the workforce . this section expands the discussion of the eight critical success factors to highlight the kind of thinking and action that marks high - performing organizations' approaches to managing people through the presentation of concepts and steps for progressing that agencies can pursue to help maximize the value of their human capital . human capital expenditures are regarded as investments in people and in the agency's capacity to perform its mission . investment strategies for acquiring , developing , and retaining staff are evaluated and developed in light of modern human capital management practices . agency strategies for investing in human capital are fully integrated with needs identified through its strategic and annual planning . the goals and expectations for these investments are transparent and clearly defined , and their rationale is consistent across the range of human capital programs . the efficiency of the investments is continuously monitored and the effectiveness is periodically evaluated . agency managers believe that meaningful improvements in human capital management are not feasible . the range of tools and flexibilities available to the agency under current laws and regulations have yet to be explored . in addition , the department or agency may have self - imposed constraints in place that are excessively process - oriented or based on obsolete perceptions of civil service laws , rules , or regulations . standardization and by - the - book human capital management are yielding to flexible and innovative approaches . managers have identified the tools and flexibilities available to them under current law and are using many of these to modernize their human capital approaches to help meet current and emerging needs . the agency is looking both within and outside itself for model principles and practices , and is pursuing opportunities to test new and more results - oriented approaches . the agency tailors its human capital strategies to meet its specific mission needs . as such , it is taking all appropriate administrative actions available to it under current laws , rules , and regulations . in addition , it is exploring opportunities to enhance its competitiveness as an employer and eliminate barriers to effective human capital management .