if so , describe . do the accommodations seem reasonable ? do any of the issues addressed in the recovery plan need to be reassessed from time to time ? how often do you think such issues should be reassessed , and under what conditions ? to further our understanding of the process used to develop listing decisions , critical habitat designations , and recovery plan recommendations for the desert tortoise , we interviewed officials and collected pertinent documentation from numerous federal agencies , including the u.s . fish and wildlife service , the u.s. geological survey , the bureau of land management , the national park service , and military installations of the department of defense ; state and local governments in california , nevada , and utah ; nongovernmental organizations , such as the desert tortoise preserve committee , the high desert multiple use coalition , and the quadstate coalition ; academic scientists ; and six of the eight members of the desert tortoise recovery team . to assess the effectiveness of actions taken by federal agencies and others to conserve the desert tortoise and to assess what is known about trends in tortoise populations , we collected relevant land use planning documents , habitat conservation plans , and other official documents , published and unpublished scientific studies , desert tortoise population monitoring reports , survey data collected and compiled by the management oversight groups' technical advisory committee regarding recovery actions , and other reports . we interviewed officials from federal and state agencies and other organizations involved with the tortoise , and conducted several site visits to observe tortoise habitat and implementation of conservation actions . specifically , we made site visits to the desert tortoise conservation center in las vegas , nevada ; the desert tortoise natural area in california ; joshua tree national park ; the marine corps air ground combat center at twentynine palms , california ; the army's national training center at fort irwin , california ; and the red cliffs reserve in washington county , utah . we also attended the annual symposium of the desert tortoise council in palm springs , california , which featured presentations on actions taken to conserve the desert tortoise and results of tortoise recovery efforts and research projects . to identify costs and benefits associated with desert tortoise recovery actions since the tortoise was first listed in 1980 , we examined the annual expenditure reports the service is required to submit to the congress ; these reports compile and summarize federal and state agencies' annual expenditures on threatened and endangered species , by species . the reports contain expenditure data for land acquisition and for general activities ( eg , conducting research , monitoring species' populations , developing and implementing recovery plans , and constructing fences ) . the reporting requirement began for expenditures made in fiscal year 1989 , and the last report the service submitted to the congress was for expenditures made in fiscal year 1997 . we obtained all nine of these reports , as well as the draft report for fiscal year 1998 and the more recent expenditure data ( for fiscal years 1999 through 2001 ) that the service had compiled as of august 19 , 2002 , but had not published .