act . act establishes minimum mortgage licensing standards and a coordinated network of state and federal mortgage supervision . flexible and adaptable csbs agrees that a regulatory system should be adaptable and forward - looking so that regulators can readily adapt to market innovations and chances to include a mechanism for evaluating potential new risks to the system . in fact , this is one of the greatest strengths of the state system . the traditional dynamic of the dual - banking system of regulation has been that the states experiment with new products , services , and practices that , upon successful implementation , congress later enacts on a nationwide basis . in addition , state bank examiners are often the first to identify and address economic problems . often , states are the first responders to almost any problem in the financial system . the states can — and do — respond to these problems much more quickly than the federal government as evidenced by escalating state responses to the excesses and abuses of mortgage lending over the past decade . unfortunately , the federal response was to thwart rather than encourage these policy responses . 3 efficient and effective in the report , gao asserts that a system should provide for efficient and effective oversight by eliminating overlapping federal regulatory missions and minimizing regulatory burden . csbs believes efficiency must not be achieved at the cost of protecting consumers , providing for a competitive industry that serves all communities or maintaining the safety and soundness of financial institutions . we recognize that our regulatory structure is complex and may not be as efficient as some in the industry would prefer . there is undoubtedly a need for improved coordination and cooperation among functional regulators . however , this efficiency must not be met through the haphazard consolidation or destruction of supervisory agencies and authorities . csbs strongly believes that it is more important to preserve a regulatory framework with checks and balances among and between regulators . this overlap does not need to be a negative characteristic of our system . instead , it has most often offered additional protection for our consumers and institutions . we believe that the weakening of these overlays in recent years weakened our system and contributed to the current crisis . in addition , we should consider how “efficient” is defined . efficient does not inherently mean effective . our ideal regulatory structure should balance what is efficient for large and small institutions as well as what is efficient for consumers and our economy . while a centralized and consolidated regulatory system may look efficient on paper or benefit our largest institutions , the outcomes may be inflexible and be geared solely at the largest banks at the expense of the small community institutions , the consumer or our diverse economy . consistent consumer and investor protection the states have long been regarded as leaders in the consumer protection arena . this is an area where the model of states acting as laboratories of innovation is clearly working . state authorities often discover troubling practices , trends , or warning signs before the federal agencies can identify these emerging concerns .