iii ) . the commissioner noted that the 2004 filing season was one of the best ever , with improved telephone service , timely and effective return processing , substantial increases in electronic filing , and a successful shift in the number of tax returns prepared in irs walk - in sites to volunteer sites . the commissioner said he appreciated that our report recognized irs's achievements for this filing season and over the past few years as well . the commissioner agreed with the importance of recognizing and disclosing the limitations of performance data obtained by managers directly observing employees in 2005 . he also said that irs has communicated the limitations in briefings with all levels of management and outside stakeholders , and will continue to do so . however , the commissioner differs with our assessment of the extent of the limitations in the data . while he agreed that there may be some bias in the data because employees know that their managers are observing them , he disagreed with our subsequent finding that data obtained through this method may not be representative of true performance . however , as our report indicates , because of the potential for bias and absence of other data , we cannot determine if the observed performance is representative or not . further , according to irs officials , the accuracy rates compiled by the quality review staff and managerial reviews cited by the commissioner are not based on statistically representative samples . the commissioner agreed with the recommendation to ensure that causes of delays in implementing improved quality measurement at walk - in sites are addressed . he said that while the delay in the implementation of contact recording as a means of collecting embedded quality data is attributable to the lengthy approval process , irs expects to begin the contact recording pilot by january 2005 and is on target for post - pilot initial implementation for the last quarter of fiscal year 2005 . regarding volunteer sites , the commissioner also agreed with the recommendation to implement quality initiatives in a timely manner and address delays . data limitations are discussed where appropriate . we conducted our work at irs headquarters in washington , d.c. ; the small business / self - employed division headquarters in new carrollton , maryland ; the wage and investment division headquarters , the joint operations center ( which manages telephone service ) , and a telephone call site in atlanta , georgia ; and walk - in and volunteer locations in georgia , maryland , and virginia . we selected these offices for a variety of reasons , including the location of key irs managers , such as those responsible for telephone and walk - in and volunteer services . we performed our work from january through october 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . irs's filing season is an enormous and critical undertaking that includes two key activities — returns processing and taxpayer assistance — and which consumes thousands of staff years annually . we are also sending copies to the secretary of the treasury ; the commissioner of internal revenue ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties .