all seven responded that they did not have any comments . we are sending copies of this report to the director of the office of management and budget and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . in accordance with the federal information security management act of 2002 ( fisma ) requirement that the comptroller general report periodically to the congress , our objectives were to evaluate ( 1 ) the adequacy and effectiveness of agencies' information security policies and practices and ( 2 ) federal agencies' implementation of fisma requirements . to assess the adequacy and effectiveness of agencies' information security policies and practices , we analyzed our related reports issued from july 2009 through march 2011 . we also reviewed and analyzed the information security work and products of the offices of inspector general at the 24 major federal agencies covered by the chief financial officers act for fiscal years 2009 and 2010 . further , we reviewed and summarized weaknesses identified in our reports and those of inspectors general using the five major categories of information security general controls identified in our federal information system controls audit manual: ( 1 ) access controls , ( 2 ) configuration management controls , ( 3 ) segregation of duties , ( 4 ) continuity of operations planning , and ( 5 ) agencywide information security programs . further , we reviewed and analyzed data on information security in federal agencies' performance and accountability and financial reports for fiscal year 2010 . to assess the implementation of fisma requirements , we reviewed and analyzed the provisions of the act and the fisma data submissions for 24 major federal agencies for fiscal years 2009 and 2010 . in addition , we reviewed the mandated annual fisma reports from the office of management and budget and the national institute of standards and technology , as well as the department of homeland security's u.s. computer emergency readiness team report of security incidents for fiscal year 2010 . we also examined the office of management and budget's reporting instructions and other guidance related to fisma . to assess the reliability of the fisma data , we selected 6 agencies to gain an understanding of the quality of processes in place to produce both chief information officer and inspectors general fisma reports . to select these agencies , we sorted the 24 major agencies from highest to lowest using the total number of systems the agencies reported in fiscal year 2009 ; separated them into even categories of large , medium , and small agencies ; then selected the median 2 agencies from each category .