documenting the extent and nature of child labor . raising public awareness and understanding of international child labor issues . the program has built a network of key partners in 75 member countries ( including government agencies , nongovernmental organizations , media , religious institutions , schools , and community leaders ) in order to facilitate policy reform and change social attitudes , so as to lead to the sustainable prevention and abolition of child labor . during fiscal years 2000-2003 , the united states is funding programs addressing child labor in the following countries or regions: bangladesh , brazil , cambodia , colombia , costa rica , the dominican republic , el salvador , ghana , guatemala , haiti , honduras , india , jamaica , malawi , mongolia , nepal , nicaragua , nigeria , pakistan , the philippines , romania , south africa , tanzania , thailand , uganda , ukraine , vietnam , yemen , and zambia and africa , asia , central america , inter - america , and south america . business for social responsibility , headquartered in san francisco , california , is a membership organization for companies , including retailers , seeking to sustain their commercial success in ways that demonstrate respect for ethical values , people , communities , and the environment . ( its sister organization , the business for social responsibility education fund , is a nonprofit charitable organization serving the broader business community and the general public through research and educational programs. ) in 1995 , this organization created the business and human rights program to address the range of human rights issues that its members face in using factories located in developing countries . the business and human rights program provides a number of services ; for example , it offers ( 1 ) counsel and information to companies developing corporate human rights policies , including codes of conduct and factory selection guidelines for suppliers ; ( 2 ) information services on human rights issues directly affecting global business operations , including country - specific and issue - specific materials ; ( 3 ) a means of monitoring compliance with corporate codes of conduct and local legal requirements , including independent monitoring ; ( 4 ) a mechanism for groups of companies , including trade associations , to develop collaborative solutions to human rights issues ; and ( 5 ) the facilitation of dialogue between the business community and other sectors , including the government , media , and human rights organizations . the fair labor association , a nonprofit organization located in washington , d.c. , offers a program that incorporates both internal and external monitoring . in general , the association accredits independent monitors , certifies that companies are in compliance with its code of conduct , and serves as a source of information for the public . companies affiliated with the association implement an internal monitoring program consistent with the fair labor association's principles of monitoring , covering at least one - half of all their applicable facilities during the first year of their participation , and covering all of their facilities during the second year .