air force vol . ii – part 2 ( february 2012 ) . the planning , programming , budgeting , and execution system is a formal , systematic structure dod uses for making decisions on policy , strategy , and the development of forces and capabilities to accomplish anticipated missions . the annual process produces the secretary of defense's defense planning and programming guidance , the 5-year program objectives memoranda , and 1-year budget estimate submissions for the military departments and defense agencies , and the dod portion of the president's budget . general air force and congressional reductions to funding for acquisition civilian personnel ; identify the acquisition civilian personnel funding by placing it in a single program element ; align mission and acquisition civilian personnel funding in the same resource new acquisition missions immediately ; and allow for funding flexibility so that rdt&e funding could be used to hire additional civilian personnel if an urgent need arose , rather than hiring additional contractors . further , when we asked air force officials at several different levels within the organization what the goals were for the pilot program , they cited goals that were different from those stated in the internal briefing.for example , officials at one office stated that the goals of the pilot program were to make sure there was no negative impact to the acquisition workforce ( i.e. , employee pay was not interrupted ) and to increase the transparency of decisions regarding funding of the acquisition workforce , while other officials stated the goal was to increase visibility of the acquisition civilian workforce so that — if directed by department leadership — the workforce could be more efficiently identified and excluded from general funding reductions , such as hiring freezes or furloughs . yet other officials stated the goal of the pilot program was to ensure that any future expansion of the effort to additional workforce communities would be approved by the office of the secretary of defense and the congress . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , lori atkinson , assistant director ; bruce brown ; foster kerrison ; and amanda manning made key contributions to this report . grace coleman and amie steele assisted in report development , and michael willems provided legal support . gao - 12-747r . eroded in the years that followed the downsizing of the acquisition workforce in the 1990s . dod's april 2010 acquisition workforce strategic plan identified an objective to increase its acquisition workforce from approximately 133,000 ( as of september 2009 ) to 153,000 by fiscal year 2015 . the type of account used to fund the defense acquisition workforce varies across the military services . for example , according to an army official , funding for army acquisition civilian personnel is in reimbursable accounts , such as the army working capital fund , as well as its o&m and rdt&e appropriations . according to a navy official , funding for more than half of navy acquisition civilian personnel is managed through its working capital fund , with others funded through a mix of its o&m and rdt&e appropriations .