cost . because of concerns over compatibility , new storage and dispensing equipment may be needed to sell intermediate blends at retail outlets . the cost of installing a single - tank underground storage system compatible with intermediate blends is more than $100,000 . in addition , the cost of installing a single compatible fuel dispenser is over $20,000 . liability . since epa has authorized e15 for use in model year 2001 and newer automobiles — but not for pre - 2001 vehicles or nonroad engines — many fuel retailers are concerned about potential liability issues if consumers mistakenly use e15 in their older automobiles or nonroad engines . several experts raised concerns about the extent to which the rfs is achieving its targeted greenhouse gas emissions reductions , given that most biofuel blended under the rfs is corn - starch ethanol . more specifically , some experts were critical of the life - cycle analysis epa used to determine the greenhouse gas emissions reductions for corn - starch ethanol . this criticism focuses on whether the model accurately accounts for all greenhouse gas emissions in the corn - starch ethanol production process . some experts said that epa's life - cycle analysis is flawed because it does not sufficiently include indirect land use change . further , as previously stated in this report , corn - starch ethanol plants that were in operation or under construction before december 19 , 2007 , were not subject to the requirement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20 percent . according to an august 2016 epa inspector general report , grandfathered production that is not subject to any greenhouse gas reduction requirements was estimated to be at least 15 billion gallons , or over 80 percent of today's rfs blending volume . moreover , some experts noted that under the rfs , because these facilities are grandfathered , they have no incentive to lower their greenhouse gas emissions . some experts told us that the rfs creates a perverse incentive to import brazilian sugarcane ethanol . specifically , because sugarcane ethanol qualifies as an advanced biofuel , it is more profitable to import this fuel than to domestically produce advanced biofuels . according to these experts , the import of sugarcane ethanol , which occurs to meet rfs requirements , causes significant greenhouse gas emissions as a result of fuel burned during shipping . while advanced biofuels are not likely to be produced in sufficient quantities to meet the statutory targets , experts identified actions that they suggested could incrementally improve investment in advanced biofuels and may lead to greater volumes of these fuels being produced and used in the longer term . in addition , experts identified actions to increase compatibility of infrastructure with higher ethanol blends . experts identified actions that they suggested could incrementally improve the investment climate for advanced biofuels and possibly encourage the large investments and rapid development required to make these fuels more cost - effective . addressing uncertainty about the future of the rfs: many experts told us that uncertainty about the future of the rfs is limiting investment in advanced biofuels .