ii ) . postal service . we conducted our work from may 1999 through september 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a detailed description of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . three types of internet pharmacies selling prescription drugs directly to consumers have emerged in recent years . first , some internet pharmacies operate much like traditional drugstores or mail - order pharmacies: they dispense drugs only after receiving prescriptions from consumers or their physicians . other internet pharmacies provide customers medication without a physical examination by a physician . in place of the traditional face - to - face physician / patient consultation , the consumer fills out a medical questionnaire that is reportedly evaluated by a physician affiliated with the pharmacy . if the physician approves the questionnaire , he or she authorizes the online pharmacy to send the medication to the patient . this practice tends to be largely limited to “lifestyle” prescription drugs , such as those that alleviate allergies , promote hair growth , treat impotence , or control weight . finally , some internet pharmacies dispense medication without a prescription . regardless of their methods , all web sites selling prescription drugs are governed by the same complex network of laws and regulations at both the state and federal levels that govern traditional drugstores and mail - order drug services . in the united states , prescription drugs must be prescribed and dispensed by licensed health care professionals , who can help ensure proper dosing and administration and provide important information on the drug's use to customers . to legally dispense a prescription drug , a pharmacist licensed with the state and working in a pharmacy licensed by the state must be presented a valid prescription from a licensed health care professional . every state requires resident pharmacists and pharmacies to be licensed . the regulation of the practice of pharmacy is rooted in state pharmacy practice acts and regulations enforced by the state boards of pharmacy , which are responsible for licensing pharmacists and pharmacies . the state boards of pharmacy also are responsible for routinely inspecting pharmacies , ensuring that pharmacists and pharmacies comply with applicable state and federal laws , and investigating and disciplining those that fail to comply . in addition , 40 states require out - of - state pharmacies — called nonresident pharmacies — that dispense prescription drugs to state residents to be licensed or registered . some state pharmacy boards regulate internet pharmacies according to the same standards that apply to nonresident pharmacies .