marshals service . number of federal employees: about 250 . architecture: excellent example of neoclassic revival / second renaissance revival . estimated cost of needed repairs: $13.6 million in addition to about $800,000 it received for design in fiscal year 2001 . date when needs were documented: 1993 . a study by a private sector engineering firm described this situation as an unacceptable safety hazard because of the potential for the loss of life and property during a fire . maintenance costs are higher because replacement parts for existing fire alarm system are hard to find . not having a secure corridor that separates prisoners from judges , courthouse staff , or the public is a safety risk because it increases the possibility of a confrontation or an attempted jailbreak . energy / utility costs are estimated to be 15 percent higher . the current system has extensive backup and leak problems that result in water damage to ceilings and walls . the restrooms do not meet uniform federal accessibility standards . location: cleveland , oh . historic status: not historic . opened: 1966 . size: about 1.5 million gross square feet in 33 floors and a partial mezzanine level above ground level , and a cafeteria level , a basement , and a subbasement below ground level . major tenant ( s ) : the defense finance and accounting service , internal revenue service , and department of veterans affairs . a hole has developed once . energy costs to operate the system are higher . the age of the heating and ventilation systems present the potential for them to fail at any time . steam pipes burst several times per year and cause damage . in one case , a pipe burst in a historic library and did over $150,000 in damage to ornamental metal finishes as well as other damage for which gsa did not have an estimate . maintenance costs are higher because minor breakdowns of aged heating and ventilation systems occur more frequently , and repairs involve overcoming difficulties that result when access to the problem area is obstructed . radiators and window air conditioning units break down , which can result in uncomfortable temperatures . energy costs are higher because of system inefficiency . maintenance costs are higher because the 250 window air conditioning units break down often because of their age . steam leaks and condensation from window air conditioning units facilitate the growth of mold and mildew that can cause sickness in sensitive individuals if the substances are released into the air . water leaks deteriorate the building structure . damage to interior surfaces , some of which require costly historic restoration , that increases maintenance costs and detracts from the historic beauty of the building . a potential safety hazard exists if water comes in contact with a bare wire behind the walls and causes an electrical fire , which can cause noxious fumes . a potential health hazard exists because water leaks facilitate the growth of molds and mildews that may cause sickness in sensitive individuals if these substances are released into the air . maintenance costs are higher because recurrent cosmetic repairs are needed to correct the damage when the cause of the damage — a leak — is not repaired .