these opportunities are discussed below . a key control relating to the authenticity and accuracy of a tax return is the taxpayer's signature and certification that the return is true , correct , and complete to the best of the taxpayer's knowledge and belief . irs requirements state that taxpayers who file tax form 1040 electronically must submit this signature and certification to irs on form 8453 . certain taxpayers participating in an irs pilot program may use an irs - provided personal identification number to authenticate their electronically filed return in lieu of submitting form 8453 . irs processed electronic tax returns and paid refunds even when it did not receive a signed form 8453 or when a personal identification number was not used to authenticate the return . this practice is inconsistent with the irs practice of withholding payments for refunds claimed on unsigned paper returns . agency statistics through august 24 , 2000 , showed that irs did not receive forms 8453 for almost 1.2 million — about 3 percent — of tax returns filed electronically during the 2000 tax filing season and that about 93 percent of electronically filed returns were entitled to a refund or had no balance due . according to irs , the average refund issued for the 1999 tax filing season for on - line filers was $2,041 , and for practitioner - prepared electronic returns , $1,910 . based on these statistics , irs paid refunds of about $2.1 billion on electronic tax returns that were not authenticated by taxpayers as of august 24 , 2000 . further , according to agency criminal investigators , the absence of a signed form 8453 may preclude perjury prosecutions against taxpayers who provide false information on electronic tax returns . unless electronic returns are supported with a signed form 8453 or a personal identification number before paying claimed refunds , irs is vulnerable to paying improper refunds based on unauthenticated electronically filed tax returns . another control activity involves identifying erroneous data at the point that it enters the application system , or at some later point in the processing cycle . this is accomplished through a process called data validation and editing . programmed validation and edit checks are key to this process and are generally performed on transaction data entering the system ( before the master files are updated ) and on data resulting from processing . we identified several instances in which an e - file system did not detect erroneous or invalid data in our test transactions . for example , an e - file system did not detect several arithmetical errors and inconsistent data or amounts between related data fields on the form 1040 and the attachments . as a result , there was an increased risk that irs did not detect certain erroneous or inconsistent data on electronically filed tax returns . an essential control for ensuring the integrity of a computer application is to prevent software programmers and developers from having access to the application in the production environment . denying such access to software programmers and developers can help to reduce the risk of unauthorized changes to production programs and data .