state / f . , recognizes that doing so will be difficult because , among other reasons , different agencies use different procedures , processes , and systems to formulate budget requests , allocate resources , and measure results . in addition , the operational plans are intended to provide information about how all u.s. government agencies are coordinating and collaborating in each country to achieve short - term and long - term foreign assistance goals as well as information on other agencies' foreign assistance resources . state / f's operational plan guidance requires state and usaid staff to describe how the programs of all other u.s. government agencies in the country are helping address , at the program area level , the goals in state / f's foreign assistance framework . to obtain this information , state and usaid staff must work with other agencies . according to some usaid and state staff at field missions , the annual operational plan process has improved transparency among the various u.s. government agencies involved in u.s. foreign assistance activities in the country . for example , state officials in ukraine stated that , because of going through the operational plan process with other u.s. agencies , state has a much better view of all u.s. agencies' programs in ukraine , including some details about what activities other agencies' programs include . also , usaid officials in both haiti and peru said that interacting and collaborating with other agencies that are implementing foreign assistance activities in the country during the operational plan process raised their own awareness of other agencies' program activities and goals . during our review , state / f officials told us that they had initiated several corrective actions in response to recommendations in the internal review , such as defining roles and responsibilities for its various executive and managerial positions and its organizational units ; developing plans to ensure that the current workforce is aligned to meet these needs ; and improving training and professional development offered to its employees . however , state / f has not clearly defined roles and responsibilities for some of its employees . in addition , state / f has not developed a long - term workforce management plan to periodically reassess its workforce capacity to carry out assigned responsibilities , such as supporting and managing the consolidated budget , planning , and reporting processes for state and usaid foreign assistance programs . our previous work has shown that many aspects of workforce planning and management require long - term strategies , to ensure that the agency's human capital program capitalizes on its workforce's strengths and addresses related challenges in a manner that is clearly linked to achieving the agency's mission and goals . further , although state / f has defined its core functions and is “translating them down to its various offices,” state / f officials told us that these definitions are considered an internal management tool and therefore have not been , and will not be , shared with state and usaid employees outside state / f .