, providers ) . representatives from some initiatives added that the legal fees associated with establishing ehr interoperability can also be significant . in addition to the contact named above , tom conahan , assistant director ; a. elizabeth dobrenz ; krister friday ; monica perez - nelson ; and andrea e. richardson made key contributions to this report . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , the administrator of cms , the national coordinator for health information technology , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs can be found on the last page of this report . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . cms establishes specific requirements providers must meet to qualify for incentive payments . another initiative is working to enable patient control of their information through patient - mediated exchange , which allows patients to aggregate their health records into a phr and electronically grant providers access to these records according to the patient's preferences . three other initiatives told us that they are using or plan to develop technology that allows providers to share only portions of a patient's health record , which would allow providers to ensure that they send only information that they are authorized to share . representatives from 5 of the 11 initiatives told us that their initiative incorporated specific privacy policies into agreements signed by participants , including policies governing patient consent and access to their health records . for example , 1 nationwide initiative requires participants to obtain affirmative consent from patients before their information can be exchanged using the initiative's product . representatives from several initiatives identified additional actions that are needed to fully address this challenge . some of these requirements include the exchange of health information , which is a component of interoperability . onc identifies health data standards and technical specifications for ehr systems and certifies ehr systems used by providers in the program to help ensure that providers implement a system that offers a minimum level of technological capability , functionality , and security . thirteen of the 18 initiatives are working to address the challenge of accurately matching patients' health records . representatives from 4 of the 13 initiatives said that their initiatives are working to improve the quality of the data or types of information used for matching patients' health records . for example , 2 initiatives are working to establish standard data formats for health it systems , which may reduce differences in demographic data for the same patient , thus improving the accuracy of matching .