we visited 6 of these facilities . in addition , we visited another facility that we contacted independently . we recognize that there are risks associated with the transportation sector , but it was not within the scope of our review . we limited our review of security issues to stationary chemical facilities and did not address security concerns surrounding the transportation of hazardous chemicals . in october 2002 , we also issued a report on some actions justice has taken to assess the chemical industry's vulnerabilities to terrorist attack . chemical facilities manufacture a host of products — including basic organic chemicals , plastic materials and resins , petrochemicals , and industrial gases , to name a few . other facilities , such as fertilizer and pesticide facilities , pulp and paper manufacturers , water facilities , and refineries , also house large quantities of chemicals . epa has a role in preventing and mitigating accidental releases at chemical facilities through , among other things , the rmp provisions of the clean air act . under these provisions , epa identified 140 toxic and flammable chemicals that , when present above certain threshold amounts , would pose the greatest risk to human health and the environment if released . according to epa , approximately 15,000 facilities in a variety of industries produce , use , or store one or more of these chemicals beyond threshold amounts in one or more processes ( eg , single or interconnected vessels or tanks ) . alternatively , terrorists could steal chemicals , which could be used to create a weapon capable of causing harm . justice has been warning of the terrorist threat to chemical facilities for a number of years and has concluded that the risk of an attempt in the foreseeable future to cause an industrial chemical release is both real and credible . we reviewed statutes and regulations to determine the relevant statutory framework . to determine the actions taken by federal agencies to assess the vulnerability of the chemical industry or to address security preparedness , we reviewed the national strategy for homeland security and several justice reports . we interviewed officials at the departments of energy and justice , at epa , and at osha . we also attended epa - sponsored training classes on vulnerability assessments taught by officials from the department of energy's sandia national laboratories . we also discussed the voluntary actions the chemical industry has taken to address security preparedness and the challenges it faces in protecting its assets and operations with these agencies . in addition , we interviewed the u.s. chemical safety and hazards investigation board , the center for chemical process safety , and numerous industry associations including the american chemistry council ( acc ) , the american petroleum institute , the chlorine institute , inc. , the fertilizer institute , the gas processors association , the international institute of ammonia refrigeration , the national petroleum and refiners association , and the synthetic organic chemical manufacturers association . we attended security conferences held by the acc and the american petroleum institute . we also interviewed industry officials at a number of facility locations .