enforcement . states are required to impose sanctions that increase in severity and are more immediate when sffs do not improve . for example , a state should propose a cmp or a dpna with the minimum notice period . after three standard surveys ( approximately 18 months ) in the sff program , one of the following three outcomes are expected: graduation . states determine if the sff is eligible to “graduate” from the program by meeting cms's criteria for improved performance: two consecutive standard surveys and any intervening complaint investigations must have no deficiencies at the f level or higher . in addition , an sff cannot have a deficiency higher than the f level on the fire safety portion of its most recent standard survey . termination . cms can terminate a nursing home by implementing either a mandatory or a discretionary termination . mandatory termination is required by regulation if within 23 days of the end of a survey a home fails to correct immediate jeopardy deficiencies or within 6 months if it fails to correct nonimmediate jeopardy deficiencies . cms may also impose discretionary terminations in situations other than those specified above , which require the same notice period applicable to discretionary dpnas . in addition , nursing homes can and do terminate voluntarily , which may be related to the fact that the home is at risk of involuntary termination . the objective of the sff program is to decrease the number of persistently poorly performing nursing homes by focusing more attention on a small number of nursing homes in each state with a record of poor quality performance . since the program's inception , cms has changed the sff program's scope and methodology to enhance the agency's goal of improving nursing home performance . cms uses its sff methodology to identify a list of the 15 worst performing nursing homes in each state . the sff methodology assigns points to deficiencies on standard surveys and complaint investigations , and to revisits associated with deficiencies cited on standard surveys.19 , 20 more points are assigned to deficiencies that are higher in scope and severity , and additional points are assigned to deficiencies classified as substandard quality of care ( sqc ) . ( see table 2. ) for every nursing home , cms sums the points associated with the deficiencies ( including sqc ) and the revisits to create a cycle score for each of the last three cycles . cms then creates the total score by weighting the more recent cycle scores more heavily . nursing homes with the highest number of points are the worst performing homes . to avoid potential double - counting , deficiencies that appear on complaint surveys conducted within 15 days of a standard survey ( either prior to or after the standard survey ) are counted only once . if the scope or severity differs on the two surveys , the highest scope and severity combination is used . from 1999 to 2004 , the sff methodology assigned a different number of points to deficiencies using only about 1 year of deficiency data .