we also interviewed relevant agency officials . additional information about our scope and methodology is available in our june 2019 report . since the issuance of that report , we received and reviewed additional information from selected agencies related to the actions they have taken in response to the report's recommendations . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . consistent with the discretion afforded by the apa , regulations.gov and agency - specific comment websites use required and optional fields on comment forms to collect some identity information from commenters . in addition to the text of the comment , agencies may choose to collect identity information by requiring commenters to fill in other fields , such as name , address , and email address before they are able to submit a comment . regardless of the fields required by the comment form , the selected agencies all accept anonymous comments in practice . further , because the apa does not require agencies to authenticate submitted identity information , neither regulations.gov nor the agency - specific comment websites contain mechanisms to check the validity of identity information that commenters submit through comment forms . regulations.gov and agency - specific comment websites also collect some information about public users' interaction with their websites through application event logs and proxy server logs , though the apa does not require agencies to collect or verify it as part of the rulemaking process . this information , which can include a public user's internet protocol ( ip ) address , browser type and operating system , and the time and date of webpage visits , is collected separately from the comment submission process as part of routine information technology management of system security and performance , and cannot be reliably connected to specific comments . seven of 10 selected agencies have documented some internal guidance associated with the identity of commenters during the three phases of the public comment process: intake , analysis , and response to comments . however , the focus and substance of this guidance varies by agency and phase of the comment process . with regard to the comment intake phase in particular , the variation in how agencies identify duplicate comments and post comments results in identity information being inconsistently presented on regulations.gov or the agency - specific websites . generally , officials told us that their agencies either ( 1 ) maintain all comments within the comment system or ( 2 ) maintain some duplicate comment records outside of the comment system , for instance , in email file archives . for example , according to officials of one participating agency — the wage and hour division ( whd ) — all duplicate comments are stored in regulations.gov . our analysis of whd comments did not suggest that any comments were missing from regulations.gov .