usda had no comments on the report . according to senior agency officials , hud's goal at the time we completed our work was to provide formal training to field staff in fiscal year 2005 in the technical implementation of the agency's new rules for using low - income housing tax credits or other mixed financing to help fund section 202 properties . hud provided comments in a letter from the assistant secretary for housing – federal housing commissioner ( see appendix v ) . the letter stated that the report does not give hud's programs full credit for their contributions in assisting the elderly . hud's specific comments in this regard , and our responses , are as follows: hud commented that the report should include more detail on partnership arrangements and overall supportive services provided to the elderly . we believe that the report covers these issues at a level of detail appropriate to our objective . the report includes information on the four federal housing assistance programs that require that supportive services be made available to elderly residents , and four programs that can be used to either link residents to supportive services or provide services directly . in addition , it includes examples of private partnerships and health care programs to convey a broader sense of the supportive services that can be available to the elderly . hud noted that the draft did not include data on units designated for a mixed population of the elderly and disabled . we initially determined that the 6,004 units that fall into this category were not significant enough to merit inclusion . however , in response to hud's comment , we have included this data as a note to figure 2 . hud stated that the report fails to give home equity conversion mortgages ( hecm ) sufficient credit . as detailed in the objectives , scope , and methodology ( see appendix i ) , this report focuses upon programs that met our definition of housing assistance . while the hecm program did not meet this definition , both the body of the report and appendix iv acknowledge hecm as a program that assists elderly families . hud agreed that gao used the appropriate definition of elderly households , but stated that the report should acknowledge that other households may have members aged 62 or older ( that are not the head , co - head , or spouse ) . while we did not initially provide data on such households because they are not , by definition , elderly households , we did add a note to figure 3 to acknowledge that housing assistance programs can also benefit this group . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of agriculture and housing and urban development . we will make copies available to others upon request . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 if you or your staff have any questions about this report .