accuracy of agency system inventories . the total number of agency systems is a key element in omb's performance measures , in that agency progress is indicated by the percentage of total systems that meet specific information security requirements . thus , inaccurate or incomplete data on the total number of agency systems affects the percentage of systems shown as meeting the requirements . further , a complete inventory of major information systems is a key element of managing the agency's it resources , including the security of those resources . as mentioned , fisma requires that each agency develop , maintain , and annually update an inventory of major information systems operated by the agency or under its control . however , according to their fiscal year 2003 fisma reports , only 13 of the 24 agencies reported that they had completed their system inventories . further , independent evaluations by igs for 3 of these 13 agencies did not agree that system inventories were complete . in addition , although there was little change in the reported total number of systems shown for the 24 agencies ( an increase of only 41 systems from 7,957 systems for fiscal year 2002 to 7,998 systems for fiscal year 2003 , large changes in individual agencies' total systems from year to year could make it more difficult to interpret changes in their performance measure results . for example , the total number of systems reported by the department of agriculture decreased by 55 percent from 605 for fiscal year 2002 to 271 for fiscal year 2003 , which the department attributed , in large part , to its efforts to develop the fisma - required inventory of major information systems . reporting information by system risk would provide better information about whether agencies are prioritizing their information security efforts according to risk . for example , the performance measures for fiscal year 2003 show that 48 percent of the total number of systems have tested contingency plans , but do not indicate to what extent these 48 percent include the agencies' most important systems . fiscal year 2004 omb fisma guidance . omb plans to further emphasize performance measurement in next year's guidance . in particular , its focus will center on three areas: ( 1 ) evolving the it security performance measures to move beyond status reporting to also identify the quality of the work done , such as determining both the number of systems certified and accredited and the quality of certification and accreditation conducted ; ( 2 ) further targeting of ig efforts to assess the development , implementation , and performance of key it security processes , such as remediation and intrusion detection and reporting ; and ( 3 ) providing additional clarity to certain definitions to eliminate interpretation differences within agencies and among agencies and igs . threat and vulnerability response process . poa&ms are to be submitted twice a year .