however , the standards do not define proficiency . air carriers were required to incorporate the guidance and standards into their security training programs . in supporting this partnership , tsa should establish strategic goals for the flight and cabin crew security training program so that air carriers can develop their security programs , and measure the effectiveness of these programs , based on desired results , or goals , clearly defined by tsa . with regard to our recommendations that tsa establish strategic goals for the flight and cabin crew member security training program and develop guidance and standards for air carriers to use in establishing performance goals and measures for their individual flight and cabin crew member security training programs , dhs stated that tsa has begun efforts to establish strategic goals for the program and , air carriers would benefit from additional guidance — that is , guidance in addition to the flight and cabin crew security training standards — to use in establishing performance goals and measures for their individual flight and cabin crew security training programs . while tsa has established standards for air carriers' to use in developing their flight and cabin crew security training , these standards do not include strategic goals for the training nor provide any guidance for establishing performance goals and measures . in addition , at the time of our review , tsa had not begun developing strategic goals for flight and cabin crew security training . therefore , we cannot assess the extent to which the goals tsa is currently developing satisfy our recommendation . with respect to our recommendation that tsa establish a time frame for finalizing written procedures for monitoring and reviewing air carriers' flight and cabin crew security training , dhs stated that tsa is in the process of developing a monitoring plan , to the extent that resources permit , and a handbook for reviewing air carriers' flight and cabin crew member security training programs . dhs further stated that the handbook is currently under development and will be completed and ready for implementation in fiscal year 2006 . finally , regarding our recommendation that tsa establish performance measures for the advanced voluntary crew member self - defense training program and a time frame for evaluating the effectiveness of the training , dhs stated that tsa is working with omb to establish performance measures for use in omb's performance assessment rating tool for flight security training and will finalize these measures using fiscal year 2005 data as the baseline . according to dhs , these measures will provide tsa with information that can be used in evaluating the effectiveness of the advanced voluntary crew member self - defense training . dhs also stated that tsa has begun to reach out to stakeholders to obtain feedback on this training . tsa's successful completion of these ongoing and planned activities should address the concerns we raised in this report . we also provided relevant sections of this report to faa , fbi , and dod for their review , and incorporated their technical comments into the report as appropriate .