other supplements are associated with more serious adverse effects . some of these products show potential health benefits . in analyses of garlic products , most were found to release less than 20 percent of their active ingredient.one study of ginseng found that 35 percent of the products tested contained no detectable levels of an active ingredient , and another found no detectable levels in 12 percent of the tested products . studies of sam - e and st. john's wort products also found that tested samples often contained less active ingredient than indicated on the label . federal efforts to protect seniors from health fraud include providing educational materials on avoiding health fraud , funding research to evaluate popular anti - aging therapies , and carrying out enforcement activities against companies that have violated regulations . at the state level , agencies are working to protect consumers of health products by enforcing state consumer protection and public health laws , although anti - aging and alternative products have received limited attention . both fda and ftc sponsor educational activities that focus on health fraud and seniors . for example , public affairs specialists in several fda district offices had exhibits at senior health fairs and health conferences where they distributed educational materials on how to avoid health fraud , as well as cautionary guidance on purchasing medicines and medical products online . to help seniors discriminate between legitimate and fraudulent claims , ftc publishes a range of consumer education materials on certain frequently promoted products and services , including hearing aids and varicose vein treatments . the agency also publishes guidelines on how to spot false claims and how to differentiate television shows from “infomercials.” federal support of research on alternative therapies is provided by nih's national center for complementary and alternative medicine ( nccam ) . it has developed research programs to fund clinical trials to evaluate the safety and efficacy of some popular products and therapies for conditions such as arthritis , cardiovascular diseases , and neurological disorders . there are studies , either ongoing or planned , to examine the effects of glucosamine / chondroitin , melatonin , st. john's wort , ginkgo biloba , and others . in addition , the agency funds specialized , multidisciplinary research centers on alternative medicine in such areas as cardiovascular disease , neurological disorders , aging , and arthritis . fda enforcement actions taken against products that it judged to be unapproved drugs or medical devices include court cases filed to halt the distribution of laetrile products that claimed to cure cancer and to halt the sale of “cholestin,” a red yeast rice product with lovastatin that was marketed with cholesterol - lowering claims . fda also took action to halt the marketing of the “stimulator,” a device that the manufacturer claimed would relieve pain from sciatica , swollen joints , carpal tunnel syndrome , and other chronic conditions . according to fda officials , an estimated 800,000 of these devices were sold between 1994 and 1997 , with many purchased by senior citizens . fda has notified some dietary supplement manufacturers that their promotional materials illegally claimed that their products cure disease .