sustainability . ability of the host government to absorb project resources . ability to leverage additional support . identification of a unique opportunity to provide resources that generate synergy and complement a national program or programs of other donor agencies . anticipated risk . the office of child labor , forced labor , and human trafficking ( child labor office ) also has several criteria for project development , including: nature and extent of exploitative child labor in a country . contribution of proposed project to advancing the u.s. government's foreign policy objectives . extent of a foreign government's acknowledgement of and commitment to eliminating the worst forms of child labor . past performance of labor - funded child labor projects in a given country . presence and support of u.s. government field operations ( i.e. , u.s. embassies and the u.s. agency for international development ) . likelihood that project interventions will have long - term and sustainable impact in reducing the incidence of exploitative child labor in the country . in addition to the contact named above , leslie holen ( assistant director ) , rachel girshick , jeff isaacs , jill lacey , grace lui , seyda wentworth , and christina werth made key contributions to this report . karen deans and etana finkler provided technical assistance . feasibility . demonstrated need for technical assistance . we accepted these as evidence of checking past performance . according to labor officials , the procurement office keeps all documents for the winning grantee , including the consensus report from the grant evaluation panel . however , after the debriefing period has ended , it does not keep the individual panelist's review sheets from the grant evaluation panel or the unsuccessful applications . the individual panelists are each responsible for reading and completing evaluations for all applications . ilab officials said that influence of the panel chair is moderated by the other panel members , and that the chair's role is to facilitate and organize the process , not to dictate the review . ilab panels generally include three to four people , including the chair . ilab officials said that the other panelists can be people from within the agency who have expertise on the sector or country , as well as people from outside of labor , such as academics or the state desk officer for the country . labor officials said the procurement office provides training to panelists . the most recent training document , from july 2013 , includes an integrity overview , including confidentiality and conflict of interest provisions , and explains the process the panel follows during the evaluation of the applications . these manuals contain chapters on project selection criteria , planning , and design . in addition , we reviewed ilab's three annual reports on international child labor and forced labor: findings on the worst forms of child labor ; the list of goods produced by child labor or forced labor ; and the list of products produced by forced or indentured child labor . we met with knowledgeable officials from the child labor and trade and labor offices to understand how they develop project ideas .