the voucher program is not an entitlement program . as a result , the amount of budget authority hud requests and congress provides through the annual appropriations process limits the number of households that the program can assist . historically , appropriations for the voucher program ( or for other federal housing programs ) have not been sufficient to assist all households that hud has identified as having worst - case housing needs — that is , unassisted households with very low incomes that pay more than 50 percent of their incomes in rent , live in substandard housing , or both . in 2009 , 41 percent of the more than 17 million very low - income renters had worst - case housing needs , according to hud . the primary problem affecting these renters was rent burden — approximately 97 percent paid more than 50 percent of their incomes in rent . in conducting our work , we assessed the reliability of datasets provided by hud , including data files derived from hudcaps , vms , and pic . specifically , we performed basic electronic testing of relevant data elements , such as housing assistance payment amounts , total tenant payment , and unit months leased . we reviewed hud's data dictionaries , instructions , and other relevant documentations . we also interviewed hud officials knowledgeable about the data to obtain clarifications about key variables and calculation rules . where possible , we compared our results with other sources to ensure the reasonableness of the information . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of this report . finally , for all of our objectives , we interviewed hud officials and consulted with one academic and officials from various housing groups including the center on budget and policy priorities , council of large public housing authorities , national low - income housing coalition , national association of housing redevelopment officials , public housing authorities directors association , quadel consulting , and the urban institute . further , we contacted 53 housing agencies that administer the voucher program . in selecting these housing agencies , we considered the number of authorized vouchers , location ( that is , hud - defined regions ) , and leasing and spending rates for the voucher program as of march 2011 . we conducted this performance audit from february 2011 through march 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . to be eligible for assistance , in general , households must have very - low incomes — not exceeding 50 percent of the area median income , as determined by hud . under the quality housing and work responsibility act of 1998 ( p.l . 105-276 ) , at least 75 percent of new voucher program participants must have extremely low incomes — not exceeding 30 percent of the area median income .