implement nepa . in their most recent environmental justice strategic plans , 12 agencies discussed planning to consider environmental justice issues in their nepa analyses . at least 13 agencies provided examples of nepa actions they had implemented , including providing internal guidance on how to include environmental justice issues in nepa analyses . for example , at doi , it is departmental policy for all bureaus to include consideration of environmental justice in the nepa process and some bureaus have developed their own guidance for doing so . for example , doi's 2015 national park service nepa handbook requires the agency's environmental analyses to discuss and evaluate the impact of proposals on minority and low - income populations and communities , including the distribution of the benefits and risks among different communities and populations . implement title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 . in their most recent environmental justice strategic plans , 11 agencies planned to consider environmental justice issues when implementing their title vi programs . at least 10 agencies provided examples of title vi environmental justice actions they implemented , some of which focused on providing training and guidance . for instance , in 2016 , doj , dhs , hud , hhs , and dot jointly issued interagency guidance on title vi to state and local agencies involved in emergency activities . dhs and doj reported that dhs's office for civil rights and civil liberties and doj's civil rights division coordinated to distribute this guidance in the aftermath of the 2017 hurricane season to ensure that federal funding recipients ( eg , state and local agencies ) were aware of their obligations to provide emergency management services across communities without discrimination . consider impacts from climate change . in their most recent environmental justice strategic plans , nine agencies discussed planning to address impacts from climate change on communities with environmental justice issues . at least 11 agencies provided examples of actions they implemented in this area , including providing communities with information on how climate change may affect them . for example , in its 2016 progress report , doi reported that the u.s. geological service working with the swinomish indian tribal community and skagit river system cooperative to build a coastal model to evaluate the impacts of sea - level rise , storm surge , and waves , including effects on foods such as salmon and shellfish . doi reported that the model was used to inform tribal climate adaptation and resilience plans . consider impacts from goods movement . in their most recent environmental justice strategic plans , three agencies discussed planning to address environmental justice issues arising from goods movement , and at least five agencies provided examples of actions they implemented in this area . for example , dot's federal highway administration developed a detailed freight and land use handbook in 2012 , which highlights potential negative impacts in communities with minority or low - income residents ( eg , air quality or light pollution ) and provides guidance on integrating freight and land - use planning to balance freight's beneficial economic impacts and harmful environmental impacts for affected communities .