divestment from sudan has been at the forefront of these efforts . however , in deciding whether and how to divest , stakeholders must consider how divestment affects foreign companies operating in sudan , particularly those that strive to make a positive contribution to the sudanese people . they must also ensure that divestment is consistent with their fiduciary responsibility . additionally , they must identify and evaluate conflicting sources of information about which companies have sudan - related business operations . requiring companies to disclose their own operations in sudan ( as well as other state sponsors of terrorism ) would provide more accurate and transparent information to investors carefully weighing whether and how to divest from sudan . furthermore , the strong demand for this information from states that require divestment , as well as from other investors , indicates that this information could be considered material — a judgment that the sec has suggested in its correspondence with operating companies . in our report released today , we recommend that , in order to enhance the investing public's access to information needed to make well - informed decisions when determining whether and how to divest sudan - related assets , the sec consider issuing a rule requiring companies that trade on u.s. exchanges to disclose their business operations related to sudan , as well as possibly other u.s. - designated state sponsors of terrorism . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for questions or further information about this testimony , please contact thomas melito at ( 202 ) 512-9601 , or melitot@gao.gov . the company did not provide a response to the request . four years later , the office reiterated its question to the company . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . that report contains a detailed overview of our scope and methodology . all of our work for this testimony was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we found that several states have divested or frozen assets primarily related to sudan and that the value of u.s. investment companies' sudan - related asset holdings has declined considerably since march 2007 . our survey responses show that state fund managers have divested or frozen about $3.5 billion in assets primarily related to sudan ( see table 1 ) .