gas produced during oil production is called associated gas . during oil and gas production , it may be necessary to burn or release natural gas for a number of operational reasons , including lowering the pressure to ensure safety . burning natural gas is known as flaring , while releasing natural gas directly into the atmosphere is called venting . in addition to the operational reasons for flaring and venting , in areas where the primary purpose of drilling is to produce oil , producers flare or vent associated natural gas because no local market exists for the gas and transporting it to a market may not be economically feasible . natural gas prices are a major determinant of whether associated gas is flared and vented or sold . associated natural gas would be sold if prices were high enough over a long enough period to justify building the infrastructure — pipelines and ports — to transport the gas to a market . in the united states , there are well - developed natural gas markets and infrastructure to reduce the flaring and venting of associated natural gas . however , in parts of the world like africa and the middle east , where the natural gas market and infrastructure for transporting gas are not as well - developed , flaring and venting are generally more prevalent . with increases in natural gas prices , some countries have recognized the potential of increasing exports to high - demand countries like the united states using liquefied natural gas ( lng ) technology . these countries liquefy the natural gas and transport it in specially designed tanker ships to the united states and other countries . to do this work , we obtained currently available data on natural gas production and estimates of flaring and venting in the united states from eia , mms , and blm . in general , flaring and venting are not authorized on these properties except for standard operational reasons . in addition , both agencies require producers to report combined flaring and venting data for federal leases . the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) has responsibility for determining public convenience and necessity for interstate transmission of natural gas through pipelines as well as for permitting onshore liquefied natural gas facilities . in addition , the u.s. coast guard plays a role in the lng offshore permitting process . the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) supports various projects around the world , including energy projects , in partnership with other countries . the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , under the department of commerce , uses u.s. satellite technology to , among other things , monitor gas flaring activity around the world .