cdip . the cdip is one of seven actions identified in dod's cybersecurity campaign to prompt commanders and senior leaders to enforce full cybersecurity compliance and accountability across the department . in october 2015 , the deputy secretary of defense signed the cdip to reinforce basic cybersecurity technical requirements identified in policies , directives , and orders as a means to defend dod information networks , secure dod data , and mitigate risks to dod missions . the cdip memorandum identifies 17 tasks for all commanders and supervisors to implement across the department . these tasks include removing operating system software that no longer receives security updates from vendors , configuring servers consistent with dod guidance on secure configurations , and addressing vulnerabilities for servers and network infrastructure in a timely manner . cyber awareness challenge training . this training is intended to help the dod workforce ( including service members , civilians , and contractors ) to maintain awareness of known and emerging cybersecurity threats , reinforce best practices to keep information and information systems secure , and ensure that network users stay abreast of changes in dod cybersecurity policies . disa develops the training content and periodically updates the training . in addition , the cyber workforce advisory group that includes officials from the dod cio , disa , and dod components , solicit input about ways to improve the training and meets annually to approve updates to the cyber awareness challenge . federal law and a dod initiative and strategy highlight the important role of leadership in improving cybersecurity culture and performance across the department . for example , the federal information security modernization act of 2014 ( fisma ) requires agency heads — including the secretary of defense — to ensure that senior agency officials provide security for the information and information systems that support the operations and assets under their control . additionally , the dc3i states that leaders will be held accountable by the chain of command for the cybersecurity performance of their organization and the individuals who comprise it , and for the role cybersecurity performance plays in accomplishing assigned missions . it also states that leaders will set an example and help individuals master appropriate cyber behavior , will take action against those who commit gross negligence or errors of commission , and may use all available means , both legal and administrative , as they deem appropriate . further , the 2018 dod cyber strategy states that reducing the department's network attack surface ( i.e. , the different points in a network where attackers can try to enter or extract information ) requires an increase in cybersecurity awareness and accountability across the department . the strategy also states that the department would hold dod personnel accountable for their cybersecurity practices and choices . the 2019 cybersecurity readiness review , directed by the secretary of the navy , describes best practices for effective cybersecurity leadership . these best practices , according to the readiness review , require navy leaders to be informed on cybersecurity issues facing their organization , engaged in ensuring cybersecurity issues are addressed , and hold their organization accountable for cybersecurity performance .