gao - 16-390 . washington , d.c.: april 14 , 2016 . it comprises both hardware and software . the hardware consists of three main components: the autonomic logistics operating unit ( alou ) : the alou is the computer server that all f - 35 data ultimately are sent through and it supports communications with and between the government and the contractor's systems . the central point of entry ( cpe ) : the cpe is configured to provide software and data distribution for the entire f - 35 fleet in the united states , enables interoperability with national ( government ) systems at the country level , and enables alis data connectivity between bases . each international partner operating f - 35 aircraft is expected to have its own cpe at other locations . the standard operating unit ( sou ) : sous provide all alis capabilities to support flying , maintenance , and training . they also provide access to applications to operate and sustain the aircraft . as of february 2016 , there was one operational alou and cpe within the united states . each f - 35 operating and testing site in the united states has a varying number of sous depending on the site's number of aircraft and squadrons , and there are two versions: sou v1 and sou v2 . the main difference between the two sous is that sou v2 was designed to better meet participants' deployability requirements . while sou v1 was housed in two 1,600-pound server racks , sou v2 was designed to have its components fit into transit cases that are two - man portable , each weighing approximately 200 pounds . dod is planning to have at least one sou accompany each f - 35 squadron . the services organize their squadrons differently but squadron sizes generally range from 10 to 24 aircraft . the f - 35 operational requirements document , which originated in march 2000 and contains the performance and operational parameters for the concept of the f - 35 , calls for an incremental development of f - 35 capabilities by aircraft software blocks and phased software releases during the system development and demonstration phase . this is concurrent to the production and fielding of small volumes of aircraft during low - rate initial production . alis's software development is anticipated to be completed after two more of its versions are released , the first of which will support the air force declaring initial operational capability in summer 2016 . the current fielding status of alis is illustrated in figure 2 , which also includes the dates for when the next software upgrade — alis version 2.0.2 — is to be introduced at each f - 35 site . alis 3.0 , which is the version expected to meet the requirements defined in the operational requirements document , is expected to have completed its development and commence testing by october 2017 in line with the end of system development and demonstration . the release is to be fielded under the low - rate initial production contract in early 2018 and is intended to be fully functional by 2019 .