notification of make decisions . according to the federal acquisition regulation , the prime contractor is responsible for managing contract performance , including planning , placing , and administering subcontracts as necessary to ensure the lowest overall cost and technical risk to the government . the federal acquisition regulation further provides that when “make - or - buy programs” are required , the government may reserve the right to review and agree on the contractor's make - or - buy program when necessary to ensure negotiation of reasonable contract prices , among other things . we recommended that the coast guard be notified of make - or - buy decisions over $5 million in order to facilitate controlling costs through competition . we suggested the $5 million threshold because lockheed martin , one of the major subcontractors , considers that amount to be the threshold for considering its suppliers major . the coast guard has asked the system integrator , on a voluntary basis , to provide notification 1 week in advance of a make decision of $10 million or more based on the criteria in the make - or - buy program provisions of the federal acquisition regulation . according to coast guard officials , to date , no make decision has exceeded $10 million since the request was made . the details implementing this recommendation have not yet been worked out , such as specifically who in the coast guard will monitor the subcontractors' make decisions to ensure that the voluntary agreement is complied with . we will continue to monitor the coast guard's progress in implementing this recommendation during our pending review of the revised deepwater plan . our work suggests the costly and important deepwater program will need constant monitoring and management attention to successfully accomplish its goals . in this respect , we identified three points that should be kept in mind in considering how to proceed with the program . first , the need to replace or upgrade deteriorating legacy assets is considerable . while the coast guard currently lacks measures that clearly demonstrate how this deterioration affects its ability to perform deepwater - related missions , it is clear that the deepwater legacy assets are insufficient for the task . as the coast guard continues to develop condition measures that are more robust and able to link the assets' condition with mission capabilities , and as it further develops and implements its capital asset management system , it will be in a better position to make more informed decisions regarding where its budget should be spent to maximize the capabilities of its legacy assets as the coast guard transitions to the integrated deepwater system . second , there are signs that as the deepwater program moves ahead , the coast guard will continue to report more problems with sustaining existing assets , together with the attendant need for additional infusions of funding to deal with them . some of these problems , such as those on the 378-foot cutters , are included in the compendium the coast guard uses to set sustainment priorities and plan budgets , but the coast guard has not allocated funds because the problems pertain to assets that are among the first to be replaced .