that was not our intent . our recommendation is meant to ensure that the goals and accompanying performance / status measures selected are clearly defined in the instruction . as pointed out in the report , this is not currently the case . we agree that determinations of overall materiel readiness require the consideration of a variety of factors , such as maintenance manning and supply fill rates , as well as metrics such as an aircraft's availability . however , we believe that the instruction should continue its current requirement to include performance / condition status measures relative to those goals . clearly identifying the goals that are sought and their performance measures in the instruction will help avoid further uncertainty and disagreement over the level of basic aircraft performance , and does not preclude the consideration of other metrics in broader assessments of overall readiness . for these reasons , we believe no change to our recommendation is needed . dod also disagreed with the part of our recommendation calling for the secretary of defense to revise the instruction to establish a standard methodology identifying objective principles of analysis to be used in setting the goals . it believed that the services should establish the detailed analytical methodology because the types of goals and their basis may vary by service , and the services have a better understanding of the differences and complexities of their individual environments . we agree with the need for some leeway at the service level to handle individual differences between them . however , we continue to believe that all services should adhere to a standardized set of overarching principles of analysis in order to safeguard objectivity and transparency in the goal setting process . such principles could be identified in coordination with the services during the department's planned evaluation of the basis for the current goals and alternative methodologies . the services could then develop detailed methodologies consistent with these principles but tailored to their individual environments . consequently , no change to our recommendation is required . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix iii . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 757 ) 552-8100 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . legend: mc = mission capable , fmc = fully mission capable , fy= fiscal year , ec / c = electronic command and control .