medicaid . we previously found that during economic downturns — when medicaid enrollment can rise and state economies weaken — the fmap formula does not reflect current state economic conditions . we previously developed a formula that offers an option for providing temporary automatic , timely , and targeted assistance . we recommend that congress use this formula for any future changes to the fmap during the current or any future economic downturn to help ensure that the federal funding is targeted and timely . in the report we issued yesterday , we also describe potential indicators that could be used to monitor public health and economic recovery . the report also contains 41 enclosures that contain information about a wide range of federal programs or initiatives that were created , expanded , or funded in the covid - 19 relief laws . in conclusion , both congress and the administration have acted to respond to public health and economic threats posed by covid - 19 . federal agencies and personnel acted quickly to stand up new programs or expand existing programs to , among other things , aid individuals , states , and businesses . but much work remains in protecting the health and well - being of americans , both today and in the coming months , as the nation may be forced to simultaneously confront new waves of covid - 19 infections and seasonal influenza . in our initial report we make recommendations to help improve the effectiveness of the federal government's ongoing response . our ongoing oversight will continue to focus on improving the government's response and recovery efforts as well as the nation's preparedness for future outbreaks . chairman clyburn , ranking member scalise , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact a. nicole clowers , managing director , health care , at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or clowersa@gao.gov ; katherine siggerud , chief operating officer , at ( 202 ) 512-5600 or siggerudk@gao.gov ; or orice williams brown , managing director , congressional relations , at ( 202 ) 512-4400 or williamso@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . contract obligations . government - wide contract obligations in response to the covid - 19 pandemic totaled about $17 billion as of may 31 , 2020 . goods procured include ventilators , and services contracted for include vaccine development . in addition , the cares act provided $1 billion for defense production act purchases — $76 million of which was awarded to increase production of n95 respirators . the nation has made some progress in fighting covid - 19 . however , the virus continues to pose risks to all americans , and there is a concern of another wave of infection this fall .