condition 2 . the plan , including related program documentation and program officials' statements , partially satisfied this condition by providing for future compliance with dhs's enterprise architecture ( ea ) . dhs released version 1.0 of the architecture in september 2003.1 we reviewed the initial version of the architecture and found that it was missing , either partially or completely , all the key elements expected in a well - defined architecture , such as a description of business processes , information flows among these processes , and security rules associated with these information flows.2 since we reviewed version 1.0 , dhs has drafted version 2.0 of its ea . we have not reviewed this draft . department of homeland security enterprise architecture compendium version 1.0 and transitional strategy . gao , homeland security: efforts under way to develop enterprise architecture , but much work remains , gao - 04-777 ( washington , d.c.: aug. 6 , 2004 ) . is reviewed by gao . however , cbpmo did not provide this plan to us because it was not yet approved . moreover , program officials told us that the staffing plan is no longer operative because it was developed before december 2004 , when a modernization office reorganization was implemented . as part of this reorganization , cbp transferred government and contractor personnel who have responsibility for the automated commercial system,1 the automated targeting system,2 and ace training from non - cbpmo organizational units . this change is expected to eliminate redundant ace - related program management efforts . the automated commercial system is cbp's system for tracking , controlling , and processing imports to the united states . the automated targeting system is cbp's system for identifying import shipments that warrant further attention . objective 2 results open recommendations following our recommendation , cbpmo provided reports dated march 31 , 2004 , and june 30 , 2004 , to the appropriations committees on its human capital activities , including development of the previously mentioned staffing plan and related analysis to fully define cbpmo positions . additionally , it has reported on efforts to ensure that all modernization office staff members complete a program management training program . objective 2 results open recommendations open recommendation 4: have future ace expenditure plans specifically address any proposals or plans , whether tentative or approved , for extending and using ace infrastructure to support other homeland security applications , including any impact on ace of such proposals and plans . the ace program plan states that ace provides functions that are directly related to the “passenger business process” underlying the u.s . visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) program,1 and integration of certain ace and us - visit components is anticipated . in recognition of this relationship , the expenditure plan states that cbpmo and us - visit are working together to identify lessons learned , best practices , and opportunities for collaboration . us - visit is a governmentwide program to collect , maintain , and share information on foreign nationals for enhancing national security and facilitating legitimate trade and travel , while adhering to u.s. privacy laws and policies .