we have identified such opportunities . for example , as i already mentioned , usda and fda spend resources on overlapping food safety activities , and we have made recommendations designed to reduce this overlap . similarly , regarding fda's seafood inspection program , we have discussed options for fda to use personnel at noaa to augment fda's inspection capacity . many of our recommendations to agencies to promote the safety and integrity of the nation's food supply have been acted upon . nevertheless , as we discuss in the 2007 high - risk series , a fundamental reexamination of the federal food safety system is warranted . how can agencies more strategically manage their portfolio of tools and adopt more innovative methods to contribute to the achievement of national outcomes ? integration can create synergy and economies of scale and can provide more focused and efficient efforts to protect the nation's food supply . further , to respond to the nation's pressing fiscal challenges , agencies may have to explore new ways to achieve their missions . such a reexamination would need to address criticisms that have been raised about usda's dual mission as both a promoter of agricultural and food products and an overseer of their safety . taken as a whole , our work indicates that congress and the executive branch can and should create the environment needed to look across the activities of individual programs within specific agencies and toward the goals that the federal government is trying to achieve . to that end , we have recommended , among other things , that congress enact comprehensive , uniform , and risk - based food safety legislation and commission the national academy of sciences or a blue ribbon panel to conduct a detailed analysis of alternative organizational food safety structures . we also recommended that the executive branch reconvene the president's council on food safety to facilitate interagency coordination on food safety regulation and programs . these actions can begin to address the fragmentation in the federal oversight of food safety . going forward , to build a sustained focus on the safety and the integrity of the nation's food supply , congress and the executive branch can integrate various expectations for food safety with congressional oversight and through agencies' strategic planning processes . the development of a governmentwide performance plan that is mission - based , is results - oriented , and provides a cross - agency perspective offers a framework to help ensure agencies' goals are complementary and mutually reinforcing . further , this plan can help decision makers balance trade - offs and compare performance when resource allocation and restructuring decisions are made . as i have discussed , gao designated the federal oversight of food safety as a high - risk area that is in need of a broad - based transformation to achieve greater economy , efficiency , effectiveness , accountability , and sustainability . the high - risk designation raises the priority and visibility of this necessary transformation and thus can bring needed attention to address the weaknesses caused by a fragmented system .