omb , circular no . we then summarized these assessments by characteristic . in addition , we interviewed relevant agency officials , including key personnel on the programs that we selected for case study . to determine the extent to which the estimates are we conducted this performance audit from july 2011 through july 2012 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . appendix i contains further details about our objectives , scope , and methodology . given the size and significance of the government's investment in it , it is important that projects be managed effectively to ensure that public resources are wisely invested . among other things , the program's projected budget of $115 million through fiscal year 2016 was only partly supported by the cost estimate , which included costs only through fiscal year 2014 . as a result , the agency did not have a reliable basis for the program's budget projection . we made multiple recommendations to improve the quality of the agency's cost and budget information , including ensuring that the information reporting and document matching program's cost estimate is reliable and that the agency's cost - estimating guidance is consistent and clearly requires the use of current and reliable cost estimates to inform budget requests . the agency partially agreed with these recommendations and stated that they have taken steps to ensure that their cost - estimating practices and procedures follow consistent documented guidance . in january 2010 , we reported that the department of energy lacked comprehensive policy for cost estimating , making it difficult for the agency to oversee development of high - quality cost estimates . specifically , the agency's policy did not describe how estimates should be developed and did not establish a central office for cost estimating . further , we reviewed four programs at the department , each estimated to cost approximately $900 million or more , and reported that they did not have reliable cost estimates . for example , three of the cost estimates did not include costs for the full life cycles of the programs , omitting operations and maintenance costs or portions of program scope . additionally , three of the cost estimates did not use adequate data , one of which relied instead on professional opinion . further , the cost estimates did not fully incorporate risk — specifically , they did not address correlated risks among project activities . as a result , these programs were more likely to exceed their estimates and require additional funding to be completed . we made multiple recommendations to improve cost estimating at the department , including updating its cost - estimating policy and guidance and ensuring cost estimates are developed in accordance with best practices .