reg . in december 2011 , we testified that the key challenge cms faced in implementing the statutorily established federal medicaid integrity program was ensuring effective coordination to avoid duplicating state program integrity efforts , particularly in the area of auditing provider claims . at the outset of the medicaid integrity program , cms stressed the need for effective coordination and acknowledged the potential for duplication with states' ongoing efforts to identify medicaid overpayments . however , the national provider audit program results — the largest component of the medicaid integrity program — call into question the effectiveness of cms's communication , and its ability to avoid duplication with state audit programs . after examining cms's program expenditures , we found that overpayments identified by its audit contractors since fiscal year 2009 were not commensurate with its contractors' costs . from fiscal years 2009 through 2011 , cms authorized 1,663 provider audits in 44 states . however , cms's reported return on investment from these audits was negative . while its contractors identified $15.2 million in overpayments in fiscal year 2010 , the combined cost of the national provider audit program was about $36 million . in addition , cms reported in 2011 that it was redesigning the national provider audit program to achieve better results . data limitations — in particular , the use of summary data that states submit to cms on a quarterly basis — may have hampered the contractors' ability to identify improper claims beyond what states already identified . it remains to be seen , however , whether cms's redesign of the national provider audit program will result in an increase in identified overpayments . cms's other core oversight activities — triennial comprehensive state program integrity reviews and annual assessments — are broad in scope and were conceived to provide a basis for the development of appropriate technical assistance . however , we found that much of the information collected from the annual assessments duplicated information collected during triennial reviews . further , our review of a sample of assessments revealed missing data and a few implausible measures , such as one state reporting over 38 million managed care enrollees . improved data collection activities and dialogue with states will help cms ensure that it has complete and reliable state information on which to direct its training and technical assistance resources appropriately . finally , we found that the medicaid integrity institute appears to promote effective state coordination and collaboration . we reported that states have uniformly praised the institute and a special june 2011 session brought together medicaid program integrity officials and representatives of medicaid fraud control units — independent state units responsible for investigating and prosecuting medicaid fraud — in 39 states to improve working relations between these important partners . as we testified in december 2011 , cms's expanded role in ensuring medicaid program integrity has presented both challenges to and opportunities for assisting states with their activities to ensure proper payments . we have ongoing work reviewing cms's medicaid program integrity activities that will provide additional information about cms's oversight efforts in this area . chairmen gowdy and jordan , this concludes by prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members may have .