( see fig . the total time required for the development and award of these 11 high - value , long - term ssacs ranged from 18 to 46 months and the longest contracting phases were the solicitation and negotiation phases . according to leadership officials and contracting officers from all five of the network contracting offices we visited , establishing high - value , long - term ssacs in a timely manner has been challenging for several reasons , including ( 1 ) not always receiving a complete , actionable , and timely initial information package from the vamc that contains information the contracting officer needs to begin acquisition planning ; ( 2 ) lengthy review processes for high - value , long - term ssacs ; ( 3 ) negotiation challenges with the affiliates on the price of high - value , long - term ssacs ; and ( 4 ) vamc resistance to developing and pursuing high - value , long - term ssacs . vamc - based contracting officer's representatives and medical directors from all five of the vamcs we visited also explained that establishing high - value , long - term ssacs has presented challenges for them . specifically , 9 of the 14 contracting officer's representatives we spoke with noted that they are often asked to resubmit initial information packages to the contracting officer throughout the development of a ssac due to form updates or policy changes that occurred since the time they created these documents . moreover , vamc officials from all five vamcs we visited indicated that the length of time it takes to develop and award high - value , long - term ssacs presents many challenges for their vamcs , including the potential for gaps in patient care and the need to repeatedly establish short - term solutions . we also found that vha has not developed standards that can be used to measure the timeliness of developing high - value , long - term ssacs . however , during fiscal year 2016 , vha developed estimates for the maximum duration of each contracting phase , referred to as procurement action lead times ( palt ) . currently , the palt goal for the development and award of a high - value , long - term ssac is between 20 and 21 months ; however , we found that 10 of the 11 high - value , long - term ssacs we reviewed exceeded these palt goals by as little as 1.4 months and as many as 25.8 months . according to vha officials we interviewed , palt goals are not used as performance standards for vamc , network contracting office , and medical sharing office staff responsible for the development of high - value , long - term ssacs . these officials told us that vha is currently developing and conducting validity tests of revised palt goals for several types of contracts , including ssacs , but there is no planned end date for these tests and they do not expect to implement revised palt goals across vha until at least fiscal year 2017 .