gao - 07-272 . washington , d.c.: may 4 , 2007 . washington , d.c.: january 11 , 2007 . medicare part d: prescription drug plan sponsor call center responses were prompt , but not consistently accurate and complete . gao - 06-710 . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2006 . medicare: communications to beneficiaries on the prescription drug benefit could be improved . gao - 06-654 . washington , d.c.: may 3 , 2006 . the mailings included an application for the subsidy and instructions on how to apply . ssa worked with various focus groups to develop the application , which included questions about applicants' income and resources , the value of life insurance policies , and household size . appendix ii provides the total number of subsidy applications mailed by state . after the subsidy applications were mailed , a contractor then made phone calls to 9.1 million beneficiaries who had not responded to the initial mailing , and ssa made 400,000 follow - up calls to the beneficiaries who requested ssa assistance . ssa also conducted other follow - up efforts , including sending follow - up notices to individuals whom the contractor was unable to contact and to specific subgroups that it identified as having a high likelihood of qualifying for the subsidy , such as the disabled ; individuals over 79 years of age living in high - poverty areas ; and individuals in spanish - speaking , asian - american , and african - american households . in addition , ssa called over 300,000 medicare beneficiaries who had not applied , but had previously qualified for a temporary medicare drug discount card , and included information about the subsidy in its 2005 and 2006 annual cost of living adjustment notices to social security beneficiaries and its annual medicare savings program outreach letters . ssa's efforts to solicit applications were hindered by various factors , including individuals' confusion over the difference between the prescription drug program and the subsidy , the reluctance of some individuals to share personal financial information , and eligibility requirements , among other factors . according to ssa field office staff and state medicaid and advocacy group officials , many individuals were confused about the difference between the prescription drug program and the subsidy , and did not understand that they involved separate application processes , although the subsidy application and the decision letters explained that part d enrollment was a separate process . consequently , some individuals thought that once they were approved for the subsidy , they were automatically enrolled in a prescription drug plan and vice versa to a lesser extent . ssa field office staff and advocacy group officials also told us some individuals were reluctant to apply because they did not want to share their personal financial information for fear that an inadvertent error on the application could subject them to prosecution under the application's perjury clause . though the impact of these factors has lessened as individuals have become more educated about the subsidy , concerns remain about eligibility requirements and the overall complexity of the application .