pound . that would have resulted in a gain from the transaction — meaning that dod would need less funds than were budgeted for the transaction . conversely , a current rate that is lower than what was budgeted will result in a loss — and dod would require more funds than were budgeted for the transaction . within each of the services' o&m and milpers appropriations accounts , amounts are available for overseas activities . amounts obligated for overseas activities , along with associated foreign currency gains and losses , are managed by the services as part of the overall management of their o&m and milpers appropriations accounts . service components use foreign currency fluctuation accounts within their o&m and milpers appropriations to manage realized gains and losses in direct programs due to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates . the service - level foreign currency fluctuation accounts are maintained at various budgetary levels within the service components . in fiscal year 1979 , congress appropriated $500 million to establish the fcfd account for purposes of maintaining the budgeted level of operations in the milpers and o&m appropriation accounts by mitigating substantial gains or losses to those appropriations caused by foreign currency rate fluctuations . fcfd appropriations are different from the o&m and milpers appropriations in two ways . first , fcfd account amounts are no - year amounts , meaning that they are available until expended , while in general , o&m and milpers appropriations are 1-year amounts and expire at the end of the fiscal year for which they were appropriated . expired o&m and milpers amounts remain available only for limited purposes for 5 additional fiscal years . at the end of the 5-year expired period , any remaining o&m or milpers amounts , obligated or unobligated , are canceled and returned to treasury . second , fcfd account amounts may be used only to pay obligations incurred because of fluctuations in currency exchange rates of foreign countries , while o&m amounts are available for diverse expenses necessary for the operation and maintenance of the services and milpers amounts are available for service personnel - related expenses , such as pay , permanent changes of station travel , and expenses of temporary duty travel , among other purposes . amounts from the fcfd account may be transferred to service - level foreign currency fluctuation accounts within o&m and milpers appropriation accounts to offset losses in buying power due to unfavorable differences between the budget rate and the foreign currency exchange rate prevailing at the time of disbursement . the fcfd account may be replenished in several ways . amounts transferred from the fcfd to o&m and milpers appropriations may be returned when not needed to liquidate obligations because of subsequent favorable foreign currency rates in relation to the budget rate , or because other amounts have become available to cover obligations . a transfer back to the fcfd of unneeded amounts must be made before the end of the second fiscal year of expiration following the fiscal year of availability of the o&m or milpers appropriation to which the funds were originally transferred . amounts may also be transferred to the fcfd account even if they did not originate there .