scholarships . almost all corporations offered scholarships for shareholders . mentor program , which allows its youth to participate in the corporation . corporate officials told us that they instituted mentoring and internship programs to lead to future involvement of shareholders in management and leadership roles . burial assistance . twenty - two of the 30 corporations reported providing some kind of assistance to the family of a deceased shareholder . forms of burial assistance include cash , life insurance payments , or in - kind donations . land leasing , gifting or other use . most of the village and urban corporations we interviewed leased , gifted , or made other use of the land given to the village corporation in the alaska native claims settlement act settlement for shareholders . for example , one corporation gifted five acres to any shareholder who requested it . community infrastructure . several corporations invested in the infrastructure of their villages . for example , after the department of the interior's bureau of indian affairs ceased barge service to its remote village , one corporation established a transportation company that became the only mechanism to bring goods to the community . other projects included remodeling the community washateria and administering and subsidizing a village's cable and internet utilities . support of the subsistence lifestyle . corporations took steps to protect and maintain the subsistence lifestyle of their shareholders . one corporation built in subsistence leave into its personnel policy . another corporation leased its land for “fish camps,” or plots along a river for shareholders to catch and smoke fish in the summertime . cultural preservation . twenty - four of the 30 corporations we interviewed invested in cultural and heritage programs , which included museums , culture camps , or native language preservation . establishment and support of affiliated foundations or nonprofit organizations . twenty - one of the 30 corporations established affiliated foundations or nonprofit organizations . donations to other nonprofit organizations . almost all of the corporations donated to various nonprofit organizations . for example , one corporation donated to organizations that advocate for alaska natives , such as the alaska federation of natives , alaska native arts foundation , alaska native justice center , and get out the native vote . support to other corporations . some regional corporations provided various kinds of assistance to the village corporations in their regions . for example , one regional corporation is trying to develop 8 ( a ) partnerships with its village corporations to help them enter the 8 ( a ) program with lower start - up and administrative costs . other regional corporations provided recordkeeping , natural resources , and regulatory and community planning services for their village corporations . one alaska native corporation that we reviewed owned seven subsidiaries participating in the 8 ( a ) program , with six of them marketing their abilities to perform work in the same line of business . in addition to the individual named above , michele mackin , assistant director ; theresa chen ; david e. cooper ; barry deweese ; art james , jr. ; julia kennon ; jeff malcolm ; meaghan marshall ; sylvia schatz ; robert tagorda ; and tatiana winger made key contributions to this report .