savings . recent policy and guidance from agencies , most significantly the office of management and budget ( omb ) and dod , have also emphasized the importance of competition . with regard to ancs , the acting deputy assistant secretary of the army ( procurement ) issued a memo in january 2011 , stating that high - dollar sole - source awards to 8 ( a ) anc firms should be the exception rather than the rule , and laid out the expectation that these awards be scrutinized to ensure they are in the government's best interest . further , in november 2011 , dod's director of defense procurement and acquisition policy called for a review of all active sole - source contracts to ancs that were awarded prior to the new requirement for a written justification for awards over $20 million . as part of the review , dod services , agencies , and activities must review the justifications ( if any ) that support the contract awards and describe actions to ensure there is no abuse of these types of contracts . in the sole - source contracts we reviewed , we found examples where the follow - on requirements were subsequently competed , resulting in savings according to agency officials . the air force awarded a contract competitively for base operation support and , according to officials , saved about $17 million for a requirement that was valued at over $100 million . officials stated that the previous contractor had high management costs . at the army , we reviewed an approximately $8.9 million sole - source contract with a tribal 8 ( a ) firm for one year of medical services . the contracting activity recompeted the follow - on requirement , and the contracting officer estimated savings of $2.3 million annually , for a total of $11.5 million over the life of the contract . at the federal emergency management agency , the contracting officer told us that when the follow - on to the sole - source tribal 8 ( a ) contract in our review had been competed among small businesses , the labor rates on the new contract were , with one exception , between 5 and 46 percent lower than the previous sole - source contract . department of energy officials told us that they competed a requirement that was previously awarded sole source to a tribal 8 ( a ) firm , and while they could not estimate dollar savings , they believed they were getting better performance as a result of the competition . to ensure that 8 ( a ) firms do not pass along the benefits of their contracts to their subcontractors , regulations limit the amount of work that can be performed by subcontractors . specifically , for service contracts with subcontracting activity , the 8 ( a ) firm must incur at least 50 percent of the personnel costs with its own employees ( for general construction contracts , the firm must incur at least 15 percent of the personnel costs ) .