( see fig . specifically , in fiscal year 2014 , among all nih - funded clinical research studies , 57 percent of enrollees ( 16.4 million ) were women , and 39 percent ( 11 million ) were men . for all nih - funded phase iii clinical trials , in fiscal year 2014 , 60 percent of enrollees were women ( about 480,000 ) and 39 percent were men ( about 314,000 ) . at the individual ic level , data show that for each ic , women's enrollment for all clinical research studies , including phase iii clinical trials , was generally higher than men's enrollment in most years from fiscal year 2011 through fiscal year 2014 . without summary data on the funded phase iii clinical trials that are intended to provide information on potential sex differences — including the number of such trials funded in a given year — senior nih officials are limited in their ability to effectively oversee the implementation of the inclusion policy to assess whether changes are needed to their procedures . clinical trials are divided into four phases . in phase i clinical trials , which typically include 20 to 80 people , researchers test a new biomedical or behavioral intervention on human subjects for the first time to evaluate safety . in phase ii clinical trials , the intervention is given to a larger group of people , 100 to 300 participants , to further evaluate efficacy and safety . in phase iii clinical trials , the intervention is given to even larger groups — from several hundred to several thousand participants — to compare the intervention to commonly used or experimental interventions . finally , phase iv studies are conducted after the intervention has been marketed , in order to gather information on long - term use . nih's ics support clinical trials predominantly through “extramural research” — awarding funds to researchers at universities or other research entities ( awardees ) through grants , contracts , and cooperative agreements . of nih's 27 ics , almost all fund extramural research projects . these ics use a standard peer review process to inform the final decisions on which extramural research projects to fund . the size and composition of the ics' clinical trial portfolios vary substantially , depending on such factors as the ic's budget , mission , and the scientific goals of any given study . for example , some ics support few if any phase iii clinical trials . in fiscal year 2014 , nih's ics reported funding of nearly $30 billion for all biomedical research . of that amount , nih estimates that — based on reporting categories hhs developed for use by all of its agencies — $23.9 billion ( 80.3 percent ) funded research related to the health of both women and men , $4 billion ( 13.2 percent ) funded research related to women's health , and an estimated $1.9 billion ( 6.4 percent ) funded research related to men's health . ( see appendix ii for more details on estimated fiscal year 2014 funding for selected diseases and conditions of particular relevance for women. )