glri . nearly $300 million was appropriated in both fiscal years 2011 and 2012 for the glri and , according to epa , about $284 million in fiscal year 2013 , for a total of approximately $1.3 billion since fiscal year 2010 . the great lakes interagency task force ( task force ) — created in may 2004 by executive order 13340 — oversees the glri . the task force is chaired by the epa administrator , and it includes senior officials from the u.s . departments of agriculture , commerce , defense , health and human services , homeland security , housing and urban development , the interior , state , and transportation and the white house council on environmental quality . the glri is implemented by epa's great lakes national program office in conjunction with subagencies within the 11 task force agencies . epa and the other task force agencies issued the great lakes restoration initiative action plan fiscal years 2010-2014 ( action plan ) in february 2010 . in addition , epa created the great lakes accountability system ( glas ) as a mechanism for collecting information to monitor glri projects and progress . both our work and that of epa's office of the inspector general have documented concerns about great lakes restoration efforts in the past . for example , we reported in may 2002 that the pace of cleaning up the great lakes and restoring areas of concern was slower than anticipated by the united states and canada . in september 2004 , we found that epa monitoring efforts did not provide comprehensive information on the condition of the great lakes and that monitoring by other federal and state agencies yielded information that that did not cover all areas related to the condition of the great lakes or the entire great lakes basin . in september 2009 , epa's office of the inspector general reported that epa had not developed an effective management framework to clean up contaminated sediments in the great lakes areas of concern . in light of these past issues and the significant federal funds targeted toward addressing great lakes issues , you asked us to review the glri . this report examines ( 1 ) how the glri is implemented by the task force agencies and other stakeholders ; ( 2 ) the methods that epa has in place to assess glri progress ; ( 3 ) the progress identified by the task force agencies and nonfederal stakeholders ; and ( 4 ) the views of nonfederal stakeholders on factors , if any , that may affect or limit glri progress . to examine how task force agencies and other stakeholders implement the glri and identify methods that epa has in place to assess glri progress , we analyzed key documents including the action plan , epa's glri financial reports , and information about glri projects from glas .