gao - 04-615 . ● delegate the authority and accountability for defense business systems to designated approval authorities within the office of the secretary of defense . ● by march 15 , 2005 , require each approval authority to establish an investment review process to review the planning , design , acquisition , development , deployment , operation , maintenance , modernization , and project cost benefits and risks of all defense business systems for which the approval authority is responsible . ● effective october 1 , 2005 , obligate funds for a defense business system modernization project with total cost exceeding $1 million after the approval authority designated for that system certifies to the defense business systems management committee ( dbmsc ) that the system project meets specific conditions that are called for in the act , and the certification by the approval authority is approved by the dbsmc . ● how are we investing our funds to best enable the warfighting mission ? to produce a version of the architecture within the above scope , dod created 12 of the 23 recommended products included in the dod architecture framework — the structural guide that the department has established for developing an architecture . these 12 products included all 7 products that the framework designates as essential . for example , one essential product is the operational node connectivity description , which is a graphic showing “operational nodes” ( organizations ) and including a depiction of each node's information exchange needs . our preliminary work suggests that version 3.0 of dod's business enterprise architecture may partially satisfy the major conditions specified in the act . for example , version 3.0 could enable dod's compliance with many but not all federal accounting , financial management , and reporting requirements . to this end , the architecture includes the standard financial information structure ( sfis ) and the standard accounting classification structure ( sacs ) , which together could allow dod to standardize financial data elements necessary to support budgeting , accounting , cost / performance management , and external reporting . both sfis and sacs are based upon mandated requirements defined by external regulatory entities , such as the treasury , omb , the federal accounting standards advisory board , and the joint financial management improvement program . moreover , sfis has in tur been used to develop and incorporate business rules in the architecture for such areas as managerial cost accounting , general ledger , and federally owned property . business rules are important because they explicitly translate important business policies and procedures into specific and unambiguous rules that govern what can and cannot be done . however , it is not apparent that the architecture provides for compliance with all federal accounting , financial , and reporting requirements . for example , it may not contain the information needed to achieve compliance with the treasury's united states standard general ledger or a strategy for achieving this compliance . as another example , version 3.0 may partially enable dod to produce timely , accurate , and reliable financial information for management purposes .