gao - 10-302 . washington , d.c.: march 22 , 2010 . one decision letter was dated incorrectly . to what extent does dol follow its procedures to adjudicate part e claims ? how are new links between toxic substances and diseases captured and applied in dol's adjudication process ? what does dol's monitoring indicate about part e adjudication and what , if any , corrective actions have been taken to address problems identified ? to determine the extent to which dol followed applicable policies and procedures in adjudicating part e claims , we reviewed a stratified random sample of 200 part e claims that were filed within the last 5 years , between january 2010 and december 2014 , and assessed consistency with selected procedures pertaining to the development of the claim through issuance of a recommended decision and final decision . our overall sample included employee as well as survivor claims , and accepted as well as denied claims . our population of claims was stratified into two groups and 100 claims were selected within each . the first group consisted of claims associated with three selected medical conditions that , according to dol and other sources , were potentially more challenging to adjudicate — hearing loss , chronic beryllium disease , and parkinson's disease . one hundred claims were randomly selected across these three conditions , in proportion to their population sizes . the second group consisted of claims not associated with those three medical conditions and 100 claims were randomly selected within this group . in addition , we reviewed the eeoicpa procedure manual and other guidance , such as bulletins and circulars , used by claims examiners to adjudicate part e claims . we also interviewed dol officials to obtain a better understanding of how part e claims are adjudicated . to determine how new links between toxic substances and diseases are captured and applied in the adjudication process , and to understand what dol's monitoring efforts indicate about the part e adjudication process , we interviewed agency officials and reviewed relevant reports . in addition , we reviewed findings from dol's annual accountability reviews and other audits conducted by dol since 2010 . we also reviewed available corrective action plans and interviewed agency officials to determine how deficiencies found during these internal audits are resolved . lastly , during the course of our work we compared the steps taken during dol's adjudication of part e claims against federal standards for internal control . we conducted this performance audit from may 2014 through february 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for more information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . eeoicpa , as amended , generally provides compensation to employees of the department of energy ( energy ) and its contractors employed in the production of u.s. nuclear weapons who developed illnesses related to their exposure to radiation and many other toxins at energy facilities .