( app . i describes our overall objectives , scope , and methodology. ) in the taxpayer relief act of 1997 , congress authorized irs to collect delinquent tax debt by continuously levying up to 15 percent of certain federal payments made to delinquent taxpayers . in july 2000 , irs first implemented the continuous levy program , now referred to as fplp . we estimated in prior reviews that once fully operational , the program could potentially recover hundreds of millions of dollars in delinquent tax debt annually . while reviewing the draft report , irs officials raised concerns , which they did not express in our previous discussions with them , that computer programming costs associated with implementing this draft recommendation might make the recommendation infeasible for certain types of taxpayer accounts . in light of those concerns , we agreed to modify our recommendation to instead recommend that irs study the feasibility of submitting all delinquent accounts for matching . in his letter , the acting commissioner agrees with this revised recommendation and indicates that efforts to do so are underway . in reference to our recommendation that irs discontinue use of the tpi criterion , the acting commissioner stated irs's commitment to ensuring all taxpayers are treated fairly and that irs is concerned with the issues we raised regarding the tpi criterion . the acting commissioner did not agree to discontinue the use of the tpi immediately , but said that irs would take the next 120 days to work with the national taxpayer advocate and program administrators to assess deficiencies in the current process and to develop a suitable solution . this action generally is responsive to our recommendation . however , if developing and implementing a suitable solution extends beyond the 120-day milestone set by the acting commissioner , we believe irs should , as we recommended , discontinue use of the tpi criterion and rely on the two - notice procedure already in place while irs continues to work on a solution it believes would be more suitable . as our report notes , irs has been aware of some limitations with tpi for some time and has yet to identify a suitable solution . we will send copies to the ranking minority member , house committee on ways and means ; ranking minority member , subcommittee on oversight , house committee on ways and means ; and the chairman and ranking minority member , senate committee on finance . we will also send copies to the acting commissioner of internal revenue and other interested parties . copies of this report will also be made available to others upon request . the report will also be available on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or ralph block at ( 415 ) 904-2150 . key contributors to this work are listed in appendix iv .