attorneys office personnel . the terrorist financing unit of the counterterrorism section in justice's criminal division is involved in coordinating and prosecuting matters and cases involving terrorist financing , which are investigated by both the fbi and ice . another agreement provision — requiring ice to detail a significant number of appropriate personnel to the national jttf and jttfs in the field — is being handled on a location - specific , case - by - case basis . in response to our inquiries , fbi and ice officials said that this provision was not intended to refer to a specific number of personnel and certainly was not intended to imply that all former operation green quest agents were to be detailed to jttfs . according to ice officials , as of february 2004 , a total of 277 ice personnel ( from various legacy agencies ) were assigned full time to jttfs — a total that consisted of 161 former immigration and naturalization service agents , 59 federal air marshals , 32 former customs service agents , and 25 federal protective service agents . ice officials said that this total does not include ice agents who will be assigned to jttfs in consonance with vetted cases being transitioned to jttfs , nor does it include ice investigators who participate part time on jttfs . another provision in the may 2003 memorandum of agreement required that the fbi and ice jointly report to the attorney general , the secretary of homeland security , and the assistant to the president for homeland security on the implementation status of the agreement 4 months from its effective date . as of may 2 , 2004 , the fbi and ice had not yet produced the required joint report on the implementation status . the memorandum of agreement , by granting the fbi the lead role in investigating terrorist financing , altered ice's role in investigating terrorism - related financial crimes . however , while the agreement specified that the fbi has primary investigative jurisdiction over confirmed terrorism - related financial crimes , the agreement does not preclude ice from investigating suspicious financial activities that have a potential ( unconfirmed ) nexus to terrorism — which was the primary role of the former operation green quest . moreover , the agreement generally has not affected ice's mission or role in investigating other financial crimes . specifically , the agreement did not affect ice's statutory authorities to conduct investigations of money laundering and other traditional financial crimes . ice investigations can still cover the wide range of financial systems — including banking systems , money services businesses , bulk cash smuggling , trade - based money laundering systems , illicit insurance schemes , and illicit charity schemes — that could be exploited by money launderers and other criminals . according to ice headquarters officials , ice is investigating the same types of financial systems as before the memorandum of agreement . further , our february 2004 report noted that — while the memorandum of agreement represents a partnering commitment by the fbi and ice — continued progress in implementing the agreement will depend largely on the ability of these law enforcement agencies to meet various operational and organizational challenges .