some of these are classified . the april 1999 document , design basis threat for the department of energy programs and facilities , identifies and characterizes potential adversary threats to doe's programs and facilities that could adversely affect national security , the health and safety of employees , the public , or the environment . the document specifically addresses the protection of doe facilities in the united states against terrorist attacks and is coordinated with dod and the nuclear regulatory commission as well as with the intelligence community and the fbi . it serves as the foundation for doe's defensive policies and requirements , including facility protection strategies and countermeasures . the june 1996 plan provides a coordinated federal response for urgent public health and medical care needs resulting from chemical and / or biological terrorist threats or acts within the united states . the plan supports the fbi and fema by leading the emergency support function no . 8 response to the health and medical aspects of a chemical or biological terrorist incident . it also supplements and assists affected state and local governments by providing resources from ( 1 ) hhs and its supporting federal agencies and departments and ( 2 ) non - federal sources , such as major pharmaceutical suppliers and international disaster response organizations like the canadian ministry of health . the plan is an appendix to emergency support function no . 8 of the federal response plan . portions of the plan may be implemented under hhs authorities prior to formal implementation of the federal response plan . the april 1999 plan serves as a tool for infection control professionals and healthcare epidemiologists to guide the development of response plans for their institutions in preparation for a real or suspected bioterrorism attack and encourages institution - specific response plans to be prepared in partnership with local and state health departments . the plan is updated as needed to reflect public health guidelines and new information . the unpublished april 2000 report outlines steps for strengthening public health and health care capacity to protect the united states against chemical and biological terrorism in cooperation with law enforcement , intelligence , and defense agencies in addition to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . the june 2000 draft manual outlines criteria for implementation of the smallpox response plan and cdc vaccine and personnel mobilization activities . the draft manual assists state and local health officials with specific activities essential for the management of a smallpox emergency . the january 2001 departmental 5-year plan builds on hhs' strategic plan to include budget projections for the agencies and offices involved in achieving the department's goals for ( 1 ) prevention of bioterrorism ; ( 2 ) infectious disease surveillance ; ( 3 ) medical and public health readiness for mass casualty events ; ( 4 ) the national pharmaceutical stockpile ; ( 5 ) research and development ; and ( 6 ) secure and continuously operating information technology infrastructure . this february 2001 draft - planning guidance is designed to help state public health officials determine their role in terrorism response and understand the emergency response roles of local health departments and emergency management communities .