charter services . although some charter buses choose to register through irp , many do not and , therefore , are not included in prism . representatives from irp , inc. , the american association of motor vehicle administrators , and the united motorcoach association , as well as officials from fmcsa , told us that charter buses are exempt from irp registrations because the vehicles are for hire and may not be able to reliably predict which states they may travel to in order to properly apportion registration fees . the representatives , however , were not able to provide a rationale for why this exemption does not apply to for - hire trucking companies that also may not be able to reliably predict the states in which they may travel . officials from fmcsa told us that charter buses could be included in prism if charter buses were required to register through irp or if prism was expanded to include non - irp vehicles . officials from nine states we met with that sanction vehicle registrations of out - of - service carriers told us that charter buses should be included in prism . according to representatives from irp , inc. , there has been some discussion on changing the exemption to require charter buses to register through irp ; however , no changes have been formally submitted for approval by its member states . nathan associates , motorcoach census 2008: a benchmarking study of the size and activity of the motorcoach industry in the united states and canada in 2007 ( dec. 18 , 2008 ) . the 13 states we contacted that deny , suspend , and revoke vehicle registrations told us that they provide registrations because they cannot conclusively link the new carrier to the old out - of - service carrier at the time of registration — even if the vehicle identification number is or has been associated with an out - of - service carrier — especially when the new carrier is presenting legitimate documentation of the new company . in one state , officials told us that if a vehicle identification number for a new registration is identified through prism as being associated with an out - of - service dot number , the carrier is notified that the vehicle is attached to the out - of - service dot number . if the carrier provides proper documentation to support ownership ( for example , proof of an established place of business in the state , proof of title for the vehicles being registered , and other documents ) , the vehicle is registered . officials added that they would also provide registration for these carriers because it would be next to impossible to prove differently based on speculation . in another state , officials told us that once a chameleon carrier obtains a new dot number , the motor vehicle administration is unable to prevent the carrier from obtaining an irp registration — even if they know the carrier is a chameleon carrier — because they do not deny the registration until fmcsa connects the identity of the “new” carrier with the out - of - service carrier .