es . we have also reported that nasa remains vulnerable to disruptions in its information technology network . information security is a critical consideration for any organization reliant on information technology and especially important for nasa , which depends on a number of key computer systems and communication networks to conduct its work . these networks traverse the earth and beyond , providing critical two - way communication links between earth and spacecraft ; connections between nasa centers and partners , scientists , and the public ; and administrative applications and functions . nasa has made important progress in implementing security controls and aspects of its information security program . however , nasa has not always implemented sufficient controls to protect the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of the information and systems supporting its mission directorates . specifically , nasa did not consistently implement effective controls to prevent , limit , and detect unauthorized access to its networks and systems . a key reason for these weaknesses is that nasa has not yet fully implemented key activities of its information security program to ensure that controls are appropriately designed and operating effectively . during fiscal years 2007 and 2008 , nasa reported 1,120 security incidents that resulted in the installation of malicious software on its systems and unauthorized access to sensitive information . nasa established a security operations center in 2008 to enhance prevention and provide early detection of security incidents and coordinate agency - level information related to its security posture . nevertheless , the control vulnerabilities and program shortfalls — which gao identified — collectively increase the risk of unauthorized access to nasa's sensitive information , as well as inadvertent or deliberate disruption of its system operations and services . they make it possible for intruders , as well as government and contractor employees , to bypass or disable computer access controls and undertake a wide variety of inappropriate or malicious acts . as a result , increased and unnecessary risk exists that sensitive information is subject to unauthorized disclosure , modification , and destruction and that mission operations could be disrupted . gao has recommended actions the nasa administrator should take to mitigate control vulnerabilities and fully implement a comprehensive information security program including: developing and implementing comprehensive and physical risk assessments ; conducting sufficient or comprehensive security testing and evaluation of all relevant security controls ; and implementing an adequate incident detection program . in response to our report , the deputy administrator noted that nasa is implementing many of our recommendations as part of an ongoing nasa strategic effort to improve information technology management and information technology security program deficiencies . the deputy administrator also stated that nasa will continue to mitigate the information security weaknesses identified in our report . the actions identified by the deputy administrator , if effectively implemented , will improve the agency's information security program . in executing nasa's space exploration , scientific discovery , and aeronautics research missions , nasa must use its resources as effectively and efficiently as possible because of the severity of the fiscal challenges our nation faces and the wide range of competing national priorities .