decision support tools . cdhps may provide decision support tools for consumers to help them become actively engaged in making health care purchase decisions . these tools may provide enrollees online access to their savings accounts to help them manage their spending . they may also provide enrollees with information to assess the quality of health care providers and the prices for health care services . while health insurance carriers may provide decision support tools to all enrollees , these tools may be more important to cdhp enrollees who have a greater financial incentive to take a more active role in their health care purchase decisions . to help enrollees choose a doctor or a hospital , experts suggest they need data to assess the quality of those providers . such data may include the volume of procedures provided ; the outcomes of those procedures , such as mortality and complication rates ; as well as certain process indicators , such as the percentage of cases in which a provider followed established clinical practice guidelines for a particular procedure . to help enrollees manage their hsa account funds and evaluate the price competitiveness of various providers , some experts believe enrollees need information about the expected costs of services — such as an average or expected range of costs for a procedure , or the actual price a provider will charge based on the payment rates negotiated between the provider and the health insurance carrier . ( see table 2. ) hdhps generally covered the same services as those covered by their traditional plan counterparts ; however , enrollees' financial responsibilities usually differed . insurance carriers have faced challenges in obtaining or presenting quality and cost data . a savings account to pay for services under the deductible . hras are funded solely by the employer and are generally not portable once the employee leaves . these funds may accumulate up to any employer - specified maximums and may only be spent on qualified medical expenses . although hras are generally coupled with health plans that include a high deductible , this is not a requirement for favorable tax treatment . an hsa is a new type of tax - advantaged savings account that , unlike hras , must be coupled with an hdhp that meets statutorily defined minimum deductibles and limits on out - of - pocket expenditures for enrollees . contributions to an hsa may be made by both the employer and employee . the hsa account holder essentially owns the account and can transfer funds from one hsa account to another . for example , one hdhp allowed more frequent vision exams , but covered fewer days in skilled nursing facilities relative to the traditional plan . another hdhp had no time restrictions for receiving emergency services following an accidental injury , while the traditional plan did . in addition , the hdhp for which the traditional plan counterparts were hmos offered coverage for out - of - network providers for nonemergency care , while the hmos did not . the other two hdhps had similar restrictions as the traditional plans on obtaining coverage from out - of - network providers . the few instances where covered services differed typically involved vision , dental , or chiropractic care benefits .