hhs had no comments . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of the department of defense , the secretary of the department of health and human services , the secretary of the department of veterans affairs , the administrator of cms , and the appropriate congressional committees . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at iritanik@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in addition to the named above , key contributors to this report were james c. musselwhite , jr. , assistant director ; kathryn black ; sarah harvey ; laurie pachter ; vikki porter ; and hemi tewarson . va nursing homes: reporting more complete data on workload and expenditures could enhance oversight . to what extent is information on exchange - purchased coverage and federal subsidies available to servicemembers , former servicemembers , and their dependents through dod and va websites ? to what extent do servicemembers , former servicemembers , and their dependents have health care coverage through dod , va , medicare , and medicaid ? to examine the factors used to determine servicemembers' , former servicemembers' , and their dependents' eligibility for health care coverage through dod , va , medicare , medicaid , and to purchase coverage through an exchange , we reviewed relevant federal laws , or program descriptions provided on agency websites or in program materials , such as handbooks and fact sheets . we also interviewed dod , va , and cms officials knowledgeable about the eligibility requirements for these respective programs and the eligibility requirements for purchasing coverage through an exchange . washington , d.c.: june 19 , 2013 . to examine the key benefits offered by dod , va , medicare , medicaid , and exchange - purchased coverage , we identified and summarized benefit categories for each form of coverage as described by program descriptions provided on agency websites or in program materials , such as handbooks and fact sheets . we also reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , or our prior work . due to the potential differences in the individual services offered and definitions for terms used to describe individual services provided by dod , va , medicare , medicaid , and exchange - purchased coverage , we did not compare the individual services covered by each type of coverage within each benefit category , or differences in the amount , duration , or scope of covered services . nor did we examine the differences in coverage within individual health plans that some programs or the exchanges may offer , such as different managed care plan options .