usec has not complied with this requirement . in addition , usec stated in its comments that the draft report's discussion of usec's delays in responding to doe's follow - up questions is incomplete and inaccurate . in response , we have modified our report to note usec's disagreement with doe officials' statements regarding the number of doe inquiries each month and usec's responsiveness . usec also stated that the draft report's title overstates the report's findings and implies a materiality to usec's delays that is not supported in the body of the report . we disagree that the draft report's title makes this implication . doe then compensates the corporation for its invoiced costs . in the absence of dcaa audits of usec's annual decontamination costs , doe has taken steps to protect the government's interests by limiting the amount of compensation paid to usec . for example , usec has stated that its actual decontamination costs in calendar year 2004 exceeded doe's compensation for that year . however , because dcaa was unable to complete its audit of usec's costs for that year , doe refused to pay this difference . in addition , provisional billing rates were not revised in 2005 , and usec was compensated using 2004 provisional billing rates . usec officials told us that the failure to revise the provisional billing rates has only increased the difference between usec's actual decontamination costs and the amount the corporation is being compensated . according to usec officials , the difference between the corporation's actual decontamination costs and the amount it has been compensated is about $3 million and will continue to grow until new billing rates are approved by doe . doe officials told us that they plan to approve new billing rates in june 2006 . furthermore , doe officials said that the department will pay usec any difference between the corporation's actual decontamination costs and the amount already compensated once usec submits its actual incurred costs and dcaa has been able to complete its audits . almost 8 years after usec's privatization , usec and doe are still dealing with the cleanup of technetium - contaminated uranium . according to doe officials , the department decided to compensate usec for decontaminating uranium to resolve potential legal liabilities and to help achieve other policy goals , such as the continuation of a reliable domestic source of uranium enrichment today and in the future . in our view , however , doe has left the congress and the public largely uninformed about these policy goals , as well as about the amount of progress usec has made decontaminating uranium and the costs incurred in doing so . additional information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted our work between august 2005 and may 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , which included an assessment of data reliability and internal controls that determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . uranium undergoes a number of processing steps in the production of nuclear fuel . to ensure its efficiency and ability to be used safely in nuclear reactors , nuclear fuel must meet rigorous technical specifications .