, primary status ) . we determined the data were reliable for our purposes . when discussing the number of stations in the report , we note that while fcc's rules require licensees to notify fcc when their station is silent ( not broadcasting ) for more than 10 days , there may be some licensed stations that are not actively broadcasting and have not notified fcc . we did not attempt to determine the number of stations that have gone silent without notifying fcc that they are not broadcasting ; therefore , we are including them in our station counts . as a result , when we describe numbers of “stations” in the report , we are referring to the number of current broadcast licenses . we reviewed documentation of fcc's actions to transition stations to digital , and of any challenges stations may face in transitioning to digital . we compared fcc's tables against our own , and we examined data runs for duplicates and other inconsistencies . finally , we interviewed selected low - power licensees and asked them to verify fcc's data regarding their status in transitioning , and asked them for their general impressions regarding the accuracy of fcc's data . we note that applicants for a construction permit , displacement , or license from fcc enter the data regarding the location of their station , although as previously mentioned , fcc does check the data against existing data for stations on faa - registered towers . fcc's system automatically captures applications for station permits and licenses — necessary steps in transitioning from analog to digital — and we cross - checked stations' tower coordinates against the community of city and state served by the station . we determined the data were reliable for our purposes . when discussing the number of stations in the report , we note that while fcc's rules require licensees to notify fcc when their station is silent ( not broadcasting ) for more than 10 days , there may be some licensed stations that are not actively broadcasting without notifying fcc . however , these stations are holding licenses for particular pieces of spectrum ; therefore , we are including them in our station counts . therefore , when we describe numbers of stations in the report , the word “stations” includes actively broadcasting stations and other stations that may not be actively broadcasting , but which have licenses to broadcast . to identify the steps fcc has taken to transition low - power television stations to digital , and any challenges low - power television stations are facing transitioning to digital , we interviewed fcc officials and reviewed fcc's orders and notices of proposed rulemaking relating to the digital transition of low - power television stations and the proposed reallocation of broadcast spectrum for wireless broadband , as well as comments submitted in response to fcc's requests for comments on these issues . in addition , we reviewed the national broadband plan and a related technical paper on the proposed spectrum reallocation , as well as documents regarding the proposed spectrum reallocation from an fcc - sponsored broadcast engineering forum and an fcc webinar with state broadcasting associations .