peer reviews . as the primary verification activity , peer reviews are to be conducted to help facilitate early detection of problems , and thus reduce the number of problems discovered in later stages of development , which helps to minimize the cost associated with rework . peer reviews are to include a review of requirements , design , code , and test planning work products . peer reviews can be conducted by peer members of the project team or team leads , managers , and design review boards . process and product quality assurance reviews . these reviews are intended to ensure that work products , project management processes , high - level development processes , and day - to - day practices adhere to documented cms processes and standards . these reviews are to be conducted by contractors not directly responsible for the work product or process being reviewed . quality assurance review . eligibility and enrollment module . individuals seeking to apply for health care coverage through the federally facilitated marketplace use the eligibility and enrollment module to guide them through a step - by - step process to determine their eligibility for coverage and financial assistance . once eligibility is determined , the applicant is then shown applicable coverage options and has the opportunity to enroll . throughout the eligibility and enrollment process , the applicant's information , such as name , address , social security number , citizenship status , and employer name , is collected and stored in the ffm system's database . this information is compared with records maintained by other federal agencies and a private entity to determine whether the applicant is eligible to enroll in a qualified health plan and , if so , to receive the advance payment of the premium tax credit and cost - sharing reductionscost of this coverage . in 2014 , we reported on challenges cms and its contractor faced in developing , implementing , and overseeing the healthcare.gov initiative . we reported on cms's efforts to plan and oversee healthcare.gov - related development contracts , as well as the agency's efforts in addressing contractor performance , in july 2014 . we determined that the agency undertook the development of healthcare.gov and its related systems without effective planning or oversight practices , despite facing a number of challenges that increased both the level of risk and the need for effective oversight . in addition , cms incurred significant cost increases , schedule slips , and delayed system functionality for the ffm and dsh systems due primarily to changing requirements that were exacerbated by oversight gaps . lastly , cms identified major performance issues with the ffm contractor but took only limited steps to hold the contractor accountable . specifically , cms declined to pay about $267,000 in requested fees to the ffm contractor , which was about 2 percent of the $12.5 million in fees paid . we recommended that cms take actions to assess increasing contract costs and ensure that acquisition strategies are completed and oversight tools are used as required , among other actions . cms concurred with most of the recommendations .