all border and nonborder counties . we analyzed srs violent crime data for all 4 border counties in arizona , both border counties in california , all 3 border counties in new mexico , and all 15 border counties in texas . we also analyzed these data for all 11 nonborder counties in arizona , all 56 nonborder counties in california , 29 of 30 nonborder counties in new mexico , and all 239 nonborder counties in texas . the violent crime rate for the new mexico border counties was lower in 2011 than in 2005 , but the rate in new mexico's border counties decreased less than in its nonborder counties . iv. ) mouse over the state or county names to find out more information about border crime statistics . with respect to violent crimes , as shown in figure 1 , the violent crime rate was lower in border counties than nonborder counties for three of the four southwest border states . comparing all border counties combined with all nonborder counties combined within each state , the violent crime rate in california and texas border counties was lower than in nonborder counties each year from 2004 through 2011 , and lower in new mexico border counties each year from 2005 through 2011 . this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) what information do reported crime rates in southwest border communities provide on spillover crime and what do they show ? ( 2 ) what efforts , if any , have federal , state , and select local law enforcement agencies made to track spillover crime along the southwest border ? ( 3 ) what concerns , if any , do these agencies have about spillover crime ? ( 4 ) what steps , if any , have these agencies taken to address spillover crime ? to describe crime rates , we analyzed summary reporting system ( srs ) data from the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi ) uniform crime reporting ( ucr ) program — the government's centralized repository for crime data — from january 2004 through december 2011 for the four southwest border states ( arizona , california , new mexico , and texas ) . we selected january 2004 as the initial date because it provided us with data for more than 2 years prior to december 2006 , when mexican president felipe calderón took office and began a major military offensive against mexican drug cartels . we also analyzed ucr's national incident - based reporting system ( nibrs ) data , available from january 2007 through december 2010 , for the single southwest border law enforcement agency reporting such data — the sheriff's office in yuma county , arizona . to assess the reliability of the ucr data , we conducted analyses to test for irregularities in the data , reviewed fbi documentation on how the data can and cannot be used and on the fbi's procedures for ensuring ucr data quality , and interviewed fbi officials knowledgeable about the data . on the basis of this assessment , we excluded some counties from our analysis because they did not report complete crime data to the fbi .