gao - 10-136 . washington , d.c.: november 6 , 2009 . the results of this analysis were inconclusive . increase certainty for taxpayers: irs relies on its customer satisfaction survey to measure whether taxpayer certainty has increased . in its 2012 survey , 90 percent of cap respondents said that tax certainty has increased “somewhat” or “a lot” for their corporations . in addition , an irs official informed us in june 2013 that irs has begun to use data it has been collecting on the percentage of taxpayers that are issued full acceptance or no change letters by tax and fiscal years to reflect certainty . irs officials stated that the measures being used for cap , such as cycle time , staff hours , and taxpayer satisfaction , are derived from the traditional lb&i balanced measures related to business results and customer satisfaction for all of its audits . these traditional balanced measures do not directly link to all cap goals . according to an irs official , irs has not identified targets for any of its cap measures because it does not traditionally set official targets for pilot programs . the official informed us in july 2013 that irs is developing targets , which may be in place by the start of fiscal year 2014 pending approval by lb&i leadership . even if irs implements targets , irs does not have an objective basis for determining whether cap is effective because some goals do not have measures . to implement a performance measurement system , it is necessary to collect the right data and ensure its accuracy . standards for internal control in the federal government calls for a variety of control activities for data being collected to help ensure that actions are taken to reduce risk . even though some cap measures exist , the irs data being collected are not consistent or complete to use in determining whether the cap goals are met . such inconsistencies arise in part from data collection processes . an irs official indicated that data used by irs to manage cap are manually transferred from multiple databases into an excel spreadsheet . without controls or documentation to ensure and validate their consistency , we could not be assured of the validity and accuracy of the data that irs uses to create the cap report used by lb&i leadership . furthermore , this limits the ability to do analyses , such as: measuring the average hours spent to close a tax return and staff time charges for a tax year by pre - filing and post - filing activities . specifically , tracking staff time charges on pre - filing activities for cap could not be done because the code used by irs to track some charges also included non - cap activities ; doing an analysis of cap time charges would help determine whether cap saves resources compared to traditional audits . comparing taxpayer's returns filed before and after they entered cap to analyze any similarities and differences , accounting for when taxpayers entered cap and moved from the pre - cap phase to the cap phase . doing an analysis may help irs determine whether the right taxpayers are in cap .