david j . wise , ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov . in addition to the individual named above , judy guilliams - tapia , assistant director ; leia dickerson ; jennifer dubord ; colin fallon ; david hooper ; erik kjeldgaard ; terence lam ; emily larson ; sara ann moessbauer ; madhav panwar ; and joshua ormond made key contributions to this report . estimates of the cost of congestion vary . according to the department of transportation ( dot ) , congestion costs america an estimated $200 billion a year in lost travel time and fuel , and drivers in metropolitan areas spend more than one - quarter of their total annual travel time in congested conditions . pressures on the surface transportation system are likely to grow substantially if trends that underlie the demand for passenger and freight travel , such as trends in population , continue . dot officials told us that the pace of its adoption by state and local governments has been slow and that upgrades to newer types of technologies have been difficult . in the next section we discuss some of the common challenges state and local governments face in deploying its , such as funding constraints . we identified four emerging uses of its technologies that have the greatest potential to reduce traffic congestion , based on views of experts we interviewed ( see table 2 ) .two broad themes: ( 1 ) using integrated data to manage traffic and inform travelers , and ( 2 ) proactively managing traffic . state and local governments face various challenges in deploying and effectively using its technologies to manage traffic congestion . state and local governments have used intelligent transportation systems ( its ) technologies to help manage congestion . its technologies consist of a range of communications , electronics , and computer technologies , such as systems that collect real - time traffic data and transmit information to the public via dynamic message signs and other means , ramp meters to improve the flow of traffic on freeways , and synchronized traffic signals that are adjusted in response to traffic conditions . its technologies support strategies to more efficiently use existing roadway capacity by improving traffic flow . planning for its is a key component of strategically using its to address transportation issues and reduce congestion . transportation planning for metropolitan areas has traditionally focused on building and maintaining basic infrastructure to ensure adequate roadway capacity . its , in contrast , focuses on managing already - existing capacity to use it more effectively . strategically using its requires agencies to shift focus from planning construction and maintenance of roadways to planning the operations of the surface transportation system , a shift that , according to dot , some states and local transportation agencies have not yet fully made . a rita official told us that planning is a major challenge that affects agencies' ability to make effective use of its . the federal its program , as mentioned previously , initially included a dot program that provided grants to transportation agencies specifically to deploy its .