( see fig . sixty - seven percent of contracts between d - snps and state medicaid agencies did not expressly provide for d - snps to cover medicaid benefits . to carry out mippa's requirement that each d - snp contract provide or arrange for medicaid benefits to be provided , cms guidance has required that contracts list the medicaid benefits that dual - eligible beneficiaries could receive directly from the state medicaid agency or the state's medicaid managed care contractor ( s ) . for d - snps contracting with state medicaid agencies to provide all or some medicaid benefits , the capitated payment reflected variation in coverage and conditions . our analysis has several limitations . we limited our analysis to the 50 states and the district of columbia . although most of the analysis is based on 2012 , the demographic data are from 2011 , and the health status data are from 2010 , the most recent years available . the contracts between d - snps and state medicaid agencies we reviewed are limited to contracts submitted to cms for 2012 . because only 40 percent of all d - snps were required to submit contracts in that year , these contracts may not represent the full range of possible d - snp arrangements with state medicaid agencies . additionally , because we judgmentally selected the state medicaid agencies and d - snps for our interviews , we cannot generalize the findings from these interviews to all states and all d - snps . we did not assess the quality of care provided by d - snps . we conducted this performance audit from september 2011 through september 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform our work to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our research objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . snps , including d - snps , have been reauthorized several times since their establishment was first authorized in 2003 . the other 6 percent of contracts included provisions for providing different coordination activities such as requiring the plan to work with medicaid staff to coordinate delivery of wrap - around medicaid benefits . the remaining 81 percent of all contracts did not specifically address d - snps' coordination with state medicaid staff , such as case managers . rather , these contracts indicated that the d - snp would coordinate medicaid and medicare services but did not specify the role of the state medicaid agency in coordinating those services . because d - snps are required by medicare to provide care coordination services to dual - eligible beneficiaries , these services are often provided without reimbursement or payment from the state medicaid agency . d - snp representatives and state medicaid officials we spoke with reported that contract development and submission to cms are resource - intensive . state officials reported that because they had limited resources , they needed to balance the benefits of the contract with the time and resources needed to develop and oversee it .