executive compensation . we identified 24 bills that members of congress introduced in calendar years 2008 and 2009 involving restrictions on executive compensation or additional taxation of executive compensation at companies receiving tarp assistance . also , aig officials stated that the majority of congressional contacts they received related to executive compensation and bonuses . transparency and accountability . we identified 16 bills introduced in calendar years 2008 and 2009 that would require the companies to take steps that would result in increased transparency or accountability , such as reporting on how tarp funds were used . for example , the tarp transparency reporting act would require tarp recipients to report to treasury on their use of tarp funds . mortgage modifications . officials from the companies whose business includes mortgage financing told us that one of the most common subjects of congressional correspondence was requests for modifications to specific constituents' mortgages . automobile dealerships . about 60 percent of the bills we identified that specifically targeted the auto industry sought to curtail or prevent the closure of automobile dealerships . one of these bills , which established an arbitration process for dealerships that want to appeal a closure decision , became public law . furthermore , according to letters from members of congress that chrysler and gm provided to us , dealership closure was the most common subject . the letters usually either asked for an explanation of how the closure decisions had been made or for reconsideration of the closure of a particular dealership . ( see appendix iii for more information on the nature and scope of communication with the auto industry. ) company officials we interviewed told us that the level of government involvement — from requests for appearances at congressional hearings to letters from elected officials — had increased since their companies had requested and received financial assistance from the government . company officials told us that this involvement was to be expected and did not cause them to make decisions that were in conflict with their respective companies' best interests . however , these officials also stated that addressing the government's involvement , such as responding to letters or requests for information , required increased company resources . federal government intervention in private markets not only requires that these efforts be transparent but also requires that the action include a strategy to help ensure open and effective communication with stakeholders , including congress and taxpayers . the government's actions in the recent crisis have highlighted the challenges associated with achieving both of these objectives . throughout the crisis , congress and the public often stated that the government actions appeared vague , overly broad , and conflicted . for example , treasury's initial response to the crisis focused on providing assistance to individual institutions and appeared ad hoc and uneven , leading to questions about its strategic focus and the transparency of its efforts . specifically , questions about the government's decision to assist bear stearns and aig , but not lehman brothers , continued months after the decisions were made .