procurement of this aircraft is complete . the air force plans to maintain and improve its capabilities , ensuring that the b - 2 remains the primary platform in long - range combat aviation . we assessed the funding for the b - 2 as green because current and projected funding is consistent with the air force's stated requirements to sustain the b - 2 inventory . the programmed funding should allow execution of the program strategy to sustain , maintain , and modify the system through the future years defense plan . the b - 2 is of special interest to the congress , which requires an annual report on this system , including a schedule of funding requirements through the future years defense plan . no items specific to the b - 2 were included in the air force's fiscal year 2004 unfunded priority list . while we did not have sufficient data to definitively assess the wartime capability for the b - 2 , the aircraft has successfully fulfilled its wartime missions despite current condition weaknesses . the air force demonstrated the aircraft's long - range strike capability by launching missions from the united states , striking targets in afghanistan , and returning to the states . more recently , the air force deployed four b - 2 aircraft to support operation iraqi freedom , where they contributed to the 505 sorties flown by bombers during the conflict . the b - 2 annual report to the congress states that the b - 2 program plan will ensure that the b - 2 remains the primary platform in long - range combat aviation . the c - 5 galaxy is the largest of the air force's air transport aircraft , and one of the world's largest aircraft . it can carry large cargo items over intercontinental ranges at jet speeds and can take off and land in relatively short distances . it provides a unique capability in that it is the only aircraft that can carry certain army weapon systems , main battle tanks , infantry vehicles , or helicopters . the c - 5 can carry any piece of army combat equipment , including a 74-ton mobile bridge . with aerial refueling , the aircraft's range is limited only by crew endurance . the first c - 5a was delivered in 1969 . the air force currently has 126 c - 5 aircraft in its inventory , and the average age is about 26 years . we assessed the condition of the c - 5 as yellow because it consistently failed to meet its mission capable goal of 75 percent ; however , mission capable rates have been steadily improving and , in april 2003 , active duty c - 5s exceeded the goal for the first time . program officials pointed out that , although the total fleet has never achieved the 75 percent goal , there has been considerable improvement over time , with the rate rising from about 42 percent in 1971 to about 71 percent in 2003 . the air force scientific advisory board has estimated that 80 percent of the airframe structural service life remains .