i would be happy to respond to questions . for further questions on this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 7215 or bovbjergb@gao.gov . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include michael collins , rachel frisk , kristen jones , amy anderson , david chrisinger , carla craddock , sarah cornetto , sheila mccoy , susan offutt , frank todisco , walter vance , christie motley , mike alexander , david hong , and brandon pettis . appendix i: 2011 social security statement this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . ” insert to workers age 55 and older . because ssa considers the statement to be one of the three key elements of the agency's financial literacy initiative , “encourage saving,” this insert was updated in 2008 to improve and clarify benefits information provided to this age group and a new insert was created to provide age - appropriate benefits information to younger workers . since february 2009 , ssa has sent “what young workers should know about social security and saving” with the statement to workers age 25 to 35 . since ssa suspended mailings of the statement in march 2011 , the agency has been assessing the feasibility of making the statement available online . a wide variety of options for reform have been proposed . some of the reform options focus on restoring long - term stability ; however , a few aim to enhance benefits for specific groups , such as widows and low - earners who are especially at risk for poverty . our prior work has noted that reform proposals should be evaluated as packages that strike a balance among the individual elements of a proposal and the interactions among those elements , and that the overall evaluation of any particular reform proposal depends on the weight individual policy makers place on various criteria . our framework for evaluating reform proposals considers not only solvency but other aspects of the program as well . specifically , the framework uses three basic criteria: the extent to which a proposal achieves long - term stability and how it would affect the economy , including overall savings rates , and the federal budget ; the relative balance struck between the goals of individual equity ( rates of return on individual contributions ) and income adequacy ( level and certainty of benefits ) ; and  how readily a proposal could be implemented , administered , and explained to the public . if reform is enacted , educating the public about program changes and how they will affect benefits will likely be a high priority for ssa , and the statement is likely to be one of the agency's key mechanisms for accomplishing this goal .