dot has not implemented this recommendation . in its work on the tiger program , dot's office of the inspector general ( oig ) found that while grantees had developed performance measures , as required , these measures were generally not outcome based and thus could not be used to assess whether projects were meeting the expected outcomes articulated in their applications , such as improving the state of infrastructure and enhancing safety . going forward , documenting key decisions for all major steps in the review of competitive grant applications will help improve transparency and help to ensure the credibility of dot's award decisions . in addition , establishing a process for evaluating program performance based on project outcomes will be important for dot to be able to measure the impacts of these investments . high speed intercity passenger rail ( hsipr ) grant program: the hsipr program , administered by the federal railroad administration ( fra ) , provides funds to states and others to develop high - speed rail and inter - city passenger - rail corridors and projects . congress appropriated $8 billion for high - speed rail and inter - city passenger rail in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) and $2.5 billion in the fiscal year 2010 dot appropriations act . in addition , while the nation's aviation system is one of the safest in the world , with air travel projected to increase over the next 20 years , efforts to ensure continued safety are increasingly important . to enhance safety , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) is shifting to a data - driven , risk - based safety oversight approach — called a safety management system ( sms ) approach . implementation of sms is intended to allow faa to proactively identify system - wide trends in aviation safety and manage emerging hazards before they result in incidents or accidents . our recent work on transportation safety across all modes has highlighted the need for improvement in data and oversight . with the move toward a more performance - based approach in map - 21 , high - quality data are essential to identify progress and ensure accountability . as dot moves closer to a data - driven , performance - based structure , a robust oversight approach is critical to ensure that states are establishing appropriate goals and making sufficient progress toward those goals . for traffic safety data , states maintain six core types of data systems that are used to identify priorities for highway and traffic safety programs . in 2010 , we reported that nhtsa's periodic assessments designed to help states evaluate the quality of their data systems were in some cases incomplete or inconsistent . we recommended actions for dot to make those assessments more useful for states , and dot plans to complete implementation of those actions this spring . data are also critical for the federal motor carrier safety administration ( fmcsa ) to target resources and identify which of the hundreds of thousands of commercial motor vehicles operating on our nation's roads pose the highest safety concerns .