ncua stated that such a result was not a foregone conclusion . ncua indicated that a proposal under consideration included risk categories with weights at and above 100 percent . the statement in the draft report was based on our discussion with representatives of the credit union industry . as we noted in our draft report , no detailed proposals regarding a risk - based system for all credit unions was available for our analysis , including that being developed by ncua . in the absence of details , we cannot comment on the ultimate effect of a proposal that is in the process of being developed on the required capital levels for credit unions . however , we believe that , used in tandem with leverage capital requirements , any risk - based capital standards should appropriately recognize the risks credit unions face . in response to the statement in our draft report that pca was intended to act as a restraint on growth , ncua stated that it was important to differentiate overly aggressive growth from robust growth , consistent with sound business strategy , experienced by healthy credit unions . while we agree that there are different types of growth , institutions still need to hold sufficient capital regardless of the type of growth experienced . we remain a strong supporter of pca as a regulatory tool . the system of pca implemented for credit unions is comparable with the pca system that bank and thrift regulators have used for over a decade . we are aware that ncua is constructing a more detailed risk - based capital proposal that incorporates both risk - based and leverage requirements ; however , due to the lack of formalized details , we could not perform a meaningful assessment of the proposal . given that none of the secondary capital or risk - based pca proposals provided to us have garnered credit union industry consensus or contain sufficient details on which to base an assessment , we did not perform an evaluation of these proposals or an analysis of their potential benefits and implications . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. , from november 2003 through july 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . while ncua has not finalized its risk - based pca proposal for all credit unions , ncua officials provided us items being used in the development of their risk - based pca proposal: ncua supports a statutorily mandated pca system , with a minimum core leverage requirement ( hard floor of 2 percent of total assets for critically undercapitalized ) ; a statutory definition of net worth ( with ability through regulation to reduce what qualifies as net worth , not increase it ) ; and statutory thresholds based on risk assets defined by ncua for the various net worth categories . ncua also believes it should be provided with the authority to set the remaining elements of the risk - based pca system by regulation .