in addition , on pp . we repeatedly sought to obtain the factual and detailed underpinnings that support dr. campbell and mr. smith's statements , but dod did not provide this information . see comment 1 . the focus of this report is on current u.s. defense interests in the fsm and the rmi . however , we examined the potential role of the fsm and the rmi with regard to the quadrennial defense review on pp . 16-17 and noted dod's views that the fsm and the rmi may not be included in dod plans to increase the u.s. presence in the western pacific . the official u.s. pacific command position on the strategic importance of the fsm is classified . this information , as well as classified details of the 1999 dod assessment of u.s . interests in the fas , was presented to the requesters of this report in june 2001 . further , the views from the u.s. pacific command officials , which are included in our report , were collected from individuals specifically designated by the command to respond to our questions . the u.s. pacific command has told us that the united states has access to airfields throughout the fas . according to the air mobility operations center within the pacific command air force operations center , the u.s. air force ( usaf ) does not use yap and chuuk for refueling as a matter of routine operations . as a rule , when usaf fighters transit the pacific command's area of responsibility they have tanker escort , which means they do not need to refuel on the ground . the air mobility operations center does not keep track of fighter refueling and cannot verify whether any usaf fighters have refueled at yap or chuuk . however , a pacific command representative stated that it is quite possible that the marines or navy could have dropped in for fuel , but there is no way to provide an accounting of how many times and for what reasons . he stated that there have been literally hundreds of flights transiting the pacific command's area of responsibility in support of operation enduring freedom . u.s. pilots are given a great deal of latitude ; and , given countless possible scenarios , some could have dropped into the fsm to refuel . finally , he stated that palau and guam have also been used recently for refueling purposes , with guam used more often than small airfields when it is convenient . however , carrier - based aircraft transiting the pacific command's area of responsibility might find a more direct route by flying through the fsm or the rmi rather than guam . this report does not conclude that the value of strategic denial is overrated .