but it still has not been completed . while the agencies are now in a better position to do so , they must build on the progress made to date by completing data and modeling efforts underway , updating their fire management plans with the results of these data efforts and ongoing research , and following through on recent cost - effectiveness and affordability initiatives . however , time is running out . further delay in completing a strategy that cohesively integrates these activities to identify options and related funding needs will only result in increased long - term risks to communities , ecosystems , and federal budgetary resources . because there is an increasingly urgent need for a cohesive federal strategy that identifies long - term options and related funding needs for reducing fuels , we have recommended that the secretaries of agriculture and the interior provide the congress , in time for its consideration of the agencies' fiscal year 2006 wildland fire management budgets , with a joint tactical plan outlining the critical steps the agencies will take , together with related time frames , to complete such a cohesive strategy . in an april 2005 letter , agriculture and interior said that they will produce by august 2005 , for the wildland fire leadership council's review and approval , a .joint tactical plan that will identify the steps and time frames for developing a cohesive strategy . next , i would like to summarize the findings of our second report , being released today , that discusses ways to help protect homes and improve communications during wildland fires . although wildland fire is a natural process that plays an important role in the health of many fire - adapted ecosystems , it has the potential to damage or destroy homes located in or near these wildlands , in the area commonly called the wildland - urban interface . since 1984 , wildland fires have burned an average of 850 homes each year in the united states , according to the national fire protection association . however , losses since 2000 have risen to an average of 1,100 homes annually . in 2003 , more than 3,600 homes were destroyed by wildland fires in southern california and resulted in more than $2 billion in insured losses . many homes are located in the wildland - urban interface nationwide , and the number is growing , although the risk to these homes from wildland fire varies widely . in california , for example , an estimated 4.9 million of the state's 12 million housing units are located in or near the wildlands , and 3.2 million of these are at significant risk from wildland fire . as people continue to move to areas in or near fire - prone wildlands , the number of homes at risk from wildland fire is likely to grow . when a large high - intensity wildland fire occurs near inhabited areas , it can threaten hundreds of homes at the same time and overwhelm available firefighting resources . homeowners can play an important role in protecting their homes from a wildland fire , however , by taking preventive steps to reduce their home's ignition potential .