not all questions were asked of all respondents . for example , questions about the prevalence of billing problems were asked only of respondents who indicated they were solely or jointly responsible for paying for their service . additionally , satisfaction with wireless coverage for particular locations ( i.e . at home , at work , and in a vehicle ) was calculated only among respondents who indicated they used their wireless phone service in those locations . to identify the type and nature of problems consumers have experienced in recent years with their wireless phone service , we interviewed officials from the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , consumer organizations , national organizations that represent state agency officials , and state agency officials from three selected states — california , nebraska , and west virginia — representing utility commissions , offices of consumer advocates , and offices of attorneys general . we selected these states based on their various geography , populations , and region , and their varying approaches to providing wireless phone service oversight based on information obtained from national organizations representing state agency officials . we also interviewed officials from the four major wireless carriers , two selected smaller carriers that serve mostly rural areas , and wireless industry associations . in addition , we reviewed documents obtained from some of these sources and fcc's recent quarterly reports about consumer complaints . we also used the information obtained from these stakeholders to develop some of the questions in the consumer survey . to determine how fcc addresses consumer complaints , we interviewed fcc officials about these activities and reviewed related documentation obtained from these officials . we also reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and procedures , as well as fcc's quarterly complaint reports , strategic plan , and budget with performance goals and measures . in addition , we reviewed the government performance and results act of 1993 requirements and our prior recommendations on performance goals and measures and determined whether fcc's efforts to measure the performance of its consumer assistance efforts are consistent with these requirements and recommendations . in addition to the individual named above , judy guilliams - tapia , assistant director ; james ashley ; scott behen ; nancy boardman ; andrew huddleston ; eric hudson ; ophelia robinson ; andrew stavisky ; and mindi weisenbloom made key contributions to this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . these assumptions affect the response rate calculation . for this survey the response rate was calculated using the american association of public opinion research ( aapor ) response rate 3 . based on these assumptions , the response rate for the survey was 32 percent ; however , the response rate could be lower if different assumptions had been made and might also be different if calculated using a different method . we used random digit dial ( rdd ) sampling frames that include both listed and unlisted landline numbers from working blocks of numbers in the united states .