we disagree . as tigta explained in its report , referrals were counted as incorrect when the irs employee merely provided the publication , without walking the customer through it to identify the answer , as required by established field assistance procedures . in our view , the complexity of tax laws and varying education levels among taxpayers seeking assistance suggest that requiring field assistance employees to walk the taxpayer through a publication to identify the correct response is a necessary procedure that should be followed in practice for the response to be considered correct . irs's data for january 1 through april 20 , 2002 , showed that about 85 percent of the 2.6 million walk - in customers for whom wait - time was tracked waited 30 minutes or less to obtain assistance between january 1 and april 20 , 2002 . however , irs made the following two changes to the way it reported wait - time in 2002 that precluded any comparison to 2001 . irs reduced the number of sites for which wait - time data was tracked . in 2001 , all walk - in sites tracked wait - time either automatically , if they were equipped with the queuing management system ( q - matic ) , or manually , if they did not have q - matic . as of march 2002 , however , the approximately 297 sites not equipped with q - matic were no longer required to track or report wait - time — a decision we believe was prudent because manual tracking was not practical at some sites with limited staff and because manual tracking of wait - times is an error - prone process . irs doubled the threshold used for wait - time tracking from 15 minutes or less in 2001 to 30 minutes or less in 2002 , thus increasing the reported percentage of taxpayers receiving timely assistance . the bi - weekly wait - time reports submitted by the sites and derivative summary data provided to us by irs did not provide any details on the wait - times for the 15 percent of customers ( about 384,000 taxpayers ) who waited longer than 30 minutes for assistance , even though this information was available through q - matic , thus limiting management's ability to identify and minimize excessive wait - time . irs took steps to improve its walk - in service , some of which may have helped improve the accuracy of tax law assistance in 2002 . other efforts that involve implementing two new accuracy measures and testing new q - matic requirements have the potential for improved service in the future . field assistance officials said that they had taken a number of steps to improve the accuracy of assistance in 2002 . for example , they said that irs had completed all actions listed in response to our report on the 2001 filing season — which included providing more consistent and standardized services , better training , and improved access to taxpayer account information . irs also refined the process for referring complex tax law questions that are beyond the scope of normal walk - in staff training to expert field assistance , toll - free telephone , or compliance staff .