ii. ) five of these aircraft types — fa - 18c , p - 3c , s - 3b , ea - 6b , and e - 2c — accounted for about 35,000 of the service's 84,000 reported cannibalizations , or 42 percent of the total for that year . ( see fig . these five aircraft types accounted for 958 aircraft , or 26 percent of the total inventory for which cannibalizations were reported in fiscal year 2000 . ( see app . ii. ) the rates of the f - 15c and f - 15e were almost twice the average at 22 and 23 , respectively . ( see fig . we were unable to include army data in our analysis because , unlike the navy and the air force , the army does not track cannibalization servicewide and does not require subordinate commands to do so . unit commanders are allowed to report cannibalizations but do not do so consistently , and the data are not aggregated at the service level . the army requires only that cannibalizations be reported for selected components ; these make up less than 4 percent of all aviation repair parts . according to the army deputy chief of staff for logistics , although the army's reporting systems do not completely track all cannibalizations , there is evidence that cannibalization rates are higher than desired and that commanders are using them more than is desired to meet readiness and mission requirements . several army headquarters officials we spoke with agreed that cannibalizations should be tracked to provide an overall picture of how much cannibalization is used to compensate for parts shortage or availability . consequently , each service was directed to report by may 15 , 2001 , to the deputy under secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness ( 1 ) the cannibalization metric applicable to each weapon system or end item reported in the department of defense status of resources and training system and ( 2 ) the maximum acceptable level for each metric and the rationale for establishing that level . within 15 calendar days of the end of each quarter , the services are also to report to the deputy under secretary ( 1 ) the data for one year's cannibalization ( the last completed quarter and the prior three quarters ) , by weapon system or end item , and ( 2 ) narrative comments whenever an unfavorable trend for any system is identified and at least whenever the maximum acceptable level is exceeded for three consecutive quarters . the department of defense is currently working with each of the services to finalize the reporting requirements . aside from that , however , it has done little to address the issue department - wide . according to the recent testimony by its officials , the air force has implemented a multifaceted strategy of increased funding for spares , initiated a new policy , and developed organizational initiatives to reduce cannibalization rates . beginning in fiscal year 2000 , depot - repairable spare parts were funded at 100 percent of stated requirements . also attending were representatives from naval air forces atlantic and pacific fleets , the center for naval analysis , and subordinate commands .