transaction controls . auditors have reported on dod's inability to provide effective funds control and report reliable financial information , including budgetary information for many years . dod's challenges in properly recording and adequately supporting its obligations and disbursements have impaired its ability to track and control the use of public funds . the dod ig reported that this is a significant weakness because when fully deployed , the system is intended to manage 54 percent of the navy's total obligational authority , which was $155.9 billion for fiscal year 2013 . air force deams . in september 2012 , the dod ig reported that the air force's deams lacked critical functional capabilities needed to generate accurate and reliable financial management information . according to the dod ig , this weakness occurred because deams managers did not maintain an adequate general ledger chart of accounts , and because dod and air force management initially decided not to report financial data directly to the defense departmental reporting system ( ddrs ) for financial reporting purposes until the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2016 . further , we recently reported that the air force did not meet best practices in developing a schedule for the deams program . this raises questions about the credibility of the deadline for acquiring and implementing deams to provide needed functionality for financial improvement and audit readiness . we recommended that the air force update the cost estimate as necessary after implementing our prior recommendation to adopt scheduling best practices . dod concurred with our recommendation . fundamental weaknesses in dod funds control , including related business systems weaknesses , significantly impair dod's ability to ensure the ( 1 ) proper use of resources , ( 2 ) reliability of reports on the results of operations , and ( 3 ) success of its financial audit readiness efforts . for example , billions of dollars in dod - reported improper payments and continuing reports of millions of dollars in ada violations underscore dod's inability to assure proper use and accountability of resources provided to carry out its mission and operations . further , dod's transaction control weaknesses , including unsupported adjustments ( plugs ) to reconcile dod fund balances with the department of the treasury's ( treasury ) records , and suspense transactions that cannot be identified to a fund account impair accurate accounting for programs and results of operations . as a result , quarterly and annual financial statements , reports on budget execution , and reports on the results of operations , which could have a material effect on budget , spending , and other management decisions as well as determinations of agency compliance with laws and regulations , are unreliable . military auditors also reported that these weaknesses leave their departments at risk of fraud and improper transactions . additionally , funds control weaknesses continue to hinder dod's ability to achieve its september 2014 sbr audit readiness goal and raise questions about dod's ability to achieve audit readiness on a full set of financial statements by the end of fiscal year 2017 .