efforts . for example , in july 2011 a former director of the office testified that the ipo's 2009 charter had established a modest role for the office , and thus , the office did not have control over the budget for those initiatives for which it was responsible ; rather , this control remained with va and dod . when the departments re - chartered the ipo in 2011 , they included language related to the office having budgetary control over the iehr program . for example , this charter gave the ipo director the authority to manage budgeting and finances related to the planning and acquisition of the iehr capabilities . in addition , the charter provided the director with the authority to develop and propose interagency budget submissions for iehr to the departments . nevertheless , even with these revisions to its charter , the ipo was not fully empowered to execute funds related to iehr because the departments have different processes for budgeting it programs and , in va's case , for releasing funds for it development . according to the deputy chief management officer , dod had a dedicated fund for the iehr program , which the ipo director had authority to execute . however , va funded the iehr program through several funds , including it appropriations that va officials asserted could only be executed by the chief information officer ( cio ) . as a result , the ipo director was required to request funding for iehr - related activities from va on a project - by - project basis . according to one of the iehr program managers , although this process did not necessarily cause delays to iehr projects , it was a source of continuous frustration for the ipo director because it did not provide the expected level of control over the program's budget , as described in the office's charter . staffing: when va and dod designated the ipo to lead the iehr program in 2011 , they recognized that the office would need to be expanded to accommodate its new responsibilities . to this end , the departments and the ipo determined that the office would require a significant increase in personnel — more than 7 times the number of staff originally allotted to the office by va and dod — to complete hiring under the office's 2011 charter . however , while each of the departments provided personnel to the ipo through reassignments and short - term details of personnel , the departments did not fully staff the office as planned . for example , a staffing report from early november 2012 showed that , at that time , the ipo was staffed at about 60 percent . specifically , while the office consisted of 101 reassigned va and dod staff and 43 detailed staff , 95 positions remained vacant . further , in january 2013 , the ipo director stated that the office was staffed at approximately 62 percent and that hiring additional staff remained one of its biggest challenges , partly due to a hiring freeze within the tricare management activity .