this has not been the case at the agencies we reviewed . in many cases , the agencies continue to show extended milestones for needed corrective actions years in the future , even though substantial amounts of eligible delinquent debt have still not been referred . rhs administers a direct sfh loan program to help low - income individuals or households purchase homes in rural areas . as of september 30 , 2000 — the most recent fiscal year end for which agency - certified reporting exists for agriculture — rhs reported having about $17 billion outstanding in direct sfh loans . as shown in table 1 , rhs reported $383 million of direct sfh loans over 180 days delinquent , including debts classified as currently not collectible ( cnc ) on its treasury report on receivables due from the public ( tror ) as of september 30 , 2000 . rhs excluded $182 million of this delinquent debt from referral to fms for top and cross - servicing . however , fms officials told us that fms had not provided such guidance to fsa . fms officials emphasized that fms will accept debts that are older than 6 years because , although the debts cannot be referred to doj for litigation , collection can still be attempted through other debt collection tools such as referral to private collection agencies . even though fsa reported having referred $934 million of direct farm loans to fms for top as of september 30 , 2000 , the agency has lost and continues to lose opportunities for maximizing collections on this debt because it does not refer co - debtors . according to fsa officials , the vast majority of direct farm loans have co - debtors , who are also liable for loan repayment . however , fsa's automated loan system cannot record more than one debtor because the system modifications necessary to accept taxpayer identification numbers ( tins ) for multiple debtors have not been made . according to an fsa official , the need to have co - debtor information in the system to facilitate debt collection was initially determined in 1986 . however , we were told that to date , higher - priority systems projects have precluded fsa from completing the necessary systems enhancements to allow the system to accept more than one tin per debt . in other words , although fsa recognized years ago the need to take action , the agency has not considered this to be a high enough priority . according to fsa officials , fsa has now incorporated this requirement in the new farm loan program information delivery system scheduled for implementation in fiscal year 2005 . according to data provided by fsa officials , about $400 million of new delinquent debt became eligible for top during calendar year 2000 . although fsa officials stated that the debts became eligible relatively evenly throughout the year , debts eligible for top are referred by fsa only once annually , during december . consequently , a large portion of the $400 million of debt likely was not promptly referred when it became eligible .