app . §523 ( b ) . in addition to scra , the housing and urban development act of 1968 includes a requirement applicable to institutions that service mortgages . this act requires that all mortgage servicers that service home loans provide notification of the availability of homeownership counseling offered by the lender to eligible homeowners who fail to pay any amount by the due date . in 2006 , changes were made to the homeownership counseling notice requirement . mortgage servicers are required to alert borrowers of scra protections if they are in default on their mortgage , and the notice instructs borrowers to notify their servicer if they believe they are eligible for scra protections . servicers must provide the notification within 45 days from the date a payment was missed by a borrower . the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) developed and disseminated the format for this notice . scra provides protections to active duty servicemembers in all five of the military services — army , navy , air force , marine corps , and coast guard — as well as members of each of these services' reserve these components include the army reserve , navy component . reserve , marine corps reserve , air force reserve , coast guard reserve , army national guard , and air national guard . in 2010 , active duty servicemembers comprised 63 percent of the military's force , and the reserve components represented the remaining 37 percent of the military force . figure 1 shows the distribution of the military population and shows that the army constitutes the greatest percentage of both active duty servicemembers and the reserve forces . while the army reserve , the navy reserve , the marine corps reserve , and the air force reserve are federal entities , the army national guard and the air national guard ( known collectively as the national guard ) have both federal and state missions . members of the national guard who are eligible for scra protections are those who have been called into federal active duty service . in addition , members of the national guard recalled for state duty are also eligible for scra protections under certain circumstances . the responsibility of extending mortgage - related scra protections to eligible servicemembers often falls to mortgage servicers . while some institutions that originate home mortgage loans hold the loans as assets on their balance sheets , institutions generally sell them to other financial institutions or the enterprises — fannie mae or freddie mac . the enterprises purchase mortgages from primary mortgage lenders . they hold some of the mortgages they purchase in their portfolios , but they package the majority into mortgage - backed securities and sell them to investors in the secondary mortgage market . the enterprises guarantee these investors the timely payment of principal and interest . if a mortgage originator sells its loans to either an investor or to an institution that securitizes them , another financial institution or other entity is appointed as the mortgage servicer to manage payment collections and other activities associated with these loans .