gsa had no comments on the draft . we are sending copies of this report to the congressional committees with jurisdiction over dhs and gsa , and their activities ; the secretary of homeland security ; the administrator of gsa ; and the director of office of management and budget . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6543 or steinhardtb@gao.gov . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v. contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . this report ( 1 ) describes the guidance that the office of personnel management ( opm ) , general services administration ( gsa ) , federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , and federal protective service ( fps ) have issued pertaining to the use of telework during emergencies ; ( 2 ) assesses the extent to which opm's recent reviews of the agencies' telework policies and programs address the incorporation of telework into continuity plans , and the extent to which opm , fema , gsa , and fps offer guidance on incorporating telework into emergency and continuity planning ; and ( 3 ) assesses the extent to which opm and fema coordinated with other agencies on the development of their recently released guidance documents pertaining to the use of telework during emergencies . to address these three objectives , we reviewed governmentwide telework and emergency - related statutes . we also reviewed regulations issued by opm and gsa , and related governmentwide guidance that opm , gsa , fema , and fps had issued over the past 10 years . lastly , we conducted interviews with key officials from each of these agencies regarding each objective . we conducted additional data collection and analyses to answer selected objectives , as described below . to assess the extent to which opm's recent reviews of the agencies' telework policies and programs addressed the incorporation of telework into continuity plans , we reviewed opm's annual telework survey and its 2010 evaluation of agency telework policies . we compared the survey question relating to whether telework had been integrated into the agency's emergency preparedness / continuity of operations ( coop ) plans to generally accepted survey methodology . we also reviewed the survey results for this question from the first year it was included in the survey , in 2004 , through the most recent survey , conducted in 2009 . we also compared opm's description of the methodology it used to evaluate agency telework policies to gao guidelines for developing and using checklists . we also reviewed the cumulative scores that opm evaluators assigned to the checklist item — whether the telework policy “references agency emergency policies ( eg , coop and pandemic ) .” in addition to reviewing opm's recent telework assessments , we reviewed recent gao and inspector general reports to identify examples of problems agencies might be having with potentially using telework during emergencies .