the deputy administrator then reported to the administrator . as we noted in our report on nnsa's stockpile life extension program , problems with the w - 87 refurbishment were caused , in part , because the assigned program manager was not qualified to perform all required tasks and was not enrolled in doe's project management qualification program . senior nnsa officials in headquarters expect nnsa's policy to be issued by may 2004 , and implementation plans for this policy to be developed by summer 2004 . nnsa officials told us that even after the policy is issued , its implementation is expected to take some time because it will likely require a change in the behavior and culture of program managers and the manner in which they operate . nnsa's delay in issuing program management policy and appointing program managers is currently creating confusion . according to nnsa's existing policy concerning the appointment of contracting officer representatives , headquarters - based program officials must first be designated as program managers before they can be designated as contracting officer representatives for a site . as a result , any uncertainty surrounding the number of program managers and their responsibilities has the potential to disrupt the appointment of contracting officer representatives . however , despite the present uncertainty surrounding the designation of program managers , site offices are appointing contracting officer representatives . for example , the sandia site office appointed 25 of its 36 contracting officer representatives using available nnsa headquarters staff , as of june 2003 . however , nnsa provided us with a list of its designated program managers as of december 2003 ( the latest date for which data were available ) that did not officially recognize 21 of the 25 headquarters - based contracting officer representatives that had been formally appointed by the sandia site office . until nnsa fully implements its policies to delineate program management authority and responsibility , it remains unclear under the new reorganization and management structure how program management authorities and responsibilities will be exercised in the day - to - day management of contractors and site operations and nnsa cannot ensure that the full discipline and accountability it seeks through its reorganization is fully achieved or that its long - standing organizational structure problems are corrected . the second outstanding problem with nnsa's reorganization is that it has created gaps in the responsibility for safety oversight that need to be addressed . for example , managers at nnsa's pantex site office , which oversees the contractor operating the pantex plant — an assembly / disassembly plant for nuclear weapons in amarillo , texas — stated that authority and responsibility for certain safety - related oversight is unclear . specifically , according to the pantex site office manager , when the realignment abolished the albuquerque operations office , it left a void regarding who would take over certain nuclear explosive safety oversight activities previously performed by that office . among other things , nuclear explosives safety oversight includes activities such as evaluating the adequacy of controls associated with tooling , testers , and operational processes to prevent and / or minimize the consequences of an accident involving nuclear explosives .