but we can do better than we do now . the primary consequences of risk are often the need for additional time and money . yet , when significant risks are taken , they are often taken under the guise that they are manageable and that risk mitigation plans are in place . the question is why aren't we doing it ? ” to that point , reforms have been aimed mainly at the “what” versus the “why.” they have championed sound management practices , such as realistic estimating , thorough testing , and accurate reporting . today , these practices are well known . we need to consider that they mainly address the mechanisms of weapon acquisitions . seen this way , the practices prescribed in policy are only partial remedies . the acquisition of weapons is much more complex than policy describes and involves very basic and strongly reinforced incentives to field weapons . accordingly , rival practices , not normally viewed as good management techniques , comprise an effective stratagem for fielding a weapon because they reduce the risk that the program will be interrupted or called into question . i will now discuss several factors that illustrate the pressures that create incentives to deviate from sound acquisition management practices . the process of acquiring new weapons is ( 1 ) shaped by its different participants and ( 2 ) far more complex than the seemingly straightforward purchase of equipment to defeat an enemy threat . collectively , as participants' needs are translated into actions on weapon programs , the purpose of such programs transcends efficiently filling voids in military capability . weapons have become integral to policy decisions , definitions of roles and functions , justifications of budget levels and shares , service reputations , influence of oversight organizations , defense spending in localities , the industrial base , and individual careers . thus , the reasons “why” a weapon acquisition program is started are manifold and acquisitions do not merely provide technical solutions . while individual participants see their needs as rational and aligned with the national interest , collectively , these needs create incentives for pushing programs and encouraging undue optimism , parochialism , and other compromises of good judgment . under these circumstances , persistent performance problems , cost growth , schedule slippage , and difficulties with production and field support cannot all be attributed to errors , lack of expertise , or unforeseeable events . rather , a level of these problems is embedded as the undesirable , but apparently acceptable , consequence of the process . these problems persist not because they are overlooked or under - regulated , but because they enable more programs to survive and thus more needs to be met . the problems are not the fault of any single participant ; they are the collective responsibility of all participants . thus , the various pressures that accompany the reasons why a program is started can also affect and compromise the practices employed in its acquisition . i would like to highlight three characteristics about program funding that create incentives in decision making that can run counter to sound acquisition practices .