employee morale . the navsup report said that va employee morale is at a low point and is having an impact on employee productivity . navsup said that aos needs to respond to its employee morale issue by addressing specific employee concerns related to workload distribution , strategic and acquisition planning , communication , and complaint resolution . va has taken several actions related to employee morale . workload distribution issues have been addressed by developing a workload and spreadsheet tracking system and removing restrictions on work schedules for employees at ranks of gs - 15 and below . strategic planning actions completed include the development of mission and vision statements by a cross section of va personnel and collective involvement in approval of organizational restructuring efforts . communication and complaint resolution issues are being resolved by facilitating a meeting between aos management and employees to air concerns . partially completed actions include the development of new employee training module , including a comprehensive new employee orientation package . according to va , new employee training includes the dissemination of draft standard operating procedures . va is also in the process of developing an employee survey to measure overall employee satisfaction . discussions with va officials indicate that the agency believes its limited progress has largely been due to the absence of permanent leadership and insufficient staffing levels . officials told us that the recommendations will be implemented once key officials are in place . for example , positions for two key va acquisition managers — associate deputy assistant secretary for acquisitions and the director for aos — were unfilled for about 25 months and 15 months , respectively . but during the course of our review these positions were filled . as of august 25 , 2005 , aos has still not selected permanent personnel for 17 of its 62 positions . this includes two other key management positions — the deputy director of field operations and the deputy director for va central office operations , both filled by people in an acting role . supervisory leadership has also suffered as a consequence of understaffing , va officials said . four of the eight supervisory contract specialist positions are filled by people in an acting role . critical nonsupervisory positions also have remained unfilled , with 11 contract specialists' positions vacant . the absence of contract specialists has largely been caused by a high turnover rate . according to va officials , the high turnover rate can be attributed to a heavy contracting workload , as well as the other factors identified in the navsup report . when asked , the va officials we spoke with could not provide specific time frames for completing actions on the recommendations or a method to measure progress . we believe the lack of an implementation plan with time frames and milestones , as well as a way to measure progress , contributed to va's limited progress in implementing the key navsup recommendations . the seven key navsup recommendations we identified have not been fully implemented . while some progress is being made , progress is lacking in those areas that we believe are critical to an efficient and effective acquisition process .