management services . this study began in 1999 , competition was announced in 2001 , and the contract was awarded in august 2003 . what does the function cost ? is there potential to reduce cost and / or improve productivity by competing the function ? how does the function fit into other current or planned strategic projects ? an irs competitive sourcing official cited several benefits from the business case approach used during the planning stage up - front consideration of major decision variables such as economics , market research , and risk ; involvement of top - level management and leadership ; the ability to test candidate projects against strategic goals and performance improvement objectives ; and low investment of resources to qualify or reject an activity as a competitive sourcing project . the army's “core , non - core concept” for assessing functions employed a more strategic approach . initially , the army's approach for classifying positions for its inventory focused on determining whether functions were core or non - core to the agency's mission . however , the army found that such a distinction did not , by itself , provide a good basis for a decision , and that other factors , such as risk and operational considerations , also must be considered . a cognizant army official told us that focusing on positions does not consider how well the function is being performed or who should perform the function — military , civilian , contractor , or some combination of these . some of these approaches are summarized below . for example , functions such as childcare and equal employment opportunity operations , while not inherently governmental , are exempt from competitive sourcing because they are important for reasons such as military morale and quality of life . according to a dod competitive sourcing official , the army's approach is evolving and is unique within dod . officials at four civilian agencies in our review expressed similar concerns that the army official expressed on developing their inventories . officials told us that given the investment of time and resources required to develop an inventory , agencies should focus on mission - related functions rather than individual positions . the department of education's “one - ed” initiative also used strategic approaches in identifying candidates for competition . one - ed covers all elements of major departmental operations , and seeks management changes through integrated human capital reform , competitive sourcing , and organizational restructuring . as part of its broader approach , the department developed its fair act inventory by analyzing key processes in the activities under consideration . it then used the results of this process to restructure positions as either commercial or inherently governmental and frame a broader analysis of the function's activities . the ultimate success of the administration's competitive sourcing initiative hinges on the extent to which agencies achieve the efficiencies , innovation , and improved performance envisioned by the president's management agenda . successful implementation of this initiative requires results - oriented goals and strategies ; clear criteria and analysis to support agency decisions ; and adequate resources .