it is a foreign organization . the organization engages in terrorist activity or terrorism , or retains the capability and intent to engage in terrorist activity or terrorism . the organization's terrorist activity or terrorism threatens the security of u.s. nationals or the national security of the united states . designation of a terrorist group as an fto allows the united states to impose certain legal consequences on the fto , as well as on individuals that associate with or knowingly provide support to the designated organization . it is unlawful for a person in the united states or subject to the jurisdiction of the united states to knowingly provide “material support or resources” to a designated fto , and offenders can be fined or imprisoned for violating this law . in addition , representatives and members of a designated fto , if they are not u.s. citizens , are inadmissible to and , in certain circumstances , removable from the united states . additionally , any u.s. financial institution that becomes aware that it has possession of or control over funds in which a designated fto or its agent has an interest must retain possession of or control over the funds and report the funds to treasury's office of foreign assets control . in addition to making fto designations , the secretary of state can address terrorist organizations and terrorists through other authorities , including listing an individual or entity that engages in terrorist activity under executive order 13,224 ( e.o . 13,224 requires the blocking of property and interests in property of foreign persons the secretary of state has determined , in consultation with the attorney general and the secretaries of the departments of homeland security and the treasury , to have committed or to pose a significant risk of committing acts of terrorism that threaten the security of u.s. nationals or the national security , foreign policy , or economy of the united states . 13,224 blocks the assets of organizations and individuals designated under the executive order . it also authorizes the blocking of assets of persons determined by the secretary of the treasury , in consultation with the attorney general and the secretaries of state and homeland security , to assist in ; sponsor ; or provide financial , material , or technological support for , or financial or other services to or in support of , designated persons , or to be otherwise associated with those persons . in practice , when state designates an organization as an fto , it also concurrently designates the organization under e.o . once state designates an organization under e.o . 13,224 , treasury is able to make its own designations under e.o . 13,224 of other organizations and individuals associated with or providing support to the organization designated by state under e.o . these designations allow the u.s. government to target organizations and individuals that provide material support and assistance to ftos . state has developed a six - step process for designating foreign terrorist organizations . state's bureau of counterterrorism ( ct ) leads the designation process for state , and other state bureaus and agency partners are involved in the various steps .