environmental cleanup issues are unique to each site . however , we have reported that three key factors can lead to delays in the cleanup and transfer of sites . these factors are ( 1 ) technological constraints that limit dod's ability to accurately identify , detect , and clean up unexploded ordnance from a particular site , ( 2 ) prolonged negotiations between environmental regulators and dod about the extent to which dod's actions are in compliance with environmental regulations and laws , and ( 3 ) the discovery of previously undetected environmental contamination that can result in the need for further cleanup , cost increases , and delays in property transfer . in conclusion , mr. chairman , while the data indicate that dod has made progress in cleaning up its contaminated sites , they also show that a significant amount of work remains to be done . given the large number of sites that dod must clean up , we recognize that it faces a significant challenge . addressing this challenge , however , is critical because environmental cleanup has historically been a key impediment to the expeditious transfer of unneeded property to other federal and nonfederal parties who can put the property to new uses . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . for further information about this testimony , please contact anu mittal at ( 202 ) 512- 3841 or mittala@gao.gov or john b. stephenson at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov . contributors to this testimony include elizabeth beardsley , antoinette capaccio , vincent price , and john smith . table 1 provides a summary of these goals for the irp and mmrp . as the table indicates , brac sites have no established goals for preliminary assessments or site inspections . for sites included under the first four brac rounds , the goal is to reach the rip / rc milestone at irp sites by 2015 and at mmrp sites by 2009 . for sites included under the 2005 brac round , the goal is to reach the rip / rc milestone at irp sites by 2014 and at mmrp sites by 2017 . dod's military components plan cleanup actions that are required to meet these goals at the installation or site level . dod requires the components to assess their inventory of brac and other sites by relative risk to help make informed decisions about which sites to clean up first . using these relative risk categories , as well as other factors such as stakeholder interest and mission needs , the components set more specific cleanup targets each fiscal year to demonstrate progress and prepare a budget to achieve those goals and targets . the proposed budgets and obligations among site categories are also influenced by the need to fund long - term management activities .