these requirements are outlined below . program execution instruction ( 2016 ) – in january 2016 , nnsa approved a program execution instruction that defines requirements for carrying out nnsa defense programs , such as the strategic materials programs . this instruction outlines a series of requirements that vary based on the categorization — and therefore the rigor — of management applied to a program . of the four categories outlined in the instruction — standard management , enhanced management a , enhanced management b , and capital acquisition management — nnsa has generally designated the strategic materials programs as “enhanced management b,” the most rigorous designation applicable to this type of program , according to nnsa officials . the “enhanced management b” programs are required to have the following elements documented: a program plan , a work breakdown structure that details the work elements necessary to organize the total work scope with cost estimates , a decision analysis , an integrated master schedule that includes the entire scope of work required for the program's successful execution , a performance management approach , and a lessons learned / best practices review . according to the instruction , if the scope , cost , and schedule of a program are more complex , moving to a more rigorous program management category is often required . according to the instruction , when enhanced complexity and risk are associated with a program , among other things , “enhanced management b” is the appropriate designation . the instruction also allows for programs to “tailor,” or modify , the application of certain requirements depending on risk and other factors . program management policy for weapons and strategic materials programs ( 2017 ) – nnsa issued a program management policy in january 2017 that defines general roles and responsibilities for all four strategic materials program managers . this policy broadly outlines the managers' authority and responsibilities for managing the strategic materials ; these responsibilities include developing program documentation and managing risk . according to nnsa officials we interviewed , the policy is based on nnsa's experience in implementing the uranium program in 2014 . the policy requires each of the strategic materials programs to develop a number of guidance documents , including a mission strategy , mission requirements , and a technology development plan . for each program , the policy also requires the formation of a strategic materials mission working group that is comprised of the key stakeholders involved in the program . nnsa officials told us that they are making progress in implementing the program requirements outlined for each of the strategic materials programs , although some are further along than others . however , these officials said that relatively few staff had been assigned to these programs , which has challenged implementation efforts . for its two strategic materials programs established in 2014 — uranium and domestic uranium enrichment — nnsa officials told us that they are generally meeting the strategic materials program management requirements outlined in the program execution instruction and the program management policy for weapons and strategic materials . nnsa officials identified documents for each program , including mission strategy , mission requirements , program plan , and work breakdown structure .