( see fig . overall , most state officials were also satisfied with the level of assistance they received from education staff and their contractors in addressing issues related to the reading first application and implementation processes . for example , state officials in 39 states reported that education staff were of great or very great help during the application or implementation process . additionally , officials from 48 states reported that education officials were helpful or very helpful in addressing states' implementation - related questions , which frequently dealt with using reading assessments and helping districts with reading scores that had not improved sufficiently . what changes have occurred to reading instruction since the inception of reading first ? what criteria have states used to award reading first sub - grants to districts , and what , if any , difficulty did states face in implementing the program ? what guidance , assistance , and oversight did education provide states related to the reading first program ? to answer these questions , we collected information about the reading first program from a variety of sources . specifically , 41 states cited the centers as helpful or very helpful in addressing states' inquiries related to the implementation of reading first . we conducted a web - based survey of the reading first directors in all 50 states and the district of columbia , and 100 percent responded . we also obtained and analyzed data from the department of education for each state on reading first districts' eligibility , applications , and awards for states' first school year of funding . to assess the reliability of this data , we talked to agency officials about data quality control procedures and reviewed relevant documentation . we also conducted semi - structured follow - up interviews with reading first directors in 12 states and conducted site visits to 4 of the 12 states . during the site visits , we met with state and district officials , as well as school officials , including teachers , principals , and reading first coaches . we selected these 12 states to represent diversity in terms of geographic distribution , grant size , poverty rates , and student reading achievement , as well as the presence or absence of a statewide list of approved reading programs . in our selection of the 12 states , we also took into consideration whether or not state officials reported that they had received guidance from education officials advocating for or against particular reading programs or assessments . for both the survey and follow - up interviews , we agreed to protect the respondents' confidentiality to encourage candid responses: therefore ; we will not identify states by name in this report . we also interviewed administrators from each of the three regional reading first technical assistance centers ( tac ) , officials from rmc research — which provided technical assistance to states during the application process and oversaw the tacs , and the american institutes for research ( air ) — the contractor responsible for conducting monitoring visits in each state . in addition , we interviewed several publishers and other providers of reading curricula and assessments , as well as reading first officials and attorneys at education .