gao - 11-537r . washington , d.c.: may 19 , 2011 . critical infrastructure protection: dhs efforts to assess and promote resiliency are evolving but program management could be strengthened . gao - 10-772 . washington , d.c.: september 23 , 2010 . we identified limitations that should be considered when using our results . for example , the iscd memorandum represented the views of the senior iscd officials that prepared the memorandum and may not be representative of the views of other officials within the cfats program . also , our results are based on iscd's action plan as of june 2012 so these results reflect the status of iscd's progress up to that point in time . we conducted this performance audit from february 2012 to july 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our analysis based on our audit objectives . appendix i discusses our scope and methodology and related limitations in greater detail . the cfats program is intended to secure the nation's chemical infrastructure by identifying and protecting high - risk chemical facilities . section 550 of the dhs appropriations act for fiscal year 2007 requires dhs to issue regulations establishing risk - based performance standards for security of facilities that the secretary determines to present high levels of security risk . the cfats rule was published in april 2007 and appendix a to the rule , published in november 2007 , listed 322 chemicals of interest and the screening threshold quantities amount for each . according to the cfats rule , any facility that possesses ( or later comes into possession of ) any of these chemicals in quantities that meet or exceed the threshold is required to submit certain information to dhs for screening . according to the rule , if dhs preliminarily determines that a facility is high risk — that is , the facility presents a high risk of significant adverse consequences for human life or health , national security , or critical economic assets if subjected to terrorist attack , compromise , infiltration , or exploitation — the facility must submit a security vulnerability assessment to dhs that identifies security vulnerabilities at the site , among other things . after reviewing the security vulnerability assessment , dhs then makes a final decision as to whether the facility is high - risk and , if so , assigns the facility to a final tier . the rule then requires facilities that have been finally determined to be high - risk to develop and submit for dhs approval site security plans that generally show how they are to address the vulnerabilities identified in the vulnerability assessment , including measures that satisfy applicable risk - based performance standards . in addition , the rule requires that dhs implement a compliance inspection process to ensure that covered facilities are satisfying dhs's performance standards consistent with their approved site security plans .