sipc has no such aggregate cap . the mechanics of the claims process were unclear . in addition to limitations on coverage , at least one policy had other characteristics that could either restrict a customer's ability to recover losses that exceed the amount covered under sipa or delay a customer's recovery until long after the net equity covered by the insurance has been determined . the policy conditioned the customer's recovery upon the customer providing the insurer with a claim notice subject to specific time , form , and content specifications . among other things , the customer was required to submit a written claim accompanied by evidence satisfactory to the insurer and an assignment to the insurer of the customer's rights against the firm . the other policies did not address when a customer must file a claim . the role of the trustee in the claims process was unclear . another difference we found is the role of the trustee regarding customer claims under sipa and excess sipc coverage policies . under sipa , the trustee acts on behalf of customers who properly file claims to see that they recover losses as provided in sipa . it is unclear whether the trustee could represent customers on claims for excess insurance because , in some cases , the policies indicate that only individual customers could bring claims and , in any case , the trustee may not have authority under the bankruptcy laws to do so . sipc trustees and other attorneys experienced with sipa liquidations also agreed that it was not clear who was responsible for filing the claim , the customer or the trustee . the policies did not clearly state when a claim would be paid . the policies also differed from sipc coverage regarding when customers could recover their losses . for purposes of sipc coverage , the trustee discharges obligations of the debtor from available customer property and , if necessary , sipc advances , without waiting for the court to rule on customer property and net equity share calculations . under the excess coverage policies , it is unclear when customers would be eligible to recover assets in excess of those replaced by sipc . some of the policies provide for “prompt” replacement or payment of the portion of a customer's covered net equity . while some have already chosen this option , officials from some of the larger firms said that this might not be an acceptable option because the remaining insurer generally limits the amount of the coverage per firm . firms that currently offer net equity coverage were concerned that their high net worth customers may not be satisfied with a policy that has a cap on its coverage . additionally , the policy of the remaining underwriter raised the most questions about its consistency with sipc coverage . letting the policies expire and not replacing them . some of the firms we spoke with said that the larger firms really do not need the excess sipc because they are well capitalized and the existing customer protection rules offer sufficient protection .