nasa concurred with our findings and recommendations . in august 2014 , nasa established formal cost and schedule baselines for the sls program at the 70 percent joint confidence level for a committed launch readiness date of november 2018 . nevertheless , the program plans to continue to pursue an initial capability of sls by december 2017 as an internal goal and has calculated a joint cost and schedule confidence level of 30 percent associated with that date . as illustrated by table 1 below , the sls and gsdo programs are pursuing ambitious and varying target dates for the em - 1 test flight . in addition , the orion program is currently tracking and reporting to december 2017 . the agency acknowledges differences in the target dates the programs are pursuing and has indicated that it will develop an integrated target launch date after all three systems hold their individual critical design reviews . the sls program has assigned a low confidence level — 30 percent — associated with meeting the program's internal target date of december 2017 . even if sls does meet that goal , however , it is unlikely that both orion and gsdo will achieve launch readiness by that point . for example , the gsdo program only has a 30 percent confidence level associated with a later june 2018 date . additionally , the orion program is currently behind its planned schedule and is facing significant technical risks and officials indicated that the program will not achieve launch readiness by december 2017 . the orion program has submitted a schedule to nasa headquarters that indicates the program is now developing plans for a september 2018 em - 1 launch , though that date is preliminary until the program establishes official cost and schedule baselines now planned for may 2015 . my remarks today are based on these reports and our ongoing work . specifically , i will discuss nasa's efforts to establish baselines for the sls program based on matching cost and schedule resources to requirements , developmental challenges facing the sls and orion programs , and shortcomings in nasa's planning and cost estimates for the sls , orion , and gsdo programs . to conduct this work , we reviewed relevant design , development , cost , and schedule documents ; interviewed program officials ; and evaluated sls and orion program actions using acquisition and cost estimating best practices . more information on our scope and methodology is available in our related gao products . the work that supports this statement was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the national aeronautics and space administration authorization act of 2010 directed nasa to , among another things , develop a space launch system as a follow - on to the space shuttle and as a key component in expanding human presence beyond low - earth orbit .