, mission ) of the vehicle . we provided the agencies with each vehicle's vin number , make , model , and other identifying information to assist in the process . we did not verify whether agencies categorized vehicles correctly as some of the information necessary for these categorizations was contained within agency systems and records ( for example , if the vehicle met an agency's defined criteria or if the vehicle was repurposed ) . however , to evaluate the overall reliability of agencies' vehicle justification reporting , we selected a random sample of 20 vehicles from each agency that placed vehicles into group 4 and then requested the written justifications for those vehicles . we reviewed the selected agencies' policies on utilization and interviewed officials . to estimate the costs associated with potentially underutilized vehicles , we conducted a multi - step analytical process . first , we focused on a selected population of vehicles , which included: light trucks or passenger vehicles , because these two categories comprise the majority of federal - owned vehicle fleets ( approximately 55 percent and 15 percent respectively ) ; vehicles that are still in the selected agencies' inventories as of november 2016 ; and vehicles that were acquired prior to fiscal year 2015 , so that the agencies were fully accountable for the selected vehicles' utilization over the entire fiscal year 2015 time period . we defined passenger vehicles and light trucks using vehicle descriptions in gsa's federal automotive statistical tool ( fast ) database , as shown in table 8 . we excluded tactical , law - enforcement , and emergency - responder vehicles from the selected vehicle population as well as vehicles located outside of the continental u.s. , due to the differences in reporting and management processes that can be associated with these characteristics . we also excluded vehicles that were procured through non - appropriated funds , such as user fees , as any savings associated with eliminating those vehicles would not accrue to the federal government . we then requested data from the three selected agencies on all of the relevant vehicles in our defined population . in order to conduct this analysis , two analysts independently coded each of the options into the six categories , and then met to discuss and resolve any coding discrepancies . after this initial categorization , 48 options were categorized as “undetermined” . we subsequently discussed our categorizations with gsa officials and asked them for any examples of why agencies might select these undetermined options for any of the other five categories . after reviewing gsa's responses , we placed 38 of the previously undetermined options into one of the five other categories . the remaining 10 options were still categorized as “undetermined” because gsa's response did not provide assurance that the option belonged in one of the other five categories . for example , gsa replied that power seats could be selected for drivers with mobility impairments , but we found that agencies selected power seats over 5,000 times . similarly , gsa suggested that remote keyless entry could be a safety feature for vehicles operated in extreme climates , but it is unclear what climates would constitute “extreme” .