bedford , ma 2 . houston , tx 3 . see figure 5 . determine facility security level: isc's standard requires that facility security levels ( i - v ) are to be based on an equal weighting of five factors ( mission criticality , symbolism , facility population , facility size , and threats ) and the consideration of “intangibles.” according to the isc , each of these factors is important to quantifying a facility's attractiveness as a target for adversarial acts and the severity of consequences should such an act occur . va policy calls for three of the factors to be used in determining a facility's risk level , which partially reflects the isc standard . va policy indicates that va police are to identify an “asset risk value” that reflects the expected effect a threat would have to the functioning of vha facilities and the continued delivery of services . this score is used to calculate an “overall risk value.” the greater the threat a facility faces relative to its physical security posture and the greater the impact on va operations , the higher the overall risk value . the determination of the overall risk value reflects the isc's prescribed use of facility security levels to identify a facility's level of risk . va's policy does not articulate that factors used to determine the overall risk value be equally weighted , nor does it include facility population and facility size as factors . as a result , va may not be considering all the relevant risk factors that make a facility a more or less desirable target for threats . identify the facility's baseline countermeasures: the isc standard calls for baseline countermeasures to vary based on facility's risk level . for example , depending on a facility's security level and the type of undesirable threat posed , the use of x - ray or magnetometers may be required to screen visitors . alternatively , agencies are allowed to create templates by facility type . that is , an agency can identify the specific risks posed to particular facility types and customize different sets of countermeasures that can serve as the baseline for those facility types . va has created templates based on facility types rather than varying its baseline countermeasures relative to a facility's risk level , which is permissible under the isc standard . these templates outline the specific minimum countermeasures for different types of facilities or components of vha facilities such as medical center pharmacies . va's minimum requirements for countermeasures in their facilities were designed to meet the needs of the medical center environment and clientele . identify and assess risk: isc has established 33 specific undesirable events that agencies are to use when assessing risks to facilities . additionally , the isc requires that an agency's risk assessment methodology consider three factors — threat , vulnerability , and consequence — in examining these events in order to be credible . agencies may customize the threats they assess to their specific situations , after having considered the 33 undesirable events . according to isc officials , agencies are expected to periodically review their list of undesirable events as updates to the standards occur and document determinations and justifications for excluding any undesirable event .