cost . for fiscal year 2008 , opm's standard billing rate is $3,711 for an investigation for an initial top secret clearance ; $2,509 for an investigation to renew a top secret clearance , and $202 for an investigation for a secret clearance . the cost of getting and maintaining a top secret clearance for 10 years is approximately 30 times greater than the cost of getting and maintaining a secret clearance for the same period . for example , an individual getting a top secret clearance for the first time and keeping the clearance for 10 years would cost the government a total of $6,202 in current year dollars ( $3,711 for the initial investigation and $2,509 for the reinvestigation after the first 5 years ) . in contrast , an individual receiving a secret clearance and maintaining it for 10 years would result in a total cost to the government of $202 ( $202 for the initial clearance that is good for 10 years ) . time / workload . the workload is also affected by the scope of coverage in the various types of investigations . much of the information for a secret clearance is gathered through electronic files . the investigation for a top secret clearance , on the other hand , requires the information needed for the secret clearance as well as data gathered through time - consuming tasks such as interviews with the subject of the investigation request , references in the workplace , and neighbors . since ( 1 ) the average investigative report for a top secret clearance takes about 10 times as many investigative staff hours as the average investigative report for a secret clearance and ( 2 ) the top secret clearance must be renewed twice as often as the secret , the investigative workload increases about 20-fold . additionally , the adjudicative workload increases about 4-fold . in 2007 , dod officials estimated that it took about twice as long to review an investigative report for a top secret clearance , which would need to be done twice as often as the secret clearance . unless the new system developed by the interagency security clearance process reform team includes a sound requirements process , workload and costs may be higher than necessary . since the late 1990s , gao has emphasized a need to build more quality and quality monitoring into clearance processes to achieve positive goals such as promoting greater reciprocity and maximizing the likelihood that individuals who are security risks will be scrutinized more closely . in our november 2005 testimony on the earlier governmentwide plan to improve the clearance process , we noted that the plan devoted little attention to monitoring and improving the quality of the personnel security clearance process , and that limited attention and reporting about quality continue . when omb issued its february 2007 report of the security clearance oversight group consistent with title iii of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , it documented quality with a single metric . specifically , it stated that opm has developed additional internal quality control processes to ensure that the quality of completed investigations continue to meet the national investigative standards .