gao - 18-70 . washington , d.c.: december 8 , 2017 . ( see app . i for selected recommendations and a list of related gao reports at the end of this statement. ) for further context , my remarks reference the most recently available data from cms on medicaid beneficiary enrollment and expenditures , including enrollment and expenditures for medicaid expansion enrollees in fiscal year 2017 , information reported by state auditors , and the office of management and budget's ( omb ) 2019 compliance supplement . we conducted all of the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the federal government and states share responsibility for the financing and administration of the medicaid program . with regard to financing , medicaid is funded jointly by the federal government and states , with fmap rates ranging from a statutory minimum of 50 percent to a statutory maximum of 83 percent . under ppaca , expenditures for medicaid expansion enrollees are matched at 90 percent for fiscal year 2020 . program administrative responsibilities are shared between states and the federal government . state administrative responsibilities include , among other things , determining eligibility , enrolling beneficiaries , and adjudicating claims . with regard to eligibility , states are primarily responsible for verifying eligibility and enrolling medicaid beneficiaries . these responsibilities include verifying and validating individuals' eligibility at the time of application and periodically thereafter , accurately assigning enrollees to the appropriate eligibility group , and promptly disenrolling individuals who are not eligible . ppaca requires states to use third - party sources of data to verify eligibility to the extent practicable . consequently , states have had to make changes to their eligibility systems , including implementing electronic systems for eligibility determination and coordinating systems to share information . in addition , states have had to make changes to reflect new sources of documentation and income used for verification . in certain circumstances , states may delegate responsibility to the federal government to make eligibility determinations . at the federal level , cms is responsible for overseeing states' design and operation of their medicaid programs and ensuring that federal funds are appropriately spent . cms oversees state enrollment of beneficiaries and reporting of expenditures . for example: cms reviews and approves states' medicaid eligibility verification plans , which rely primarily on information available through data sources — including federal data sources such as the social security administration and the internal revenue services , or state data sources such as state tax records or unemployment information — rather than paper documentation from families . cms has various review processes in place to ensure that expenditures reported by states are supported and consistent with medicaid requirements .