this policy remains in force . in response to potential hazards identified by the navy with the use of aromatic polyimide , the army conducted further testing in 1986 and confirmed the navy's findings . see appendix ii . such a definition is needed to help ensure that all aviation safety information of common interest , especially that deemed critical , is promptly identified and reported to responsible officials . while faa and the military services routinely exchange some aviation safety information of mutual concern , there are gaps in the processes used by both entities , including the sharing of how specific aviation safety concerns were addressed . for example , faa sends its emergency airworthiness directives ( ad ) — a type of critical safety information — to only five u.s. military addressees , as requested by the military services , with the same level of urgency that they are sent to owners and operators of civil aircraft . these military addressees represent only a small subset of the military entities that could be affected . faa officials told us that it has added specific military users to its list of addressees , but has had limited success maintaining accurate and current contact information . despite faa's general practice of posting emergency ads to its web site in real time , the site contains a disclaimer that the agency cannot guarantee the accuracy of the information it posts — for instance , the information posted could be vulnerable to tampering from computer viruses or computer hackers . as a result , faa requires that all emergency ads be sent immediately via telegram or fax to owners and operators of civil aircraft and that their receipt be documented . while faa is not required to send these directives to the military services , it appears prudent to do so when it involves information of mutual interest , given their common responsibilities for aviation safety oversight . similarly , the military services provide faa with some of their aviation safety information , but generally not with the same level of urgency with which they distribute it to the other services . for example , the army's aviation and missile command strips privileged and classified information from its critical safety messages pertaining to its helicopter fleet , sends them all to the other military services and faa , and posts them to its web site . in contrast , the navy uses its judgment to send some of its aviation safety messages to faa , while the air force's , coast guard's , and army's safety centers generally provide aviation safety information to faa only upon request . the formal processes used by faa and the military services to exchange aviation safety information of mutual concern , including information critical to flight safety , have not always been sufficient to ensure the comprehensive exchange of such information . while informal communication networks have helped to facilitate the exchange of aviation safety information , these exchanges are not required and systematic , and do not provide assurances that such information is exchanged in a timely manner .