ii and app . iii , respectively ) . cms reiterated its commitment to continually improve the quality indicators and to work to resolve the issues discussed in our report . although cms stated it would use our report to help improve the initiative over time , it intends to move forward with national implementation in november 2002 as planned . it stated that “waiting for more reliability , more validity , more accuracy , and more usefulness will delay needed public accountability , and deprive consumers , clinicians , and providers of important information they can use now.” the nqf commented that it unequivocally supports cms's plans to publicly report quality indicators but indicated that the initiative would benefit from a short - term postponement of 3 to 4 months to achieve a consensus on a set of indicators and to provide additional time to prepare the public on how to use and interpret the data . we continue to support the concept of reporting quality indicators , but remain concerned that a flawed implementation could seriously undercut support for and the potential effectiveness of this very worthwhile initiative . cms's comments and our evaluation focused largely on two issues: ( 1 ) the selection and validity of quality indicators , and ( 2 ) lessons learned from cms's evaluation of the pilot initiative . cms asserts that the quality indicators it plans to report nationally are reliable , valid , accurate , and useful and that it has received input from a number of sources in selecting the indicators for this initiative . however , cms provided no new evidence addressing our findings regarding the appropriateness of the quality indicators selected for public reporting and the accuracy of the underlying data . we continue to believe that , prior to nationwide implementation , cms should resolve these open issues . cms intends to move forward with nationwide implementation without a requested nqf assessment of the full abt validation report and without nqf's final recommendations on quality indicators . cms would not share the technical appendices to abt's validation report with us because they were undergoing review and revision . the technical appendices are critical to assessing abt's validation approach . cms's comments did not address our specific findings on the available portions of abt's validation report , including: ( 1 ) the validation results are not representative of nursing homes nationwide because of limitations in the selection of a sample of nursing homes to participate in the validation study , and ( 2 ) abt provided little information on the specific care processes against which the indicators were validated or how its risk adjustment approaches changed facility rankings and the appropriateness of the changes . although both abt and the nqf concluded that abt's facility - level risk adjustment approach required further research to determine its validity , cms plans to report two indicators with and without facility - level adjustments . cms's comments indicated that it has chosen to report these measures both ways in order to evaluate their usefulness and to allow facilities and consumers the additional information . we continue to believe that reporting data of uncertain validity is inappropriate and , as such , will likely not be useful to either facilities or consumers .