( see fig . from fiscal year 2003 to 2008 , the number of engineers at fcc decreased by 10 percent , from 310 to 280 . similarly , from fiscal year 2003 to 2008 , the overall number of economists decreased by 14 percent , from 63 to 54 . although the number of engineers and economists has decreased from 2003 to 2008 , the percentage of the workforce comprised of engineers and economists remained the same . the overall decline in the number of key occupational staff occurred during a period of increased need for technical , economic , and business expertise . new technologies , such as rapid growth in handheld and wireless devices , are challenging existing regulatory structures . fcc also cited a number of economic issues that impact the expertise and workforce required , such as marketplace consolidation and the need to craft economic incentives for incumbent spectrum users to relocate to other spectrum . additionally , 24 percent of fcc staff responses to the 2008 office of personnel management ( opm ) federal human capital survey disagreed with the statement “the skill level in my work unit has improved in the last year.” this was significantly more than the 17 percent of staff from all other agencies responding to the survey who disagreed with the statement . similarly , several stakeholders we interviewed echoed the importance of increasing the level of expertise in certain areas at fcc and cited concerns regarding insufficient numbers of staff . in addition to the decrease in engineers and economists , fcc faces challenges in ensuring that its workforce remains experienced and skilled enough to meet its mission , including a large number of staff who will be eligible for retirement . fcc estimates that 45 percent of supervisory engineers are projected to be eligible for retirement by 2011 . while fcc has started hiring a larger number of engineers to replace retiring engineers and augment its engineering staff , most hires have been at the entry level . several stakeholders have proposed a variety of options for restructuring fcc . no more than three commissioners may come from any one political party . the commission has flexibility in how it creates and organizes divisions or bureaus responsible for specific work assigned . specifically , the communications act , as amended , requires the commission to organize its staff into ( 1 ) integrated bureaus , to function on the basis of the commission's principal workload operations , and ( 2 ) such other divisional organizations as the commission deems necessary . fcc currently consists of seven bureaus that are responsible for a variety of issues that affect consumers and the telecommunications industry , including analyzing complaints , licensing , and spectrum auctions , and 10 offices that provide support services for the bureaus and commission . appendix ii has a detailed description of each bureau and office . each bureau is required by statute to include the legal , engineering , accounting , administrative , clerical , and other personnel that the commission determines necessary to perform its functions . a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . fcc was established by the communications act of 1934 ( communications act ) .