gao - 09-413t . washington , d.c.: march 3 , 2009 . defense acquisitions: perspectives on potential changes to dod's acquisition management framework . gao - 09-295r . washington , d.c.: february 27 , 2009 . defense management: actions needed to overcome long - standing challenges with weapon systems acquisition and service contract management . gao - 09-362t . washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2009 . it will also require strong leadership and accountability within the department . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you may have at this time . for further information about this statement , please contact michael j. sullivan at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this statement include ann borseth , dayna foster , matt lea , susan neill , john oppenheim , ken patton , sharon pickup , ron schwenn , charlie shivers , bruce thomas , and alyssa weir . defense acquisitions: dod must balance its needs with available resources and follow an incremental approach to acquiring weapon systems . status of recommendations to the department of defense ( fiscal years 2001-2007 ) . gao - 09-201r . washington , d.c.: december 11 , 2008 . defense acquisitions: fundamental changes are needed to improve weapon program outcomes . gao - 08-1159t . washington , d.c.: september 25 , 2008 . a list of our key products is provided at the end of this testimony . this work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for almost two decades , we have reported on pervasive and long - standing weaknesses in dod's business operations . in january 2009 , we released our high - risk series update for the 111th congress . this series emphasizes federal programs and operations that are at high risk because of vulnerabilities to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement and has also evolved to draw attention to areas associated with broad - based transformation needed to achieve greater efficiency , effectiveness , and sustainability . solutions to high - risk problems offer the potential to save billions of dollars , dramatically improve service to the public , strengthen confidence and trust in the performance and accountability of the u.s. government , and ensure the ability of government to deliver on its promises . since our high - risk program began , the government has taken these problems seriously and has made progress toward correcting them . of the 30 high - risk areas identified by gao across the government , dod bears sole responsibility for 8 high - risk areas , including weapon systems acquisition , and shares responsibility for 7 other high - risk areas ( see table 1 ) .