, feedback effects ) . for example , a suspension of the passenger ticket taxes might lead to lower fares for air travelers , which in turn might cause more trips to be made , thereby increasing the trust fund's revenues from the flight segment tax . what is the projected financial outlook of the trust fund ? how would the suspension ( i.e. , a tax holiday ) of various taxes accruing to the trust fund affect its financial status ? to answer these questions , we requested trust fund financial projections from faa using the expenditure scenarios included in the following three proposals: ( 1 ) the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee's reauthorization proposal , known as the aviation investment and revitalization vision act ( s. 824 , may 2 , 2003 , version , hereafter called the senate ) ; ( 2 ) the house transportation and infrastructure committee , the aviation subcommittee's reauthorization proposal , known as flight 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( h.r . 2115 , may 15 , 2003 , version , hereafter called the house ) ; and ( 3 ) the president's reauthorization proposal , known as the aviation authorization act of 2003 . because there is a difference in the number of years that the three expenditure scenarios would authorize funding for faa's accounts , our analysis compares proposed authorizations for fiscal years 2004 through 2006 , which were included in each scenario . for each of these three proposals , we asked faa to model the effects of the following five different tax holidays: a cargo tax holiday , a fuel tax holiday , a flight segment tax holiday , a passenger ticket tax holiday , and an “all” tax holiday that would include the four taxes previously mentioned and the international departure / arrival taxes . we selected these five holidays because they represent a range of different tax holiday scenarios . at your request , our analysis was based on a tax holiday hypothetically beginning on april 1 , 2003 , and lasting 1 year until april 1 , 2004 . although our analysis is based on hypothetical tax holidays during this period , the results of our analysis would remain valid if congress were to decide to implement the tax holidays retroactive to april 1 , 2003 , or would be similar if congress were to grant a tax holiday at a later time . the information and analysis presented in this report are based on faa's most recently published aviation forecasts , which were made in november 2002 . appendix i provides additional details on our scope and methodology . we performed our work from february through august 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the trust fund was established by the airport and airway revenue act of 1970 ( p.l . 91-258 ) to help fund the development of a nationwide airport and airway system and to fund faa investments in air traffic control facilities .