our estimates by agencies varied . for 10 of the 24 large agencies , future trends , based on recent projections , show less minority representation for ses in 2007 than in 2000 , while 12 agencies show increases . at most agencies , the diversity picture for the gs - 15 and gs - 14 workforce is better than that for the ses . even with variations by agency , if recent promotion trends continue for the succession pool of gs - 15s and gs - 14s , by october 2007 , this workforce would experience a slight increase in the percentage of minorities governmentwide . the increase , coupled with the residual population left after attrition , indicate that significant numbers of minority candidates for appointment to ses should be available . third , the wave of near - term retirements and other attrition will provide the federal government with both a challenge and an opportunity . the challenge will be to develop succession plans based on inclusive strategies to help ensure that sufficient numbers of senior executives are in place to develop and implement the policies and programs of the federal government . the opportunity will be to use new appointments to enhance the diversity of the ses corps and the succession pool from which ses members are selected . based in part on our work on the ses corps and in other human capital areas , we have seen a positive response on the part of opm , eeoc , and other agencies . to ascertain what the gender , racial , and ethnic profile of the candidate pool for ses replacements would look like , we performed the same simulations and projections for gs - 15s and gs - 14s as we did for the ses . over 80 percent of career ses appointments of federal employees come from the ranks of gs - 15s . similarly , over 90 percent of those promoted to gs - 15 are from the gs - 14 workforce . table 3 presents the results of our analysis for gs - 15s , and table 4 presents the results for gs - 14s . the results show a somewhat lower proportion of this workforce will leave . minority representation among those gs - 15s who remain by 2007 will be about the same as it was at the beginning of fiscal year 2001 , indicating that whites and minorities will leave at about the same rates . however , the proportion of minority gs - 14s would increase somewhat ( by 1.5 percentage points ) and the proportion of both grades represented by white and minority women will also increase . moreover , if recent promotion trends to gs - 15 and gs - 14 continue , marginal gains by almost all of the racial and ethnic groups would result .