other refund fraud . if a return is selected by one of rrp's non - identity theft filters , rrp automatically assigns the return , based on the characteristics of fraud identified , to the integrity and verification operations ( ivo ) function within w&i's return integrity and compliance services office for further action or review . for example , rrp may select a return as potential refund fraud because it is missing verification of income for a refundable tax credit , such as the earned income tax credit . clustering . rrp uses a tool that reveals patterns and relationships in masses of data allowing rrp to identify clusters of returns that share traits predictive of schemes and refund fraud . for example , irs could use clustering to identify groups of returns that share the same geographic location , among other traits . according to irs , this technique was developed to automate certain aspects of criminal investigation's identification of fraud schemes . a number of systems connect to rrp and provide additional taxpayer data or third - party information for rrp to analyze . rrp contains taxpayers' prior three years' filing history and third parties — employers , banks , and others — file information returns to report wages , interest , and other payment information to taxpayers and irs . for example , the social security administration sends w - 2s to irs . the w - 2 information is loaded regularly into rrp , along with other information returns , to validate wage and income information reported on individual returns claiming refunds — a process irs calls systemic verification . rrp has filters that combine results from the analytic techniques to automatically make a selection decision and then a treatment decision before the return can move to the next processing step and a refund can be issued . returns not selected by rrp continue through the pipeline process . selection decision . returns with fraud scores above thresholds — and meeting other criteria set by irs management — will automatically be selected by rrp filters for further action or review . according to irs , the agency's capacity to review selected returns is part of the automated selection decision , as are other criteria that weigh the cost and risk to irs . irs reports that for the 2017 filing season , rrp selected 857,438 returns as potential idt refund fraud and 219,210 returns as potential other refund fraud . this is less than 1 percent of almost 158 million individual returns filed that year . treatment decision . rrp automatically assigns selected returns to the appropriate treatment based on the characteristics of idt or other refund fraud rrp detected . examples of treatments include the following: identity theft refund fraud . returns selected by an idt filter are automatically assigned for treatment in the taxpayer protection program . irs notifies taxpayers that they must authenticate their identity before irs will process the return or issue a refund . taxpayers can verify their identity by calling an irs telephone center , visiting a taxpayer assistance center , or in some cases , authenticating online or via mail .