ii. ) additionally , when excluding nevada and pennsylvania , states reporting information showed an aggregate decrease in the number of abortions eligible for federal medicaid funding they covered during the fiscal year 2013 through fiscal year 2017 time period ( from 383 to 200 ) . all states responded to the survey . in addition , we interviewed eight abortion providers about access challenges women may face . these eight providers offered services in 21 states that represented more than 40 percent of the total national medicaid population , but varied in terms of their medicaid abortion coverage and geography . our findings from these interviews are not generalizable . we also conducted a literature review to identify peer - reviewed studies that examined factors that could present challenges to women accessing abortions . we searched multiple reference databases for relevant studies published between january 2007 and september 2017 , and identified 637 studies that were potentially relevant . to further refine our search , we reviewed the abstract of each study to ensure the articles met certain criteria . for the studies remaining , we examined their methodologies to determine whether they were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . as a result of these efforts , we identified 52 studies to include in our review . for more details on the literature review and a list of studies we reviewed , see appendix i . we asked states to report information by delivery system type and by the circumstance eligible for federal funding ( rape , incest , or life endangerment ) . we did not independently verify state - reported information , but did follow up with states to clarify inconsistencies or outliers we identified . on that basis , we determined that the state - reported information was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . we conducted this performance audit from may 2017 to january 2019 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in 1973 , the u.s. supreme court concluded in roe v. wade that a woman has a fundamental right protected by the u.s. constitution to decide whether to terminate her pregnancy . however , the court also recognized that a state may have an interest sufficient to regulate abortion after the first trimester of the pregnancy or proscribe abortion after the fetus reaches viability , the point at which the fetus could live outside the womb . over time , states have adopted a range of abortion - related laws or policies , including the following examples . gestational limits: prohibiting abortions after a specified gestational age . insurance limitations: limiting insurance coverage of abortions to certain circumstances in either publicly or privately funded insurance plans . laws regulating abortion providers: requiring abortion providers to meet certain standards , such as standards that specify facility room size or corridor widths .