( see fig . the overall incidence and amounts of leakage from loans and hardship withdrawals also remained steady through 2008 , according to data that we obtained from selected major 401 ( k ) administrators . while these data were not nationally representative , they covered a wide spectrum of 401 ( k ) plans , participants , and assets . as shown in table 3 , the overall incidence and average amounts of leakage changed little , if at all , from 2005 through 2008 . two administrators also told us that they had seen little change in the number of hardship withdrawals and loans in the first quarter of 2009 . certain other distributions have been exempted from the additional tax . what is known about how various policies may affect the incidence of 401 ( k ) leakage ? to determine the principal forms of 401 ( k ) leakage , we interviewed industry and academic experts , reviewed laws and regulations , and analyzed existing studies on leakage . we then identified cashouts , hardship withdrawals , and participant loans as the three principal forms of leakage for the purposes of this report . to determine the incidence and amount of leakage over time , we analyzed a cross - section of the 3 most recent years of nationally representative survey data collected in 1998 , 2003 , and 2006 in the u.s. census bureau's survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) . we also analyzed published annual statistics from the department of labor and the internal revenue service ( irs ) , respectively , to obtain aggregate loan default amounts and early withdrawal penalties paid . to determine the recent prevalence of leakage , we analyzed summary data from 2005 through 2008 that we obtained from 401 ( k ) plan administrators that represent about 22 million 401 ( k ) participants and over $1 trillion in 401 ( k ) plan assets . to illustrate the relative significance of leakage over time , we developed scenarios to simulate the effect that various forms and amounts of leakage may have on retirement savings . in developing these scenarios , we considered a range of factors , including historical and projected rates of return , earnings , wages , contribution rates , years until retirement , loan administration fees , and penalties associated with leakage . to determine how plans inform participants about leakage , we interviewed 26 plan administrators that represented an estimated 80 percent of 401 ( k ) participants and 65 percent of 401 ( k ) plan assets . as part of these efforts , we analyzed documents related to leakage from 401 ( k ) accounts and conducted 10 site visits during which we interviewed representatives , reviewed relevant documentation , and toured a participant call center . we also reviewed selected 401 ( k ) plan sponsor and administrator web sites , and current pension law and regulations . appendix ii provides a list of the 401 ( k ) plan administrators that we contacted .