exim agreed with this recommendation . in february 2019 , exim provided documentation reflecting its efforts to implement the recommendations from our july 2018 report . § 3720b restrictions to these entities . on the basis of our discussions with exim and gsa officials and our own testing of the data , we concluded that the data elements used for this work were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted this performance audit from october 2017 to april 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . as described in figure 1 , to support u.s. exports , exim offers four major types of financing products: direct loans , loan guarantees , export - credit insurance , and working capital guarantees . regardless of type , exim's financing products generally have one of three maturity periods: short - term transactions are for less than 1 year ; medium - term transactions are from 1 to 7 years long ; and long - term transactions are more than 7 years . as we reported in july 2018 , for all financing types , exim currently conducts a number of preauthorization and postauthorization antifraud activities . see the examples shown in figure 2 . fraud and “fraud risk” are distinct concepts . fraud — obtaining something of value through willful misrepresentation — can be challenging to detect and adjudicate because of its deceptive nature . fraud risk exists when individuals have an opportunity to engage in fraudulent activity , have an incentive or are under pressure ( eg , financial pressures ) to commit fraud , or are able to rationalize committing fraud . when fraud risks can be identified and mitigated , fraud may be less likely to occur . although the occurrence of fraud indicates there is a fraud risk , a fraud risk can exist even if actual fraud has not yet been identified or adjudicated . omb published guidance under omb circular a - 123 in 2016 affirming that federal managers should adhere to the leading practices identified in the fraud risk framework . as we reported in december 2018 , exim identifies itself as subject to the act , and , as such , follows it . the fraud risk framework is also aligned with federal internal control standards , specifically principle 8 ( “assess fraud risk” ) of the green book . federal internal control standards also state that excessive pressures , such as financial pressures ( eg , delinquent federal debt ) , can pose a fraud risk factor to agency programs as these pressures can provide an incentive or motive to commit fraud . although the existence of financial pressure alone does not necessarily indicate that fraud exists or will occur , financial pressure is often present when fraud does occur . applicants for exim programs who have delinquent federal debt may not be able to obtain certain types of financing until they resolve their debts .