enhanced community benefits . representatives from the two consumer groups told us that community services offered at retail facilities — such as food drives , school tours , and community bulletin boards — may help sustain communities and increase social connectedness . postmasters we surveyed also reported ways their communities benefited from nonpostal services provided at their retail facilities . for example , one postmaster we surveyed reported that his or her retail facility collected eyeglasses for a local community organization . another postmaster we surveyed reported that during the holiday season , his or her retail facility offers decorative rubber stamps , which have become a community tradition . according to the postmasters we surveyed , some of the nonpostal products provided significant nonrevenue value , although the degree to which these provided value depended on whether the retail facility was located in a rural , suburban , or urban area . we asked postmasters to identify whether certain nonpostal products and services were offered at the selected facility , and if so , how much value the product or service provided to the community . overall , passport services were the most highly valued nonpostal product or service . about 95 percent ( 36 of 38 ) of postmasters at retail facilities that offered passport services said passports provided great or very great value to their communities . money orders were the next most highly valued nonpostal product or service . these were offered at more of the retail facilities selected for our survey than passport services . for the retail facilities that offered money orders , about 78 percent ( 115 of 147 ) of postmasters said this product provided great or very great value to their communities . burial flags were the third highly valued nonpostal product or service , for some types of locations . about 66 percent ( 21 of 32 ) of postmasters managing rural retail facilities and about 70 percent ( 35 of 50 ) of postmasters managing suburban retail facilities said burial flags provided great or very great value compared to about 43 percent ( 9 of 21 ) of postmasters overseeing urban retail facilities . among retail facilities that offered international money transfers ( suremoney ) , selective service forms , philatelic products , and gift cards , around one - third or more of postmasters reported these as providing some value or little to no value in their communities . representatives of one postal employee union , postmasters we surveyed , and officials from the six federal government entities that had partnered with usps reported minimal challenges related to providing the identified nonpostal products and services at retail facilities . for example , the representative from the postal employee union told us that the only challenge for postal workers was when locations did not have adequate staff to handle passport services . very few of the postmasters selected for our survey identified challenges related to offering the thirteen nonpostal products and services we asked about . officials from only two of the six federal government entities mentioned challenges , and none of them were significant in nature .