gao - 14-34 . washington , d.c.: december 9 , 2013 . information security: serious and widespread weaknesses persist at federal agencies . aimd - 00-295 . washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2000 . these threats can be unintentional or intentional . unintentional threats can be caused by natural disasters ; defective equipment ; or the actions of careless , inattentive , or untrained employees that inadvertently disrupt systems . intentional threats include both targeted and untargeted attacks from a variety of sources . these include disgruntled employees , criminal groups , hackers , and foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare . such threat sources vary in terms of the types and capabilities of the actors , their willingness to act , and their motives . these threat sources make use of various techniques to compromise information or adversely affect computers , software , networks , an organization's operation , an industry , or the internet itself . such techniques include , among others , denial - of - service attacks and malicious software codes or programs . the unique nature of cyber - based attacks can vastly enhance their reach and impact , resulting in the loss of sensitive information and damage to economic and national security , the loss of privacy , identity theft , and the compromise of proprietary information or intellectual property . the increasing number of incidents reported by federal agencies has further underscored the need to manage and bolster the security of the government's information systems . the number of incidents affecting va's information , computer systems , and networks has generally risen over the last several years . specifically , in fiscal year 2007 , the department reported 4,834 information security incidents to us - cert ; in fiscal year 2013 , it reported 11,382 incidents . these included incidents related to unauthorized access , denial - of - service attacks ; installation of malicious code ; improper usage of computing resources ; and scans , probes , and attempted access , among others . figure 1 shows the overall increase in the total number of incidents va reported to us - cert for fiscal year 2007 through 2013 . in addition , reports of incidents affecting va's systems and information highlight the serious impact that inadequate information security can have on , among other things , the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of veterans' personal information . for example: according to a va official , in january 2014 a software defect in va's ebenefits system improperly allowed users to view the personal information of other veterans . according to this official , this defect potentially allowed almost 5,400 users to view data of over 1,300 veterans and / or their dependents . in may 2010 , it was reported that va officials had notified lawmakers of breaches involving the personal data of thousands of veterans , which had resulted from the theft of an unencrypted laptop computer from a va contractor and a separate incident at a va facility .