employment projections . bls uses projections of the labor force and economic growth , as well as expert judgments about future trends in different occupations , to develop an occupational projection model . because it is based on interviews with employers , mls provides a vehicle for collecting direct , timely data on offshoring . due to the mls's coverage limitations , however , its data should be viewed as an imperfect indicator of offshoring - caused job losses . mls identifies only a portion of total layoffs because it does not include small establishments or layoffs involving fewer than 50 employees . for example , in 2003 , the survey covered 4.6 percent of all u.s. establishments and 56.7 percent of all u.s. workers . in addition , some employers may be unwilling to provide information when interviewed about reasons for layoffs . for the first quarter of 2004 , 7.2 percent of firms with mass layoff events refused to participate in the survey . pre - 2004 mls data had additional limitations regarding reasons for layoffs . according to bls officials , in surveys prior to 2004 , offshoring may have been involved in some instances when reasons such as “financial difficulty,” “business ownership change,” or “reorganization within the company” were provided by mls respondents . even with these limitations , mls data provide some information that is useful for understanding services offshoring . for example , the data show that “overseas relocation” was given as a reason for mass - layoff job loss for a small fraction of workers laid off during the 1996-2003 period — of 1.5 million layoffs reported in the 2003 mls , 13,000 ( 0.9 percent ) were reportedly due to overseas relocation . the data also indicate that almost all layoffs ( about 96 percent ) occurred in the manufacturing sector . the data also indicate that layoffs associated with “overseas relocation” reported by mls peaked in 2002 ( after rising sharply in 2001 ) but declined in 2003 . ( see fig . similarly , u.s. private sector employment is concentrated in service - producing industries ( 79 percent ) compared to goods - producing industries ( 21 percent ) . however , it is important to note that goods - producing industries may also employ workers in “services” occupations ( eg , computer programmers or accountants ) . services are a relatively small share of u.s. imports , compared with their share of the u.s. economy . services make up about 16 percent of total u.s. imports , compared with 84 percent of imports covered by goods . ( see fig . services make up a greater share of u.s. exports but still account for only 30 percent of the total . services trade may be relatively small relative to the size of services output in the u.s. economy partly because some services ( eg , haircuts , housing , and hospitals ) are difficult or impossible to trade internationally . overall , u.s. imports of services accounted for only about 3 percent of u.s. consumption of services in 2002 . according to the world trade organization , the united states is the world's largest importer of commercial services , with 13.3 percent of the world's share . ( see fig .