pub . 110-289 , § 1132 , 122 stat . § 1701x note . cfpb was created by the dodd - frank act , which specified the creation of the bureau's office of financial education and its role in promoting financial literacy . other financial literacy programs were initiated by agencies as part of their mission . for example , in line with the securities and exchange commission's ( sec ) mission as the primary overseer and regulator of the u.s. securities markets , the agency created the office of investor education and advocacy , which gives investors information to evaluate current and potential investments , make informed decisions , and avoid fraudulent schemes . similarly , the federal trade commission's ( ftc ) financial literacy efforts have stemmed from its responsibilities for enforcing laws and regulations against unfair or deceptive acts or practices and protecting consumers in the marketplace . having multiple federal agencies involved in financial literacy efforts can have certain advantages . some agencies have deep and long - standing expertise and experience addressing a specific issue area . for example , hud has long been a repository for information on housing issues , sec on investment issues , and the department of labor and social security administration on retirement issues . some agencies also have deep knowledge and ties to particular populations and may be the most efficient and natural conduit to providing them with information and services , as with the department of defense's ( dod ) role in providing financial information and counseling to servicemembers and their families . in addition , providing information from multiple sources or in multiple formats can increase consumer access and the likelihood of educating more people . we have previously reported that different populations respond to different types of delivery mechanisms , such as one - on - one credit counseling , employer - provided retirement seminars , and classroom - based education . at the same time , fragmentation increases the risk of inefficiency and duplication of efforts . our detailed review of financial literacy efforts across the federal government has uncovered no duplication — that is , cases where two or more agencies or programs were engaging in the same efforts and providing the same services to the same beneficiaries . in our analysis of the 20 significant financial literacy and housing counseling programs , we found that programs and efforts had differing focuses in terms of subject matter , target audience , or delivery method . this finding is largely consistent with prior reviews of the federal government's financial literacy efforts . in 2006 , the financial literacy and education commission reported that it had studied federal financial literacy programs or resources and said it found minimal overlap and duplication among programs , noting that even when different agencies' programs sometimes appeared similar , closer inspection revealed important differences in things like the target audience , delivery platform , or specific content . in response to a recommendation we made that the commission engage an independent third party to assess these issues , two subsequent studies were conducted .