seven banks responded . on the basis of the 2004 review , fdic established the mbr program to gain insights into issues affecting minority banks and obtain feedback on its efforts . gao - 07-7sp . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. , and new york from december 2005 to september 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . many minority banks are located in urban areas and seek to serve distressed communities and populations that have traditionally been undeserved by financial institutions . for example , after the civil war banks were established to provide financial services to african - americans . all survey questions and the frequencies of responses to each question are presented in a supplemental product that can be found on our web site at www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? more recently , asian - american and hispanic - american banks have been established to serve the rapidly growing asian and hispanic communities in the united states . in our review of regulators' lists of minority banks , we identified a total minority bank population of 195 for 2005 ( table 1 ) . table 2 shows that the distribution of minority banks by size is similar to the distribution of all banks by size . more than 40 percent of all minority banks had assets of less than $100 million . each federally insured depository institution , including each minority bank , has a primary federal regulator: fdic , ots , occ , or the federal reserve . the primary regulator for each bank is determined by the institution's charter ( table 3 ) . as shown in table 4 , fdic serves as the federal regulator for over half of minority banks — 109 out of 195 banks , or 56 percent — and the federal reserve regulates the fewest . the primary responsibilities of federal banking regulators include helping to ensure the safe and sound practices and operations of the institutions they oversee , the stability of financial markets , and compliance with laws and regulations . to achieve these goals , among other activities , the regulators conduct on - site examinations , issue regulations , conduct investigations , and take enforcement actions . regulators may also close banks that are deemed to be insolvent and pose risks to the deposit insurance fund . fdic is responsible for ensuring that deposits in failed banks are protected up to established federal deposit insurance limits . banking regulators primarily focus on ensuring the safety and soundness of banks , but laws and regulatory policies can identify additional goals and objectives . recognizing the importance of minority banks , under section 308 of firrea , congress outlined five broad goals that fdic and ots , in consultation with treasury , are to work toward to preserve and promote minority banks . these goals are preserving the present number of minority banks ; preserving their minority character in cases involving mergers or acquisitions of minority banks ; providing technical assistance to prevent the insolvency of institutions that are not currently insolvent ; promoting and encouraging the creation of new minority banks ; and providing for training , technical assistance , and educational programs .