others were more substantive . for example , two parties providing comments questioned whether faa should allow airplanes to be operated when their fuel tank flammability reduction systems are inoperable , noting that these systems are one of the redundant systems necessary for preventing fuel tank fires during a lightning strike . faa responded that the issue is not part of the structural lightning policy , but lightning policy , but noted that the decision is made by the faa flight operations board on a case - by - case basis . in addition to creating the special conditions , faa granted boeing an equivalent level of safety finding for the 787 related to the flame penetration properties of the fuselage . as indicated , an airplane manufacturer can request an equivalent level of safety finding when it determines that it may not be able to comply literally with the standard , but it can show that its airplane design meets the same level of safety . in this case , boeing proposed demonstrating that the 787 composite skin and insulation configuration could meet the current level of safety developed for typical aluminum - skin and insulation configurations . boeing proposed using a large - scale or laboratory - scale test — that is , a different test method from the small - scale test that the standard specifies for applicants to simulate the characteristics of a postcrash fire . boeing determined that a small - scale test would not be sufficient for testing its composite fuselage fire resistance properties because the standard faa test does not test the airplane skin , which the regulation assumes to be aluminum . faa approved the equivalent level of safety finding subject to the condition that the results of boeing's large - scale ( or laboratory - scale ) testing show the 787 fuselage skin and structural components provide a survivable cabin environment for 5 minutes or equivalent to that of a traditional aluminum fuselage with compliant insulation . we also found that faa documented its determination to grant boeing an equivalent level of safety finding , providing a description of the technical issues and boeing's plan to demonstrate the composite fuselage would meet the current level of safety in a manner similar to how it documented the special conditions determination , although it did not obtain public comments , which are not required for an equivalent level of safety finding . easa uses a validation process ( a form of certification ) to issue a type certificate indicating that u.s. - manufactured airplanes meet european airworthiness standards . as with faa , during validation easa develops a certification basis comprising relevant airworthiness standards and additional considerations such as special conditions to account for novel features or new uses of products . faa and easa officials stated that the two authorities work together to harmonize their standards and , as a result , the standards are similar in many respects , but have some differences . for example , one authority may adopt a standard before the other . as with faa's certification process , a key component of easa's type certification is determining whether current airworthiness standards are appropriate to ensure an airplane's novel features or new product uses meet current levels of safety .