ii ) . since ic chco's initial data collection efforts for the core contract personnel inventory in fiscal year 2006 , it has taken actions to further clarify and refine its guidance to address concerns that ic elements were interpreting the definition of core contract personnel differently and to improve the consistency of the information in the inventory . personnel that provide only direct support to core ic mission areas that include: ( 1 ) collection activities and operations ( technical and human intelligence ) , ( 2 ) intelligence analysis and production , ( 3 ) basic and applied technology research and development , ( 4 ) acquisition and program management , ( 5 ) enterprise information technology , and ( 6 ) management or administrative support to these functions . summary of major changes from prior fiscal year revision to “substantive work products may be incorporated in and / or indistinguishable from those of u.s. government personnel.” guidance further refines the inclusion or exclusion of personnel performing certain administrative support , information technology services , and operations and maintenance . odni's observation that the number of core contract personnel reported during initial data collection efforts may not have fully or accurately reflected all core contract personnel due to the potential exclusion of some functions underscores our finding that the core contract personnel inventory data cannot be used reliably to make year - to - year comparisons or establish trends . our recommendation did not specify that the assessments of the appropriate workforce mix be addressed as part of the core contract personnel inventory . as a result , the ic chco cannot reliably report on statutorily required information comparing the number and cost of core contract personnel over time . by enhancing their internal controls , the civilian ic elements can help ensure that the data being reported to congress are as accurate and complete as possible and consistent with omb guidelines . further , inherent limitations or changes in definitions or methodologies , including those intended to improve the data , can affect data accuracy , completeness , and comparability . not fully disclosing these limitations and the effects of these changes limits the transparency and usefulness of the information reported to congress . within the ic , core contract personnel perform functions that could influence the direction and control of key aspects of the u.s. intelligence mission , such as intelligence analysis and operations . our prior work and omb policies have underscored the importance of agencies having guidance , strategies , and reliable data to inform decisions related to the appropriate use of contractor personnel . building on longstanding omb policy , ofpp's september 2011 guidance requires agencies to develop internal procedures to identify and oversee contractors providing services that closely support inherently governmental functions . yet , of the agencies we reviewed , odni , cia , doj , doe , and treasury have not fully developed such procedures or established required time frames for doing so . without these procedures in place , odni , cia , and the civilian ic elements within these three departments risk not taking appropriate steps to manage and oversee contract personnel , particularly those performing work that could influence government decision making .