( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of this product to gsa , va , usda , interior , and commerce for review and comment . delegated leases should not extend into holdover status . the 2014 bulletin states that a lease in holdover status , or an agency occupying a building or space with no lease because it has expired , is in violation of the lease delegation authority . delegated leases should not be extended unless necessary to avoid a holdover . gsa's leasing desk guide states that short - term lease extensions should only be used as a last resort because they typically cost more , among other reasons . the post award documents that agencies submit into g - rex do not allow gsa to track agencies' performance in meeting these management goals . for example , g - rex does not calculate when lease rates are at or below private sector rates . gsa officials said that gsa does not track the performance of agencies with delegated leasing authority against these three management goals because it is primarily the agencies' responsibility to ensure they meet them . however , the four agencies with delegated leases that we reviewed did not always meet gsa's three goals . officials from two of the agencies we interviewed said that they were unaware of gsa's performance cost metric for negotiating lease rates at or below private sector rates or that it applied to delegated leases . consequently , the agency officials did not know if they met it . since neither g - rex nor the agencies with delegated authority track lease rates in this way , gsa does not know if agencies are meeting gsa's performance cost metric or , more simply stated , if agencies are negotiating cost - effective lease rates . regarding holdovers , we found all four agencies in our review were experiencing holdovers , which raises questions about how effective their policies are to prevent them . for example , usda does not use its lease expiration data in an effective manner to track expiring leases to submit lease delegation applications , according to gsa's audit of usda delegated leases . consequently , usda had one quarter ( 1,100 of 4,000 ) of its delegated leases in holdover status in the past 24 months , according to the gsa report . furthermore , according to our analysis of agency data , all four selected agencies have expired delegated leases where the agency either has a standstill agreement with the landlord , or is simply in holdover status . for example , va had approximately 10 percent of its delegated leases in holdover status in fiscal year 2018 . the requirements can include limits on square footage or the length of the lease . many of these requirements restate or elaborate on various requirements in statute and regulation . all delegations of leasing authority , including general purpose , categorical , and special purpose space delegations , are covered by the 2014 bulletin . agencies are responsible for compliance with all applicable requirements when using delegated leasing authority . agencies must also conform with the requirements of any delegation approval from gsa .