( select one ) . this issue is addressed in the section below . our survey of internet users found that 12 percent of the respondents had a broadband connection to the internet . at the same time , over 52 percent of the survey respondents reported that broadband transport via dsl or cable modem was available to them . unless otherwise noted in footnotes to the questions , there were no missing observations . question 1: are you the primary decisionmaker for your household regarding what form of internet access to purchase for your home ? ( select one ) question 2: which of the following do you most frequently use to access the internet from your home ? ( select one ) conventional dial - up telephone service provided by a telephone company ( this includes isdn service ) high - speed “digital subscriber line” ( or “dsl” ) telephone service high - speed cable modem service ( this includes using the cable modem as the downlink and a telephone line for the return path or uplink ) wireless service ( for example , satellite service such as direcpc , fixed wireless service such as winstar or teligent , or other wireless service ) question 3a: what is the most important reason you use conventional dial - up telephone service for your internet access from home ? ( select one for each row ) wireless service ( eg , satellite , fixed wireless , other wireless ) question 5: for those methods of internet access that are not available in your area , or not available to you , do either of the following reasons describe why such methods are not available ? ( select one in each row ) question 6: which of the following is the most important reason you selected your current internet service provider ( eg , aol , excite@home , mindspring , etc. ) ( select one ) previous experience / was familiar with my isp prior to subscribing provided the best access to the content / applications that i use and / or want most did research on my isp prior to subscribing recommended to me by family , friends , co - workers , etc . part of a promotion with the purchase of my computer ( eg , a cash rebate , a free trial , etc. ) offered as part of a package of services by a telecommunications company my internet service provider came bundled with my internet access other ( please specify ) missing observation = 0.2% . is ( are ) _____ available to you through your internet service provider ( you don't necessarily have to be using the application ) ? ( select one for each row ) question 8: thinking about a typical internet session , what percentage of your time is spent on your isp's home page accessing content or service applications , such as e - mail , as opposed to the percentage of time spent surfing the internet for content and applications ? ( please enter appropriate percentage ) percentage of time spent on isp's home page content 5.5 ( continued from previous page ) question 9: what are the advantages to using applications or accessing content that appear on your isp's home page ?