the naic is a participating member of fbiic . treasury coordinates its collaboration with the private sector through the financial services sector coordinating council ( fsscc ) , whose members include representatives from organizations such as securities exchanges , clearing organizations , and banking , securities , and insurance trade associations . for example , the american insurance association is a member of fsscc . unless insurers maintain adequate security and business continuity capabilities , disruptions to their operations could occur that might delay the provision of key services to policyholders , such as the processing and payment of insurance claims . while a disruption at a large insurer has the potential to affect a large number of consumers and businesses , the effects would likely be limited to that insurer's policyholders and would not spread to other insurers or the larger insurance sector . disruptions to the operations of a state insurance regulator could also delay some important services , such as licensing and product approvals for insurers and complaint resolution for consumers , but such services do not appear to be highly time sensitive , and in the short term , such disruptions would have a limited effect on insurers' normal operations . similarly , a disruption to naic's operations could delay services to insurers and state regulators , but these services also do not appear to be highly time sensitive . unless insurers implement security and business continuity capabilities that adequately protect their operations from disruption and allow them to recover those operations in a reasonable amount of time should a disruption occur , important policyholder services could be delayed . potentially disruptive events could include natural disasters , such as earthquakes or hurricanes , as well as intentional acts like bombings or computer attacks . the primary insurance services insurers provide to policyholders include assessing damage , making payments on claims or through other arrangements such as annuities , and , for health insurers , ensuring access to medical services . a disruption to any of these services has the potential to negatively impact policyholders , holding up funds needed to repair property or pay living expenses and , in some cases , cutting off access to necessary medical attention . some large insurers have millions of policies , and while it is unlikely that all policyholders would require services at the same time , a disruption at one of these large insurers could affect a large number of people . those insurers that were in the areas affected by those events , even one with operations in the world trade center on 9 / 11 , said that they were able to restore operations within several days and that their policyholders did not experience a disruption in their service . however , all of the insurers said that the events of 9 / 11 had caused them to reassess and improve their business continuity capabilities . specifically , 13 of the insurers said that they now plan for wider - scale disruptions or have more comprehensive plans , 5 had increased their physical security , and 3 had increased the pace of previously planned business continuity improvements .