b . network protection , such as a firewall , an 47 . what other it security improvements , that you consider significant , have been installed or are planned for your wastewater treatment facility and associated infrastructure ? we did not summarize the narrative responses to this question for inclusion in this appendix . check only one answer . in 50 - 100 pound cylinders 2 . other ( please specify number below. ) don't know / no response 33 . ( if "other" ) by what other method is the chlorine transported and stored ? we did not summarize the narrative responses to this question for inclusion in this appendix . which one of the following changes , if any , has your wastewater treatment facility made in how it stores and uses gaseous chlorine and when did it make them ? check one in each row . converted chlorine to 35 . ( if you indicated "yes" for "made other physical security improvements" above ) what other physical security improvements to the gaseous chlorine storage area did your facility make ? we did not summarize the narrative responses to this question for inclusion in this appendix . does your wastewater treatment facility plan to stop using gaseous chlorine ? check only one answer . no ( go to question 40. ) don't know / no response ( go to question 40. ) when does your wastewater treatment facility plan to stop using gaseous chlorine ? responses ranged from november 2005 to january 2015 . most indicated that their facilities planned to discontinue their use of gaseous chlorine in 2006 and 2007 . how do you expect annual ( as opposed to capital ) costs at your wastewater treatment facility to be affected by converting to an alternative disinfection process ? check only one answer . costs will stay about the same 3 . don't know / no response 39 . what disinfection method does your wastewater treatment facility plan to use ? check only one answer . sodium hypochlorite ( transported to site ) 2 . sodium hypochlorite ( generated onsite ) 3 . don't know / no response 40 . what other chemicals , if any , are currently at your wastewater treatment facility , or will be in the future , that have the potential to cause significant harm and damage if used for terrorist activity ? we did not summarize the narrative responses to this question for inclusion in this appendix . for each chemical identified in 40 , if any , please indicate its use at your wastewater treatment facility . we did not summarize the narrative responses to this question for inclusion in this appendix . physical security measures 42 . for each of the following physical security measures that your wastewater treatment facility may have , was it completed before september 11 , 2001 , completed after september 11 , 2001 , is it planned but not yet completed , or is it not planned ? check one in each row . power sources operation ( e.g . smart pipes ) ( lel ) meters or 43 . what other physical security improvements , that you consider significant , have been installed or are planned for your wastewater treatment facility and associated infrastructure ?