other suggestions . in addition to suggestions on ways to improve the wyo program , two wyo companies and some stakeholders suggested other ways to improve nfip . for example , representatives of two wyo companies and some stakeholders suggested encouraging private - sector participation in flood insurance ( including eliminating a noncompete clause for wyo companies from the current arrangement , discussed later ) . in addition , one stakeholder suggested making flood coverage a mandatory component of homeowners insurance , establishing a different scale for quantifying flood risk , expanding policy choices through nfip or private - sector coverage , and more closely coordinating nfip and disaster assistance . fema officials told us they plan to reexamine and improve the wyo arrangement to allow for greater flexibility in the relationship between fema and wyo companies . in may 2016 , fema issued a proposed rule to remove the wyo arrangement from regulation to make operational adjustments and corrections to the arrangement more efficiently . fema officials told us that the agency does not plan to make changes to the arrangement for fiscal year 2017 . additionally , several stakeholders and wyo company representatives with whom we spoke suggested other possible alternative structures for the wyo program . these included increasing requirements for wyo companies , removing a noncompete clause in the wyo arrangement , and adopting the federal crop insurance program model , which shares some similarities with nfip but has some notable differences . limiting wyo participation or increasing wyo company requirements . representatives of several wyo companies suggested that maintaining the current wyo arrangement but limiting the number of wyo companies allowed to participate was another option . under this option , according to wyo representatives , wyo companies would not necessarily become federal contractors , but would compete , in a sense , for available spots in the program . fema officials said adding other requirements for wyo companies — rather than determining the number of wyo companies allowed to participate — would be another way to achieve fewer participating companies . removing noncompete clause . three stakeholders , including two industry groups representing insurance companies and a vendor , said removing a noncompete clause from the arrangement ( which generally prevents wyo companies from selling private flood policies ) would encourage continued participation in the program and also encourage greater private - sector involvement in insuring flood risk . the noncompete clause was also cited as a potential barrier to increased use of private flood insurance by various industry stakeholders with whom we spoke as part of work we completed in july 2016 on private sector involvement in flood insurance . adopting crop insurance model . one stakeholder suggested the federal crop insurance model as a possible alternative structure for the wyo program . similar to the agreements between fema and wyo companies , companies participating in the crop insurance program — 17 as of september 2016 — have a 1-year agreement with the federal crop insurance corporation to sell and service policies . the crop insurance agreement is not considered a contract for the purposes of the federal acquisition regulation .