checked for the appropriateness of expenditures . in reviewing the quarterly expenditure reports , cms officials told us that they assessed the appropriateness of expenditures . for example , the agency checked that the amounts claimed complied with federal requirements for matching funds . this limit is referred to as the spending limit . if a state exceeds the demonstration spending limit at the end of the demonstration period , it must return the excess federal funds . spending limits can be a per person limit that sets a dollar limit for each medicaid enrollee included in the demonstration in each month , a set dollar amount for the entire demonstration period regardless of the level of enrollment , or a combination of both . spending limits are calculated by establishing a spending base and applying a rate of growth over the period of the demonstration . the spending base generally reflects a recent year of state expenditures for populations included in the demonstration , and the growth rate to be applied is generally based on the lower of a state - specific historical growth rate or a federal nationwide estimate . different data elements may be required by cms to assess a state's compliance with the spending limit . for example , for a per person spending limit , which is generally a defined dollar limit per enrollee per month , cms needs both expenditure and enrollment data to assess compliance with the spending limit . cms is responsible for monitoring compliance with the stcs during the demonstration , including compliance with requirements around how medicaid funds can be spent and spending limits . monitoring efforts may include reviewing performance reports and quarterly financial reporting required under the stcs and discussing questions and concerns with the state . when a state seeks a renewal of a demonstration , that request offers cms an opportunity to negotiate revisions to the stcs with the state , which could include changes to spending limits and reporting requirements . ( see fig . states are required to report medicaid expenditures , including expenditures under demonstrations , to cms at the end of each quarter . cms reviews these expenditures on a quarterly basis for reasonableness . if , during the expenditure review , cms is uncertain as to whether a particular state expenditure is allowable , then cms may withhold payment pending further review ( referred to as a deferral ) . with regard to reporting on expenditures under demonstrations , the stcs dictate the level of detail that the state is required to include in the quarterly expenditure reporting . the flexibility afforded to states in their accrual and use of unspent funds may explain , in part , why cms has infrequently found that states exceed spending limits . agency officials told us the agency has only withheld federal funds once as a result of a state exceeding its spending limit . for example , they might require the state to report expenditures by population and by payment pool approved under the demonstration . among our selected states , we found that states could accrue significant amounts of unspent funds . for example , cms officials estimated that new york and california accrued billions of dollars in unspent funds .