in addition , h.r . 2886 as introduced would have provided a waiver allowing dhs to forego a financial statement audit for fiscal year 2003 . we understand an agreement has been reached to remove this waiver from the proposed legislation . dhs's 2003 audit is already underway and the department has stated it is committed to obtaining this audit . we believe that passage of h.r . 2886 will further assist dhs in meeting this goal . mr. chairman , as you know , h.r . 2886 as introduced on july 24 , 2003 would amend the cfo act to ( 1 ) add dhs as a cfo act agency and remove fema as a cfo act agency , ( 2 ) require dhs to obtain an audit opinion on its internal controls , and ( 3 ) require dhs to include program performance information in its performance and accountability reports . the waiver option is , therefore , no longer needed , and we support dropping the provision from h.r . we supported passage of the cfo act in 1990 and continue to strongly support its objectives of ( 1 ) giving the congress and agency decision makers reliable financial , cost , and performance information both annually and , most important , as needed throughout the year to assist in managing programs and making difficult spending decisions , ( 2 ) dramatically improving financial management systems , controls , and operations to eliminate fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement and properly safeguard and manage the government's assets , and ( 3 ) establishing effective financial organizational structures to provide strong leadership . achieving these goals is critical for establishing effective financial management , and we fully support amending the cfo act to include dhs . in developing the cfo act , the congress viewed the cfo as being a critical player in the management of an agency . at the time , financial management was not a priority in most federal agencies and was all too often an afterthought . all too often , the top financial management official wore many hats , which left little time for financial management ; did not necessarily have any background in financial management ; and focused primarily on the budget . by establishing statutorily the position of cfo , requiring that the person in the position have strong qualifications and a proven track record in financial management , and giving this person status as a presidential appointee , the congress sought to change the then existing paradigm . of the 24 agencies named in the 1990 cfo act , 16 were designated as level iv , presidential appointee senate confirmation positions and eight were career positions . today , cfos have become influential across government and the quality of the appointees has borne out the wisdom of the congress's insistence that this position be elevated ( meaning it reported to the top and had standing with other top officials ) . we have seen an evolution of the cfo position and a quantum change in the expertise and abilities of cfos and the attractiveness of this position to someone having the type of proven track record in financial management that is needed in the federal government .