corporate information management . defense business operations fund . in october 1991 , dod established a new entity , the defense business operations fund by consolidating nine existing industrial and stock funds and five other activities operated throughout dod . through this consolidation , the fund was intended to bring greater visibility and management to the overall cost of carrying out certain critical dod business operations . however , from its inception , the fund was plagued by management problems . in 1996 , dod announced the fund's elimination . in its place , dod established four working capital funds . these new working capital funds inherited their predecessor's operational and financial reporting problems . defense reform initiative ( dri ) . in announcing the dri program in november 1997 , the then secretary of defense stated that his goal was “to ignite a revolution in business affairs.” dri represented a set of proposed actions aimed at improving the effectiveness and efficiency of dod's business operations , particularly in areas that have been long - standing problems — including financial management . in july 2000 , we reportedthat while dri got off to a good start and made progress in implementing many of the component initiatives , dri did not meet expected timeframes and goals , and the extent to which savings from these initiatives will be realized is yet to be determined . gao is currently examining the extent to which dri efforts begun under the previous administration are continuing . the past has clearly taught us that addressing the department's serious financial management problems will not be easy . early in his tenure , secretary rumsfeld commissioned a new study of the department's financial management operations . the report on the results of the study , transforming department of defense financial management: a strategy for change , was issued on april 13 , 2001 . the report recognized that the department will have to undergo “a radical financial management transformation” and that it would take more than a decade to achieve . the report concluded that many studies and interviews with current and former leaders in dod point to the same problems and frustrations , and that repetitive audit reports verify systemic problems illustrating the need for radical transformation in order to achieve success . secretary rumsfeld further confirmed the need for a fundamental transformation of dod in his “top - down” quadrennial defense review . specifically , his september 30 , 2001 , quadrennial defense review report concluded that the department must transform its outdated support structure , including decades old financial systems that are not well interconnected . the report summed up the challenge well in stating: “while america's business have streamlined and adopted new business models to react to fast - moving changes in markets and technologies , the defense department has lagged behind without an overarching strategy to improve its business practices. as part of our constructive engagement approach with dod , i met with secretary rumsfeld last summer to provide our perspectives on the underlying causes of the problems that have impeded past reform efforts at the department and to discuss options for addressing these challenges .