country threat . the coast guard uses security and commerce data as well as measures on government decision making , such as the prevalence of corruption , to assess the likelihood of terrorists using a foreign port to import wmds or other contraband into the united states . in particular , the coast guard relies on cbp trade information , the u.s. department of state's security environment threat list , world bank reports , and other data to determine whether countries represent a normal , medium , or high security risk . foreign port assessment . mtsa , as amended by the safe port act , requires the coast guard to reassess countries' ports every 3 years , and during these visits , ips officials use two data checklists , one that assesses government performance and one that assesses facilities' performance . what actions has dhs taken to help ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of its maritime supply chain security programs ? to address the first question , we identified how dhs's components assess risk to the supply chain associated with foreign ports and countries . specifically , we ( 1 ) gathered information on the criteria used to determine high - risk locations and the key stakeholders involved in developing any models or methodologies used to do so , ( 2 ) reviewed the methodology used to construct any models , and ( 3 ) determined the sufficiency of the models to identify high - risk locations . in particular , we reviewed the coast guard's ips model for determining operational decisions , the methodology cbp used to select csi ports , and the model developed by cbp and the department of energy ( doe ) for potentially expanding cargo - scanning operations at foreign ports . to the extent possible , we compared the relative risk of foreign ports generated by these models with the location of csi ports to determine the degree of correlation . as part of this process , we combined fiscal year 2012 data on the number of u.s. - bound shipments from foreign ports with data from the models and narrowed the list of ports based on a minimum of 1,000 u.s. - bound shipments — a step cbp took when developing its model in conjunction with doe . we assessed the reliability of the models by interviewing staff responsible for development of the methodologies and the data and reviewing documentation related to the development , application , and reviews of the models . we concluded that the models and data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . in addition , we interviewed cbp , coast guard , doe , and department of state officials about the process used for identifying high - risk locations , the stakeholders involved in this process , and the status of these efforts . we compared this information with safe port act requirements , key elements for a risk management approach , and the principles laid out in the national strategy for global supply chain security . we also reviewed our prior work on risk management practices and compared our analysis of cbp's actions with those practices .