discussion paper no . 31 ( december 2008 ) and gao , understanding the tax reform debate: background , criteria , & questions , gao - 05-1009sp ( washington , d.c.: sept. 1 , 2005 ) . million in tax year 2007 and 2.2 million in tax year 2000 . measured relative to the economy as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , corporate income tax receipts increased in the years leading up to the economic recession that began in december 2007 . during this period they increased from 2.1 percent of gdp in 2000 to 2.7 percent of gdp in 2007 and have since decreased to 1.2 percent of gdp in 2011 . both members of congress and the administration have outlined potential frameworks and proposals for modifying and simplifying the corporate income tax system in recent years . a number of these proposals have involved modifying or repealing some corporate tax expenditures to broaden the corporate income tax base and using the resulting revenue offset to reduce corporate income tax rates . one notable challenge for broader corporate tax reform is the degree to which changes to tax expenditures affect other types of taxpayers claiming them as most corporate tax expenditures are also available to other types of business entities other than corporations . in selecting activities to fund federal policy goals , congress can choose to enact a tax expenditure rather than a spending program or vice versa for a variety of reasons . we have developed and highlighted criteria and questions for evaluating tax expenditures , including whether other policy tools , such as spending programs , are preferable to tax expenditures . in addition , we have long reported that , once enacted , tax expenditures and their relative contributions toward achieving federal missions and goals are often less visible than spending programs , which are subject to a more systematic review of performance , including results . more recently , the government performance and results act ( gpra ) modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) established a framework for providing a more crosscutting and integrated approach to focusing on results and improving government performance , including for tax expenditures . gprama makes clear that the office of management and budget , in coordination with federal agencies , is to identify , among other things , the various federal agencies , program activities , and tax expenditures that contribute to the federal government's performance plan that defines the level of performance to be achieved toward crosscutting priority goals . these crosscutting priority goals cover a limited number of policy areas as well as goals to improve management across the federal government . moving forward , gprama implementation can help inform tough choices in setting priorities as policymakers address the rapidly building fiscal pressures facing our national government . estimated revenue losses from corporate tax expenditures have increased over the last few decades in constant dollars , as shown in figure 1 . after decreasing in the years following the tax reform act of 1986 , due to changes to both tax rates and tax expenditures , corporate revenue losses increased thereafter . individual revenue losses also increased , although at a faster pace than corporate revenue losses .