usaid conducted preaward risk assessments in most cases . however , we found that usaid's policies for assessing direct assistance risks do not require preaward risk assessments in all cases . usaid has not updated its policies to reflect the usaid administrator's july 2010 commitment to congress that usaid would assess all afghan public institutions before providing them with direct assistance . we found that in august 2010 and january 2011 , usaid did not complete preaward risk assessments before awarding funds to two afghan government entities . usaid has established various financial and other controls in its bilateral direct assistance agreements with ministries that go beyond what is required by its policies . however , it has not always ensured compliance with those controls . dod personnel in afghanistan have assessed the risk of providing funds to mod and moi through quarterly reviews of each ministry's capacity . dod established formal procedures on risk assessment for afghan direct assistance in june 2011 after we informed dod officials that dod lacked such procedures . we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we focused on awards or contributions of u.s. funds that are channeled through the afghan government national budget for use by afghan ministries or other government entities , consistent with usaid and dod definitions and practices . to assess steps taken by usaid and dod to help ensure the accountability of their bilateral and multilateral direct assistance to the afghan government , we reviewed the policies and practices the agencies use to assess risks associated with direct assistance and to establish control mechanisms over the use of direct assistance funds . we applied criteria drawn from gao's standards for internal control in the federal government , which defines risk assessment and control activities as key elements of an internal control framework to provide reasonable assurance that agency assets are safeguarded against fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . risk assessment includes identifying internal and external risks an organization faces and their potential effect . control activities are the policies and procedures ( such as approvals , reconciliations , and reviews ) agencies implement to mitigate identified risks and are essential for accountability of government resources . we also used criteria from usaid and dod guidance concerning direct assistance . we conducted this performance audit from august 2010 to july 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . details on our objectives , scope , and methodology are contained in appendix i . decades of conflict have left afghanistan a poor nation with high illiteracy , weak government institutions , and a high level of corruption . according to transparency international's index of perceived corruption , afghanistan is tied with burma as the world's second most corrupt nation . the united states has allocated about $56 billion for fiscal years 2002 to 2010 to reconstruct afghanistan , as shown in table 1 .