these are called the flight and operations project offices . the flight project office oversees the spacecraft , instruments , and launch services . the operations project office oversees the ground elements and on - orbit operations of the satellites . the project manager for the flight project office and the deputy project manager for operations project office are designated to be filled with nasa personnel . additionally , noaa has located the program office at nasa's goddard space flight center . noaa's acquisition strategy was to award contracts for the preliminary design of the goes - r system to several vendors who would subsequently compete for the contract to be the single prime contractor responsible for overall system development and production . as such , in october 2005 , noaa awarded contracts for the preliminary design of the overall goes - r system to three vendors . in addition , to reduce the risks associated with developing technically advanced instruments , nasa awarded contracts for the preliminary designs for five of the originally planned instruments . nasa expected to subsequently award development contracts for these instruments and to eventually turn them over to the prime contractor responsible for the overall goes - r program . noaa has completed preliminary design studies of its goes - r procurement . in addition , the agency recently decided to separate the space and ground elements of the program into two separate contracts to be managed by nasa and noaa , respectively . however , this change has delayed a key decision to proceed with the acquisition , which was planned for september 2007 . further , independent estimates are higher than the program's current $7 billion cost estimate and convey a low level of confidence in the program's schedule for launching the first satellite by 2014 . as noaa works to reconcile the independent estimate with its own program office estimate , costs are likely to grow and schedules are likely to be delayed . noaa and nasa have made progress on goes - r . the program office has completed preliminary design studies of the overall goes - r system and has initiated development work on most of the planned instruments . specifically , the noaa - issued contracts for the preliminary design of the overall goes - r system to three vendors have ended , and the designs have been completed . in addition , after completing preliminary designs on five of the originally planned instruments , nasa awarded development contracts for three of them . further , the most critical of these instruments — the advanced baseline imager — has completed a major development milestone . in february 2007 , it passed a critical design review gate and nasa approved the contractor to begin production of a prototype model . noaa recently made a number of key changes in how it plans to acquire the goes - r system . originally , noaa planned to award and manage a single prime contract for the acquisition and operation of the integrated system . however , an independent review team assessed the program and found that this approach was risky .