iss research is meritorious and valid . this body should also be able to strategically prioritize research proposed by many potential sponsors . ensure that potential and actual iss users have access to scientific or technical expertise , either in - house or external , in the areas of research relevant to the iss that can provide assistance to users as required . in commenting on a draft of this report , nasa concurred with all seven recommendations . nasa's written comments are reprinted in appendix ii . nasa also provided technical comments which were incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to nasa's administrator and interested congressional committees . the report also is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are provided in appendix iii . to identify how the international space station ( iss ) is being utilized at present , we reviewed national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) documentation pertaining to available on - station hardware and current scientific investigations that are using this hardware , including the consolidated operations and utilization plan 2008-2015 ; the reference guide to the international space station ; and nasa's iss science prioritization desk instruction . retirement of the iss is in part predicated on the life of its components . iss research decision making , including the selection of all u.s. research to be conducted on board and ensuring that all u.s . in addition to the transportation issues , high costs and limited funding , and limited crew time⎯challenges exacerbated by the possibility of retirement of the iss in 2015⎯nasa may face challenges in the management and operation of iss national laboratory research . there is currently no direct analogue to the iss national laboratory , and though nasa currently manages research programs at the jet propulsion laboratory and its other centers that it believes possess similar characteristics to other national laboratories , nasa has limited experience managing the type of diverse scientific research and technology demonstration portfolio that the iss could eventually represent . if utilized to its full capabilities , the iss research program could cross multiple research disciplines and involve researchers from the academic , governmental , and commercial sectors , management of which may be outside of nasa's core competencies . we studied other national laboratories and large , multidisciplinary science programs to learn how they are managed and to identify possible lessons learned that could be applicable to management of the iss . we also met with officials from nasa somd and nasa esmd , and we spoke with researchers from academia , specifically researchers from north carolina state university , arizona state university , case western university , the university of colorado - boulder , medical college of wisconsin , georgia institute of technology , northwestern university , and pennsylvania state university .