curtailments . when officers cut short their tours in a language - designated position , there is often no officer with the requisite language skills available to fill the position . some officers we spoke to said that in some cases , they had to cut short their language training to come to post earlier than expected in order to fill a position vacated by an officer who had curtailed . for example , the regional security officers in ankara and tunis said that they left language training after only a few months in order to replace officers who had curtailed to iraq or elsewhere . in addition , several officers in shenyang said that they had to leave language training early in order to fill gaps at post . position freeze . in recent years , state has left dozens of positions vacant — or “frozen” them — in order to fully staff missions in iraq and afghanistan . officers at several posts we visited said that in order to avoid further shortages at post , the geographic bureaus , at times , have chosen to freeze training positions , rather than overseas positions . consequently , there is no officer currently in language training for these positions , and posts will either have to request a language waiver or hope that the incumbent already has language skills when filling the position . in 2009 , state received funding for an additional 450 positions , including 300 dedicated to language training . according to the department , these positions will help to increase the training float and reduce gaps at post while officers are in language training . state officials have said that if their fiscal year 2010 request for an additional 200 training positions is approved , they expect to see language gaps close starting in 2011 ; however , state has not indicated when its foreign language staffing requirements will be completely met , and previous staffing increases have been consumed by higher priorities . for example , in 2003 , state officials stated that the increased hiring under the department's diplomatic readiness initiative would create a training float to help eliminate the foreign language gaps at overseas posts within several years . although the initiative enabled state to hire more than 1,000 employees above attrition , it did not reduce the language gaps , as most of this increase was absorbed by the demand for personnel in iraq and afghanistan , and thus the training reserve was not achieved . another challenge to state's efforts to address its language shortfalls is the persistent perception among foreign service officers that state's promotion system undervalues language training ; however , while hr officials told us that the system values language training , the department has not conducted a systematic assessment to refute the perceptions . officers at several posts we visited stated a belief that long - term training , specifically advanced training in hard languages , hinders their promotion chances .