we are not making any recommendations in this report . future costs were not discounted . the analysis did not clearly discuss the baseline that was used to estimate incremental costs and benefits ( i.e. , institute for defense analyses officials explained to us that the adm capability was evaluated against a baseline that was not a single facility , but rather a combination of the hhs ciadms and other similar facilities owned by private contract manufacturing organizations ) . the analysis assumed that development and manufacturing costs of the dod - dedicated adm capability and the alternatives would be roughly comparable , but did not assess some plausible adjustments to this assumption in a sensitivity analysis . according to the institute for defense analyses official overseeing the analysis , data used to develop the estimate of time savings — the primary benefit of having a dod - dedicated adm capability , according to the analysis — were anecdotal and were not assessed for reliability due to time constraints ; additionally , industry changes limit the usefulness of retrospective studies . where i is the interest rate and t is the number of years from the date of initiation for the program or policy until the given future year . the departments of defense ( dod ) and health and human services ( hhs ) deemed some of the information in our may report to be sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information about dod's advanced development and manufacturing ( adm ) facility and hhs's three centers for innovation in advanced development and manufacturing ( ciadm ) facilities . although the information provided in this report is more limited , the report addresses the same objectives as the sensitive report and uses the same methodology . in this report , we ( 1 ) describe the information that dod included in its report to address the six elements required by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 , and ( 2 ) present additional information related to each element that may be useful to congress in its oversight role regarding dod's adm capability . to address our objectives , we compared the six elements required by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 with dod's report to congress to meet the congressional mandate and with the cost - benefit analysis included in the 2016 dod - commissioned institute for defense analyses report to dod that was also submitted to congress . we reviewed dod's report , the cost - benefit analysis conducted for dod by the institute for defense analyses and incorporated into dod's report , and documents from the institute for defense analyses that supported its study .