washington . d.c.: september 7 , 1990. international terrorism: status of gao's review of the fbi's international terrorism program . is this too much ? perhaps the more salient question is , is this too little ? it is probably unrealistic to ask the fbi or anyone else for the answer to this question at this time , given that the government's information about the nature and extent of the terrorist threat is still evolving . however , this is a question that must be answered in due course based on a comprehensive threat assessment and analysis , including the role the fbi and other government agencies should play in our future counterterrorism efforts . according to the fbi , the special agents in charge ( sacs ) of the 56 field offices were asked to indicate how many agents could be redirected into terrorism work in their locations without unduly jeopardizing other investigative work . in fact , sacs generally volunteered more agents to shift to counterterrorism work than were actually shifted . according to the fbi , sacs were given general guidance but not specific guidelines or other directives upon which to base their decisions concerning reallocation of resources . thus , for good or ill , field offices may have used different criteria for determining how many resources could be reallocated . fbi headquarters made final reallocation decisions based on resource needs requested by the executive assistant director for counterterrorism / counterintelligence . careful monitoring will be needed to ensure that the agents to be devoted to counterterrorism can be appropriately utilized and to what extent additional resources will be needed . conversely , the impact of having fewer field agents working drug cases needs to be monitored and assessed over time . prior to september 11 , 2001 , there was no indication from the fbi that their more traditional crime areas were overstaffed . fbi officials advised us that agents will still participate in as many crime - fighting taskforces as they have in the past , but that the number of agents assigned to each effort will be fewer in order to free resources for counterterrorism work . fbi officials also indicated that agents would be made available to assist state and local law enforcement with short - term needs , such as adding agents when widespread arrests are planned . in the drug area , which is the hardest hit in this reallocation , the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) is the major federal player . while dea's resources have increased in recent years , at this time we are not aware of any plans by doj to request additional resources for dea to fill any gap that may be left by withdrawal of substantial fbi drug enforcement resources . dea has announced , though , that it will move some agents from headquarters to the field , which could potentially help fill any gaps in federal - level drug law enforcement . the reorganization plan also calls for a build - up of the fbi headquarters counterterrorism division through the transfer of 150 counterterrorism agents from field locations to washington , d.c .