further , it is grown in over 100 countries . the actual number and amount of pesticides used on tobacco or other crops in any given year vary depending on factors such as the weather and the specific pests that become problematic . for example , the incidence of many plant diseases is closely correlated to the amount of rainfall , resulting in greater use of fungicides in years with high rainfall . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . this report provides information on ( 1 ) the pesticides commonly used on tobacco and the potential health risks associated with them ; ( 2 ) how the environmental protection agency ( epa ) assesses and mitigates health risks associated with pesticides used on tobacco ; and ( 3 ) how , and the extent to which , epa , u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , and other federal agencies regulate and monitor pesticide residues on tobacco . in addition , this report provides information on the regulatory residue limits adopted by three countries that are significant importers of tobacco grown in the united states . to identify the chemicals commonly used on tobacco , we reviewed pesticide - use databases developed by the national center for food and agricultural policy ( ncfap ) , a nonprofit research organization , under a cooperative agreement with usda . these databases summarized national use of 235 pesticides on 87 food and nonfood crops for the period 1990 though 1998 . these databases , compiled from more than 130 federal and state surveys and reports , include pesticide use on cropland in the coterminous 48 states and do not include new pesticides approved by epa since 1997 . we also reviewed data from national surveys conducted in the 1990s by the u.s. geological survey and usda and from several tobacco - producing states — kentucky , north carolina , tennessee , and virginia . in total , 53 pesticides were identified as being used on tobacco in one or more of the surveys . of these , 37 were identified in one or more of the surveys that included national data , and we refer to this latter group as the pesticides that were commonly used on tobacco in the united states during the 1990s . to identify the adverse health effects associated with these 37 pesticides , we collected and reviewed relevant human health risk assessments prepared by epa's office of pesticide programs . where such assessments were not available , we reviewed documents from academic experts who maintain a database on pesticides and other toxic chemicals for usda , and other programs within epa .