( see fig . caregiver support program officials told us that after 3 years of operation , demand for the family caregiver program remains high: system - wide , there has been no appreciable decrease in the number of caregivers submitting applications for the program . step 6: caregiver training . the caregiver must complete the program's training class , which is offered online , through self - instruction with a workbook and a cd or dvd , or where available , through 2 days of facilitated classroom instruction . the training covers 10 competencies , including self - care , nutrition , and medication management . step 7: home visit . within 10 days after the caregiver completes the training , an initial home visit is conducted to determine if the caregiver has the physical capacity and skills necessary to provide medical care to the veteran , and if the home is safe and adequately equipped . since the initial home visit includes physical assessment and medical components , it must be completed by a medical professional such as a registered nurse , nurse practitioner , clinical nurse specialist , physician assistant or physician . when a veteran requires a caregiver due to a mental health diagnosis , the home visit is to be completed by or in collaboration with a mental health provider . step 8: notification of program eligibility . once the home visit assessment has been completed and the results confirm that the caregiver is prepared to provide satisfactory care of the veteran , the csc completes the final approval of the caregiver . the stipend amounts are organized into three tiers . the stipend amount that the caregiver could receive is based on the assigned tier level and the geographic location of the veteran's residence . tier 3 indicates the highest level of injury and need for a caregiver and has the highest level of payment , while tiers 2 and 1 indicate the lower levels of injury and correspondingly lower levels of payment . step 4: eligibility determination for the caregiver . while the veteran's eligibility is being verified , the csc determines the caregiver's eligibility for the program by conducting an assessment of the caregiver's ability to serve in that role , either through a phone call or in - person meeting . step 5: review of program services . once the veteran and caregiver have been determined eligible for the program , the csc schedules a joint meeting to discuss the types of family caregiver program services for which they may be eligible once they complete the application process and are approved for participation in the program . this would include a discussion of the stipend payment as well as potential coverage through champva . this entails sending approval paperwork to the caregiver , including the direct deposit form for the stipend , and updating the relevant vha systems , including the program's it system and the veteran's medical record . the caregiver support program office also permits home visits to be conducted by telephone after 1 year of satisfactory home visits has been completed for cases that do not pose exceptional medical risk . vha officials significantly underestimated the demand for the family caregiver program .