gao - 07-214 . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2007 . medicaid financial management: steps taken to improve federal oversight but other actions needed to sustain efforts . gao - 06-705 . washington , d.c.: june 22 , 2006 . yet more can be done to enhance the transparency of cms oversight . consequently , we believe our recommendations regarding the clarification and communication of allowable financing arrangements remain valid . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the committee may have . for future contacts regarding this testimony , please contact marjorie kanof at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or kanofm@gao.gov . katherine iritani , assistant director ; ted burik ; tim bushfield ; tom moscovitch ; and terry saiki made key contributions to this statement . medicaid financing: federal oversight initiative is consistent with medicaid payment principles but needs greater transparency . medicaid: states' efforts to maximize federal reimbursements highlight need for improved federal oversight . gao - 05-836t . washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2005 . medicaid financing: states' use of contingency - fee consultants to maximize federal reimbursements highlights need for improved federal oversight . gao - 05-748 . washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2005 . high - risk series: an update . gao - 05-207 . washington , d.c.: january 2005 . medicaid: intergovernmental transfers have facilitated state financing schemes . gao - 04-574t . washington , d.c.: march 18 , 2004 . medicaid: improved federal oversight of state financing schemes is needed . gao - 04-228 . washington , d.c.: february 13 , 2004 . major management challenges and program risks: department of health and human services . gao - 03-101 . washington , d.c.: january 2003 . we have not reported on cms's may 2007 rule . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , we have reported for more than a decade on varied financing arrangements that inappropriately increase federal medicaid matching payments . in reports issued from 1994 through 2005 , we reported on various arrangements whereby states received federal matching funds by paying certain government providers , such as county owned or operated nursing homes , amounts that greatly exceeded established medicaid rates . the large payments were often temporary since some states required the government providers to return all or most of the money to the states . states used the federal matching funds received for these payments — which essentially made a round - trip from the states to providers and back to the states — at their own discretion . such financing arrangements had significant fiscal implications for the federal government and states . the exact amount of additional federal medicaid funds generated through these arrangements is not known , but was in the billions of dollars . despite congressional and cms action taken during those years to limit such arrangements , we found in recent years that improved federal oversight of such arrangements was needed . they shift costs inappropriately from the states to the federal government , and take funding intended for medicaid providers , who do not under these arrangements retain the full payments .