funding . hhs administers a number of federal funding sources that states said they used for their foster family recruitment and retention efforts . for example , in our survey , states most often cited using child welfare funds under title iv - e and iv - b of the social security act for these purposes in fiscal year 2016 ( see fig . acf also provided a number of discretionary grants to support state efforts to recruit and retain foster families through the adoption opportunities program , which funds projects designed to eliminate barriers to adoption and help find permanent families for children , particularly older children , minority children , and those with special needs . specifically , acf awarded cooperative agreements to 22 states , localities , and non - profit organizations in fiscal years 2008 through 2013 for 5-year projects that aim to enhance recruitment efforts and improve permanency outcomes for children , among other things . for example , acf awarded a cooperative agreement in 2010 to the county child welfare agency in los angeles , california to launch a project that targeted recruitment efforts to prospective foster families in african american , latino , lgbt , and deaf communities to increase permanency outcomes for their foster care population . in addition , it awarded a cooperative agreement in 2013 to oregon's state child welfare agency to implement a project that focused on developing customer service concepts in working with foster families , increasing community partnerships , and using data to inform recruitment efforts and outcome measures . in addition , acf also awarded two cooperative agreements to spaulding for children to develop training for prospective and current foster and adoptive families . the first , awarded in fiscal year 2016 , was for a 3-year project to develop a foster and adoptive parent training program to prepare families who can care for children who have high needs , such as children needing therapeutic foster care services . the second , awarded in fiscal year 2017 , was for a 5-year project to develop a foster and adoptive parent training program for all individuals interested in becoming a foster family or adopting a child from foster care or internationally . in response to our survey , many states reported that they found these federal supports helpful to their recruitment and retention efforts . for example , guidance and information , such as the electronic newsletters , publications , and webinars provided by the center , were cited most often by states as being moderately or very helpful ( 31 states ) . over half the states reported that networking opportunities , such as peer - to - peer networking events facilitated by the center , and technical assistance provided by the center were moderately or very helpful to their efforts ( 28 and 27 states , respectively ) . however , similar to concerns raised by all 14 private providers in the three selected states about communication issues with child welfare agencies , several private providers told us they have not received guidance or information from these agencies about recruiting and retaining foster families , and most were unaware of some of the supports provided by acf .