attorneys to use the data . from both databases , we examined data on lawsuits filed in federal court from october 1 , 1994 , through september 30 , 2010 ( i.e. , fiscal year 1995 through fiscal year 2010 ) that were identified as brought under 10 environmental statutes and led by epa . we excluded cases involving the freedom of information act and contract , employment , or other generally applicable laws under which epa may also have been sued . we also excluded cases filed under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , which applies to major federal actions significantly affecting the environment , because , according to justice , few nepa cases are filed against epa , and such cases are generally handled by the u.s. attorneys' offices and other sections of the environment and natural resources division , such that significantly more time would be required to include them . to get their views on any environmental litigation trends and the factors that underlie them , we interviewed a nonprobability sample of the following stakeholders: officials from epa and justice ; representatives of six environmental groups , six industry associations , and the national association of attorneys general ; representatives of six state attorneys general or state environmental offices ; and a university law professor who is expert in data on citizen suits . the findings from our interviews with stakeholders cannot be generalized to those to whom we did not speak . nevertheless , eaja makes epa subject to fee awards under all the environmental statutes' provisions authorizing courts to award attorney fees and expenses . by employing an iterative electronic and manual process to standardize the court numbers associated with all cases and matching cases from the two systems by these numbers , we were ultimately able to merge the two sets of data on environmental litigation cases managed by justice's environment and natural resources division and the u.s. attorneys' offices for purposes of this report . justice officials said , however , that they do not plan to change their approach to managing the data because they use the data in each system to manage individual cases , not to identify and summarize agencywide data on cases or trends . officials said that their systems were designed for internal management purposes and not agencywide statistical tracking . furthermore , while funds are spent to maintain the systems , officials indicated that the systems are old , and adding data fields or otherwise making changes to the systems may be technically infeasible or too costly . justice officials said that the department previously sought to develop and implement a single case management system to gather common data agencywide , but the project was terminated in 2010 after a 2009 office of the inspector general report found that the project was more than 2 years behind the initial estimated completion date and that the project's total cost would be more than $18 million over budget . because the two justice components are not regularly required to merge and report their data in a systematic way , we are not making a recommendation regarding these data or systems .