gao - 13-465 . washington , d.c.: aug. 22 , 2013 . we agree with this suggestion and made the change . gao - 10-946r . washington , d.c.: sept. 24 , 2010 . as uspto further develops its goals and performance indicators , we encourage the agency to more clearly link these goals and indicators to its definition of patent quality . in response to our seventh recommendation , uspto said that , contrary to the draft report's findings , uspto's initial conclusion was that a glossary did not make a meaningful difference in quality during the prosecution of an application , though the uspto is still analyzing whether the use of a glossary has a long - term impact on a patent . in response to this comment , we revised the statement in the report to more closely align with the information that uspto officials presented at its march 8 , 2016 , patent quality chat on the issue . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of commerce , the director of the uspto , the commissioner for patents , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to examine recent trends in patent infringement litigation , we obtained patent infringement litigation data from two companies — rpx inc. and lex machina — that included all of the patent infringement lawsuits filed in all 94 federal district courts between 2007 and 2015 . these data included information on the patents asserted in each suit , the defendants involved , and the federal district court where the suit was filed . we conducted data quality testing on the data from rpx and lex machina to look for missing or out of range values , interviewed relevant officials , and reviewed relevant documentation for the data and found the data to be sufficiently reliable to determine recent trends in patent infringement lawsuits . we also conducted 11 semi - structured interviews with stakeholders from technology companies , venture capital investors , and others knowledgeable about recent patent infringement litigation . in addition , we reviewed published literature on the patent system , including reports from patent researchers , the federal trade commission , and the congressional budget office . to examine what additional opportunities exist , if any , to improve patent quality , we reviewed relevant laws and uspto documents and interviewed uspto officials and representatives of the examiners' union — the patent office professional association . we interviewed four supervisory patent examiners and six patent examiners from a variety of technology areas .