network . at the same time dod is developing jtrs for future forces , it is striving to at the same time dod is developing jtrs for future forces , it is striving to ensure that current forces are equipped with legacy radios to carry out ensure that current forces are equipped with legacy radios to carry out assigned missions . dod is confronted with the challenge of balancing the assigned missions . dod is confronted with the challenge of balancing the investment in both current and future radios — a dynamic proposition investment in both current and future radios — a dynamic proposition given that current needs change and future capabilities do not necessarily given that current needs change and future capabilities do not necessarily proceed predictably . to determine whether dod and the military services proceed predictably . to determine whether dod and the military services are acquiring radios in the most cost - efficient and effective manner and are acquiring radios in the most cost - efficient and effective manner and have developed a strategy to balance near - and long - term requirements , address capability gaps , and determine funding needs , the subcommittee requested that gao study how effectively dod and the military services are managing the acquisition of radio systems . specifically , we ( 1 ) examined how the services' planned investments in key tactical radio systems have changed over the last 5 years , ( 2 ) determined why these changes occurred , and ( 3 ) identified challenges that will confront the services as they plan tactical radio investments to provide desired future capabilities . we conducted this performance audit from july 2007 to july 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . first , cost , schedule , and performance problems delayed development of jtrs capabilities by several years . second , combat operations in afghanistan and iraq have significantly increased the demand for tactical radios - - a demand that could only be met by buying legacy radios . the demand was driven by a desire to equip deploying units with modern radios and a change in concept of operations that calls for more radios per unit . the resultant investment in legacy radios evolved from year to year as needs arose and was largely enabled by the availability of supplemental funding . although a notification process was established to help manage the transition from legacy radios to jtrs , it was not effective in tracking the extent of investments in legacy radios that occurred . as we have previously reported , developing jtrs has proven to be a significant technical and management challenge . a few years into system development , the program experienced considerable cost and schedule overruns and performance shortfalls , necessitating a major restructuring of the program in 2006 . as a result , considerably more time and funding were added to complete the first increment of jtrs . the revised schedules for each of the jtrs program components expanded development times by several years ( see fig .