gao - 07-293 . washington , d.c.: february 28 , 2007 . aviation security: progress made in systematic planning to guide key investment decisions , but more work remains . gao - 07-448t . washington , d.c.: february 13 , 2007 . border security: us - visit program faces strategic , operational , and technological challenges at land ports of entry . gao - 07-248 . washington , d.c.: december 6 , 2006 . personal information: key federal privacy laws do not require information resellers to safeguard all sensitive data . i will now discuss each of these subjects in greater detail . many concerns have been raised about the potential for data mining programs to compromise personal privacy . in our may 2004 report on federal data mining efforts , we defined data mining as the application of database technology and techniques — such as statistical analysis and modeling — to uncover hidden patterns and subtle relationships in data and to infer rules that allow for the prediction of future results . as we noted in our report , mining government and private databases containing personal information raises a range of privacy concerns . in the government , data mining was initially used to detect financial fraud and abuse . however , its use has greatly expanded . among other purposes , data mining has been used increasingly as a tool to help detect terrorist threats through the collection and analysis of public and private sector data . through data mining , agencies can quickly and efficiently obtain information on individuals or groups from large databases containing personal information aggregated from public and private records . information can be developed about a specific individual or a group of individuals whose behavior or characteristics fit a specific pattern . for example , terrorists can be tracked through travel and immigration records , and potential terrorist - related activities , including money transfers and communications , can be pinpointed . the ease with which organizations can use automated systems to gather and analyze large amounts of previously isolated information raises concerns about the impact on personal privacy . as a july 2006 report by the dhs privacy office points out , “privacy and civil liberties issues potentially arise in every phase of the data mining process.” potential privacy risks include improper access or disclosure of personal information , erroneous associations of individuals with undesirable activities , misidentification of individuals with similar names , and misuse of data that were collected for other purposes . our recent report notes that early attention to privacy in developing a data mining tool known as advise ( analysis , dissemination , visualization , insight , and semantic enhancement ) could reduce risks that personal information could be misused . advise is a data mining tool under development intended to help dhs analyze large amounts of information . it is designed to allow an analyst to search for patterns in data — such as relationships among people , organizations , and events — and to produce visual representations of these patterns , referred to as semantic graphs . the intended benefit of the advise tool is to help detect threatening activities by facilitating the analysis of large amounts of data .