( see fig . for complete applications , fda may make one of five decisions . fda may ( 1 ) issue an order approving the application , which allows the manufacturer to begin marketing the device ; ( 2 ) send the manufacturer an approvable letter pending a gmp inspection , which indicates that fda should be able to approve the device after the agency finds that the manufacturer's device establishment is in compliance with gmp requirements ; ( 3 ) send the manufacturer an approvable letter indicating that the agency should be able to approve the device if the manufacturer can make minor corrections or clarifications to the application ; ( 4 ) issue a “not approvable” letter informing the manufacturer that fda does not believe that the application can be approved because the data provided by the manufacturer do not demonstrate that the device is reasonably safe and effective ; or ( 5 ) issue an order denying approval of the application , which informs the manufacturer that the agency has completed its scientific review , identified major safety and effectiveness problems , and decided not to approve the application . fda may refer complete applications to an external advisory committee for evaluation when a device is the first of its kind or when the agency believes it would be useful to have independent expertise and technical assistance to properly evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the device . for applications referred to an advisory committee , the committee submits recommendations to fda on the safety and effectiveness of the devices . taking the committee's recommendations into consideration , fda then makes its decision . for incomplete applications , that is , applications for which fda determines it needs significant additional information , fda issues a “major deficiency letter” to the manufacturer identifying the information that is required to provide reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the device . this request for significant information is an action referred to as a cycle action . the two mdufma performance goals that fda must meet for fiscal years 2003 and 2004 are tied to the same type of cycle action for different types of applications . one performance goal applies to the cycle action taken on pmas , panel - track supplements , and premarket reports , and the other performance goal applies to expedited pmas . to meet each performance goal , fda must review the completeness of a manufacturer's response to an approvable letter pending minor corrections or clarifications and make a decision within 30 days of receiving the manufacturer's amendment . fda must meet this time frame on 90 percent of the applications for which it takes a cycle action ( see table 1 ) . in fiscal year 2005 , 20 mdufma performance goals will become effective , including the 2 performance goals that have been effective since fiscal year 2003 ( see table 2 ) . the 20 performance goals will apply to eight types of applications identified under mdufma and will be tied to other cycle actions and decisions fda makes on the applications during the review process . fda had limited data that could be used to measure the agency's performance against most of the mdufma performance goals .