( see fig . enrollment in the three plans with prescription drug coverage — h , i , and j — is relatively low ( a total of 8 percent of standardized plan enrollment ) for several reasons . ( see app . we relied on naic data containing filings as of december 31 , 1999 , for the 50 states and the district of columbia . these data represent policies in force as of 1999 , including pre - standardized policies , standardized policies , and policies for individuals living in three states in which insurers are exempt from the federal standardized policies ( i.e. please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7118 or john dicken , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7043 if you have any questions . rashmi agarwal , susan anthony , and carmen - rivera lowitt also made major contributions to this report . to assess issues related to medigap plan enrollment and premiums incurred by beneficiaries who purchase medigap plans , we analyzed data collected on the national association of insurance commisioners' ( naic ) 1999 medicare supplement insurance experience exhibit . we also analyzed the 1998 medicare current beneficiary survey ( mcbs ) to examine out - of - pocket costs paid by medicare beneficiaries with medigap policies . to assess the availability of medigap plans across states and to individuals who are not in their open - enrollment periods we examined consumer guides for medicare beneficiaries published by many states and by the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) . ( appendix ii further discusses our review of these consumer guides and the number of insurers offering standardized medigap plans. ) additionally , we interviewed researchers and representatives from insurers , hcfa , naic , and several state insurance regulators . we conducted our work from march 2001 through july 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we relied on data collected on the naic's 1999 medicare supplement insurance experience exhibit for information on medigap enrollment by plan type and premiums per covered life by plan type and across states . under federal and state statutes , insurers selling medigap plans annually file reports , known as the medicare supplement insurance experience exhibit , with the naic . naic then distributes the exhibit information to the states . these exhibits are used as preliminary indicators , in conjunction with other information , as to whether insurers meet federal requirements that at least a minimum percentage of premiums earned are spent on beneficiaries' medical expenses , referred to as loss ratios . additionally , insurers report information on various aspects of medigap plans including plan type , premiums earned , the number of covered lives , as well as other plan characteristic information and a contact for the insurer . , massachusetts , minnesota , and wisconsin ) . an initial analysis of the 1999 data set revealed that several insurers failed to include or did not designate a valid plan type on their filings . as part of our data cleaning , we reclassified some of these filings to include or correct the plan type based on information reported in other sections of the insurance exhibit .