the department had no comments on our recommendation . we have also previously reported on agencies' it workforce planning efforts . specifically , in november 2016 we identified eight key it workforce planning activities based on relevant laws and guidance and noted that the five federal departments in our review , including treasury , had mixed progress in addressing the activities . we made one recommendation to treasury and the department agreed with our recommendation . the performance of selected irs it investments has varied . in this regard , we found that the four selected investments in development had spent less than planned , and that most were behind schedule and had delivered less scope than planned . in addition most of these investments had significant variances , meaning that actual cost , schedule , or scope varied from plans by more than 10 percent . for the five selected investments in the operations and maintenance phase , we found that most had met all of their operational performance targets and all performed operational analyses required by omb . however , none of the analyses addressed all key factors specified in omb's guidance . best practices highlight the importance of monitoring the performance of projects in development by comparing actual cost , schedule , and scope to plans in order to allow appropriate corrective actions if actual performance deviates significantly from planned performance . with regard to the four selected investments in development that we reviewed , irs reported cost , schedule , and scope performance information for ecm , cade 2 , and rrp , but the agency reported only cost and schedule information for aca . table 1 provides details reported by the agency on the performance of these it investments . regarding ecm , the agency reported that it spent $1.5 million less than budgeted , had an approximately 9 percent schedule overrun for the three projects it worked on during the time frame of our review , and delivered about 90 percent of planned scope . however , after 18 months of working with a contractor , the agency paused all development activities for the investment because the product that was being delivered did not meet the agency's needs . specifically , according to agency officials , including the cio , the contractor's solution was not sufficiently automated to be scalable across the agency . thus , irs subsequently established a new effort to acquire a product that would be aligned with its business needs . the officials stated that the strategy for acquiring the new product includes collaboration with other agencies on experiences in implementing enterprise case management systems and requesting information on potential solutions from commercial vendors . regarding cade 2 , irs reported that it spent $4 million less than it budgeted , had a 54 percent schedule overrun for the 15 projects it worked on during the time frame of our review , and delivered 46 percent of the planned scope . officials responsible for managing cade 2 stated that the cost , schedule , and scope variances from planned performance were due to human resource and funding shortages .