attorneys . attorneys determined that 681 aliens had left the country . as of february 26 , 2002 , even with the information from public source data bases , 1,851 , or 45 percent , of the 4,112 aliens believed to be in the country had not been located and interviewed while 2,261 , or 55 percent , had been located and interviewed . as a second example , ins investigators determined that ins's address information was inaccurate for 45 aliens who may have known some of the terrorists responsible for the september 11th attacks . according to the assistant district director for investigations in san diego , he was advised that at least two of the terrorists had student visas and were supposed to be attending school in the san diego area . he requested that ins headquarters provide him with a list of aliens with student visas who had entered the united states within the last 2 years and , at the time of their entry , indicated they were going to the san diego area . from a list of 700 aliens , ins investigators identified 45 whom they wanted to locate . according to ins investigators who sought to locate these aliens , ins's address information for all 45 student aliens was inaccurate as none of them were located at the addresses that ins had provided . efforts to supplement ins's address information with the schools' address information provided accurate addresses for 10 students . to assist the u.s . attorneys , the foreign terrorist tracking task force asked ins to provide current address information for the aliens who were to be sought for interviews . ins obtained the address information from the nonimmigrant information system ( niis ) , an automated database that contains address and identity information on nonimmigrants who were inspected upon their entry into the united states . postal service . we also interviewed senior representatives from the executive office for u.s . attorneys , federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the secret service , and the foreign terrorist tracking task force . to identify the principal factors affecting the reliability of ins's alien address records , we analyzed the information we obtained during the review . to obtain information on the historical background of the alien registration requirement and programs , we reviewed ins historical documentation and data and interviewed ins managers and staff . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . we performed our work from october 2001 through september 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the attorney general . ins regulates immigration to the united states and oversees immigrants , who intend to remain permanently in the united states , and nonimmigrants , who intend to remain in the united states temporarily . ins receives and maintains alien address information for benefits administration , law enforcement , and national security purposes . through registration and change of address notifications , aliens provide their identity and an address where they can be located while in the united states to ins , which can share this information to help law enforcement officials identify and locate aliens .