hire a diverse workforce . a high - performing organization maintains an environment characterized by inclusiveness that reflects a variety of styles and personal backgrounds and is responsive to the needs of diverse groups of employees . agencies present different approaches in their performance plans to address diversity . for example , the national science foundation focuses on the total number of hires to science and engineering positions from underrepresented groups . the department of the interior plans to increase the general diversity of its workforce rather than the growth rate of specific groups and set a goal to increase the diverse representation of its total workforce by at least 3.1 percent for fiscal year 2001 from an unspecified fiscal year 1997 level . interior states that more detailed supporting documents are being developed . the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , on the other hand , set a goal to continue to improve its workforce diversity by increasing the percentage of specific underrepresented groups , including hispanics , women , and women and minority managers , by 0.3 percentage points . for example , hud intends to focus on increasing the share of hispanics to 7.4 percent of employees in fiscal year 2001 , based on estimated achievement of 7.1 percent representation in fiscal year 2000 . hiring a diverse workforce can be one aspect of ensuring that hud has the appropriate mix of staff with the proper skills to carry out its missions . hud's human capital has been an area of focus under our high - risk program since 1994.3 . identify skills and training needs and provide development opportunities . a high - performing organization makes appropriate investments in education , training , and other developmental opportunities to help its employees build the competencies needed to achieve the organization's mission . some agencies describe in their fiscal year 2001 performance plans their efforts to identify the skills and training needs of employees . for example , the federal technology service ( fts ) , a major component of the general services administration ( gsa ) , describes its strategy to identify core competencies for each profession , create individual development plans , and provide employees with state - of - the - art technology and tools to help improve overall performance . although it did not provide details , fts also plans to increase its investment in employee training by providing employees with an individual training budget of 1 percent of salaries — in addition to the normal 4 percent training allocation — which is intended to allow employees to have a direct role in their own development . to measure progress towards its performance goal to provide increased opportunities for employee development and respond to employee needs , fts used a survey that gsa administered to over 13,000 employees on fts' quality culture and organizational climate . the survey used a 7-point response scale and included 87 questions covering 15 categories , such as learning and development , communication , and teamwork . to measure its performance , fts uses a composite indicator that combines the responses across all the questions .