i will discuss each of these categories . this testimony is based on reports we issued from november 2009 to october 2014 . in particular , i will be highlighting our october 2014 report on spent nuclear fuel management . for this work , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from doe and nrc regarding their regulatory roles related to spent nuclear fuel management . in addition , we obtained input from experts and stakeholders in spent nuclear fuel management . a detailed discussion of our scope and methodologies can be found in each of our published reports . we conducted the work that this testimony is based on in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the transportation of large amounts of spent fuel to an interim storage or permanent disposal location is inherently complex and the planning and implementation may take decades to accomplish . the actual time it would take depends on a number of variables including distance , quantity of material , mode of transport , rate of shipment , level of security , and coordination with state and local authorities . for example , according to officials from a state regional organization we interviewed and the blue ribbon commission report , transportation planning could take about 10 years , in part because routes have to be agreed upon , first responders have to be trained , and critical elements of infrastructure and equipment need to be designed and deployed . as we previously reported , doe does not have clear legislative authority for either consolidated interim storage or for permanent disposal at a site other than yucca mountain and , as such , there is no facility to which doe can transport commercial spent nuclear fuel . without clear authority , doe cannot make the transportation decisions necessary regarding commercial spent nuclear fuel . specifically , as we reported in november 2009 , august 2012 , and october 2014 , provisions in nwpa that authorize doe to arrange for consolidated interim storage have either expired or are unusable because they are tied to milestones in the development of a repository at yucca mountain that have not been met . doe officials and experts from industry we interviewed in october 2014 agreed with this assessment , and noted that the federal government's ability to site , license , construct , and operate a consolidated interim storage facility not tied to yucca mountain depends on new legislative authority . for permanent disposal , we reported in april 2011 , that developing a permanent repository other than yucca mountain will restart the likely time - consuming and costly process of siting , licensing , and developing such a repository and it is uncertain what legislative changes might be needed , if any , to develop a new repository . in part , this is because nwpa , as amended , directs doe to terminate all site specific activities at candidate sites other than yucca mountain .