of its hopper dredges . in addition to reviewing the 2012 fiscal study , we also obtained and analyzed additional data related to the financial condition of the corps' hopper dredges . effects on industry . variability regarding federal funding for dredging also poses challenges to the corps' plans for its fleet . while funding for hopper dredging has increased since fiscal year 2003 and was about $370 million in fiscal year 2012 , corps officials and stakeholders we spoke with said that , at recent funding levels , there were substantial unmet hopper dredging needs such as providing dredging for small ports and harbors . corps , 2011 minimum fleet capital investment report . this study encompassed all 10 dredges in the corps' minimum dredge fleet , which includes the 4 hopper dredges reviewed in this report , and 6 other dredges of different types that are generally used for different dredging projects . conducting a life - cycle cost analysis to support funding plans for future dredging needs which would include a cost comparison to either ( 1 ) use and then replace the vessels or ( 2 ) repair and sustain the vessels . the 2011 study developed options based on three funding scenarios — increased , sustained , or decreased — and , as stated in the study and the corps' implementation memorandum , the corps selected the option associated with sustained funding levels as the best course of action . should increased funding become available for dredging , a corps official we spoke with said the corps may need to adjust its planned course of action . the officials said that the 2011 study could provide the corps with direction for adjusting its actions . for example , as noted in the study under the increased funding scenario , the corps could continue with its planned fleet improvements instead of deferring them under the sustained option . hopper dredges play a vital role in keeping the nation's ports , harbors , and other waterways open for commerce . over the past several decades , the corps has increasingly relied on industry to carry out hopper dredging work , but it has also maintained its own minimum fleet of four hopper dredges , in part to ensure its ability to respond to critical dredging needs during periods of high demand . the corps is faced with the task of balancing the hopper dredging work it contracts out to industry and maintaining the viability of its own fleet . the corps has recognized the need to make changes to manage its hopper dredge fleet in a fiscally sustainable manner and has taken several actions to do so , including assessing the need to potentially modify the composition of its fleet . since our 2003 report , the corps has also made progress in addressing our recommendations to improve the information it maintains to manage its hopper dredging program , including modifying data fields in its dredging database to track solicitations that receive no bids or where all the bids received exceeded the corps' cost estimate by more than 25 percent .