implementation team . select high - performing team members . use the performance management system to define the responsibility and assure accountability for change . adopt leading practices to implement effective performance management systems with adequate safeguards . establish a communication strategy to create shared expectations and report related progress . what challenges is the service likely to face as a result of its recent mergers into dhs and ice ? to answer these questions , we analyzed program data ; interviewed service and tsa officials ; and reviewed documentation from the service and tsa on background checks and training ; scheduling , mission incidents , employee misconduct , and separations ; and reviewed several workforce policies and procedures . we also visited several facilities to look at the service's operational and management control practices and documents , including the federal air marshal training facility and human resource center in new jersey , the federal air marshal headquarters office in virginia , the federal law enforcement training center in new mexico , and the federal air marshal field office in texas . to guide our assessment of the service's training , management information , and policies and procedures , we reviewed key gao documents on internal controls and human capital management . these include our standards for internal control in the federal government ( gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 , november 1999 ) , internal control management and evaluation tool ( gao - 01-1008g , august 2001 ) , human capital: a guide for assessing strategic training and development efforts in the federal government ( gao - 03-893g , july 2003 ) , and model of strategic human capital management ( gao - 02-373sp , march 2002 ) . in addition , we used our report , results - oriented cultures: implementation steps to assist mergers and organizational transformations ( gao - 03-669 , july 2003 ) , to provide a framework for evaluating the service's challenges in merging into dhs . we also reviewed a march 2003 report by the dot inspector general ( ig ) , which evaluated the service's selection and hiring process , training program , and scheduling process . finally , we discussed the governmentwide background investigation process with the office of personnel management ( opm ) . our analysis of the operational and management control issues related to the service's expansion focuses primarily on the period from november 2001 through september 2003 , when the service was part of tsa ; our assessment of the challenges related to the service's mergers is , in part , prospective . we conducted our review from september 2002 through october 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . faa's federal air marshal program expanded the sky marshal program , which was established as part of the customs service in the 1970s to deter hijackings to and from cuba . shortly after twa flight 847 was hijacked in athens , greece , in june 1985 , then president ronald reagan called for an expansion of the sky marshal program .