gao - 15-20 . washington , d.c.: december 4 , 2014 . civil support: actions are needed to improve dod's planning for a complex catastrophe . gao - 13-763 . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2013 . dod partially concurred with this recommendation . however , the department has not yet taken action that meets the intent of the recommendation . dod has and continues to take action to address our prior recommendations to strengthen the department's interagency coordination for support of civil authorities . as numerous events within the homeland in the last decade have pointed out , it is critical that dod coordinate , integrate , and synchronize its dsca mission with a broad range of interagency partners that the department may need to support . such partners can include fema , federal bureau of investigation , customs and border protection , animal and plant health inspection service , and the centers for disease control and prevention . as we have previously reported , there are three key areas that dod needs to focus on to enhance and institutionalize its interagency coordination efforts . dod has since taken action to address these areas: dod has better defined interagency roles and responsibilities . previous gao work , the national response framework , and dod strategic guidance identify the need for clearly defined roles and responsibilities to enhance interagency coordination . in our 2010 review of dod's interagency coordination efforts , we found that the key documents used to define roles and responsibilities were outdated , not fully integrated , or were not comprehensive . we found that dod's series of civil - support policies and guidance , such as a 1997 dod directive on military assistance to civil authorities , were outdated and did not reflect changes that occurred subsequent to their issuance . for example , the guidance documents did not refer to dhs , the office of the assistant secretary of defense for homeland defense , northern command , or roles and responsibilities under the national response framework . similarly , we found that roles and responsibilities for support to law enforcement — including joint task force - north , which provides defense support of civilian law enforcement agencies along u.s. borders — were unclear as were the roles and responsibilities between the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs and the assistant secretary of defense for homeland defense . consequently , we recommended and dod concurred that the department should update key documents that outline roles and responsibilities . subsequently , dod has , for the most part , issued new guidance documents or updated older guidance to better define roles and responsibilities within the department for interagency coordination . dod has issued an interagency partner guide . dod's joint doctrine on interagency coordination and support of civil authorities notes that a unified “whole - of - government” approach to national security issues requires federal partner agencies to understand core competencies , roles , and missions and that sharing information is critical for the success of interagency coordination between federal agencies . more detailed information about our scope and methodology can be found in our reports .