( see fig . the percent of ex - im financing directly benefiting small business depends on the value of small business financing compared to the value of non - small business financing . ( see fig . while the small business financing value slowly increased between fiscal years 2001 and 2007 , the value for non - small business financing was noticeably lower in 2006 and 2007 , compared to 2005 . and ( 3 ) what steps has ex - im taken to implement these standards ? we look forward to working with the officials at ex - im to complete this work , and to reporting our findings to congress later this year . established in 1934 , ex - im operates as an independent agency of the u.s. government and is the official export credit agency of the united states . in 1983 , congress required ex - im to make available for fiscal year 1986 and thereafter not less than 10 percent of its aggregate loan , guarantee , and insurance authority for financing exports by small businesses . in 2002 , congress established several new requirements for ex - im relating to small business , including increasing from 10 to 20 percent the proportion of ex - im's aggregate loan , guarantee , and insurance authority that must be made available for the direct benefit of small businesses . when reauthorizing the bank's charter in 2006 , congress again established new requirements for ex - im , including a small business division with an office of financing for socially and economically disadvantaged small business concerns and small business concerns owned by women , designating small business specialists in all divisions , creating a small business committee to advise the bank president , and defining standards to measure the bank's success in financing small business . ex - im has taken steps to meet these requirements . ( 2 ) how well do they meet established criteria such as tracking progress and providing managers needed information to make decisions regarding assistance under the mandate ? ex - im uses the small business administration methodology to determine whether a company qualifies as a small business . to apply this methodology , ex - im obtains company information through its application process . ex - im also subscribes to dun and bradstreet , a commercial information vendor , which provides information about companies , including standard industrial classification ( sic ) codes . ex - im uses the sic codes provided by dun and bradstreet to determine a company's small business standing by obtaining the corresponding north american industry classification system ( naics ) code through the small business administration website . ex - im offers a variety of financing instruments , including loan guarantees , export credit insurance , and working capital guarantees . ex - im provides its insurance either directly to exporters ( non - bank - held insurance ) or to banks which in turn finance u.s. exporters ( bank - held insurance ) . for the bank - held insurance policies , ex - im authorizes the policy for the bank , which does not know at the time it applies for the financing which exporters will eventually use the export credit insurance .