gao - 06-245t . washington , d.c.: november 17 , 2005 . financial product sales: actions needed to better protect military members . gao - 06-23 . washington , d.c.: november 2 , 2005 . military personnel: dod needs better controls over supplemental life insurance solicitation policies involving servicemembers . gao - 05-696 . washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2005 . each service has a relief or aid society designed to provide financial assistance to servicemembers . the army emergency relief society , navy - marine corps relief society , and the air force aid society are all private , nonprofit organizations . these societies provide counseling and education as well as financial relief through grants or no - interest loans to eligible servicemembers experiencing emergencies . emergencies include funds needed to attend the funeral of a family member , repair a primary vehicle , or buy food . for example , in 2003 , the navy - marine corps relief society provided $26.6 million in interest - free loans and $4.8 million in grants to servicemembers for emergencies . some servicemembers in our focus groups stated that they would not use grants or no - interest loans from a service society because they take too long , are intrusive because the financial institution or relief / aid society requires in - depth financial information in the loan or grant application , or could be career limiting if the command found out the servicemembers were having financial problems . the army emergency relief society attempted to address the time and intrusiveness concerns with its test program , commander's referral , for active duty soldiers lacking funds to meet monthly obligations of $500 or less . while recognizing these limitations , in our april 2005 report we nonetheless recommended that all armed forces disciplinary control boards be required to meet twice a year . in responding to our recommendation , dod indicated that it intended to establish a requirement for the boards to meet even more frequently — four times a year — and direct that businesses on the off - limits list for one service be off - limits for all services . although dod has made resources available to assist servicemembers , it lacks the results - oriented , departmentwide data needed to assess the effectiveness of its pfm programs and provide necessary oversight . the november 2004 dod instruction that provides guidance to the services on servicemembers' financial management does not address program evaluation or the reports that services should supply to dod for its oversight role . in our 2003 report , we noted that an earlier draft of the instruction emphasized evaluating the programs and cited metrics such as the number of servicemembers with wages garnished . dod officials said that these metrics were eliminated because the services did not want the additional reporting requirements . the only dod - wide evaluative data available for assessing the pfm programs and servicemembers' financial conditions were obtained from a general - purpose annual survey that focuses on the financial conditions of servicemembers as well as a range of other unrelated issues .