gao - 10-631t . washington , d.c.: april 21 , 2010 . financial management: improvements needed in national flood insurance program's financial controls and oversight . gao - 10-66 . washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2009 . we plan to issue this report in december 2010 . further contributing to nfip's financial challenges , fema made a policy decision to allow certain properties remapped into riskier flood zones to keep their previous lower rates . like subsidized rates , these “grandfathered” rates do not reflect the actual risk of flooding to the properties and do not generate sufficient premiums to cover expected losses . fema officials told us that the decision to grandfather rates was based on considerations of equity , ease of administration , and goals of promoting floodplain management . however , fema does not collect data on grandfathered properties or measure their financial impact on the program . as a result , it does not know how many such properties exist , their exact location , or the volume of losses they generate . fema officials stated that beginning in october 2010 they would indicate on all new policies whether or not they were grandfathered . however , they would still be unable to identify grandfathered properties among existing policies . as fema continues its efforts to modernize flood maps across the country , it has continued to face resistance from communities and homeowners when remapping properties into higher - risk flood zones with higher rates . as a result , fema has often grandfathered in previous premium rates that are lower than the remapped rates . however , homeowners who are remapped into high - risk areas and do not currently have flood insurance may be required to purchase it at the full risk rate . in reauthorizing nfip in 2004 , congress noted that repetitive loss properties — those that have had two or more flood insurance claims payments of $1,000 or more over 10 years — constituted a significant drain on nfip resources . these properties account for about 1 percent of all policies but are estimated to account for up to 30 percent of all nfip losses . not all repetitive loss properties are part of the subsidized property inventory , but a high proportion receive subsidized rates , further contributing to nfip's financial risks . while congress has made efforts to target these properties , the number of repetitive loss properties has continued to grow , making them an ongoing challenge to nfip's financial stability . according to fema , expanded marketing efforts through its floodsmart campaign have contributed to an increase in nfip policies . this program was designed to educate and inform partners , stakeholders , property owners , and renters about insuring their homes and businesses against flood damage . since the start of the floodsmart campaign in 2004 , nfip has seen policy growth of more than 24 percent , and as of june 2010 , had 5.6 million policies in force . moreover , according to fema , despite the economic downturn , both policy sales and retention have grown . in addition , nfip's collected premiums have risen 24 percent from december 2006 to june 2010 .