minnesota . minnesota's statute on compounding applies to both health care practitioners and pharmacies . the minnesota statute requires practitioners and pharmacists to comply with usp compounding standards , among other things . however , an official from the minnesota board of pharmacy told us that the pharmacy board relies on the state's board of medical practice to inform physicians that compounding by physicians should be compliant with the usp chapters related to nonsterile and sterile compounding ( usp chapters 795 and 797 , respectively ) depending on what they are compounding . this official said that the board of pharmacy does not know which physicians may be compounding , and while the pharmacy board has the authority to inspect any place in the state in which drugs are held to be distributed , they need to give advance notice of inspection to physicians . an official from the minnesota board of medical practice said that the medical board has a complaint - driven process and that if there are allegations that a physician has violated medical or pharmacy statutes that regulate the practice of medicine , including compounding , the board has the authority to investigate . north carolina . a state statute in north carolina requires that a physician who dispenses prescription drugs , for a fee or other charge , register with the board of pharmacy and comply with relevant laws and regulations governing distribution of drugs that apply to pharmacists ; however , this statute does not specifically address compounding by physicians . according to the board of pharmacy official we interviewed , disciplinary authority over these physicians lies solely with the state's medical board . the north carolina medical board official explained that the board has the authority to discipline a physician for violating any law involving the practice of medicine and that compounding drugs is included in the practice of medicine . this official further explained that the board's role in overseeing physicians has historically been complaint driven and the board had not had any complaints or issues brought to its attention related to compounding by physicians until a recent case referred to them by the board of pharmacy . this official said that the board is currently developing its role in overseeing compounding by physicians . texas . the texas medical board official told us that there was no specific mention of compounding by physicians in the texas state statute . the official said , however , that if the medical board received a complaint that involved one of their licensees ( i.e. , practitioner ) violating the state's drug compounding laws , then the board could take enforcement actions . respondents in 21 states reported that their office had heard concerns about the practice of compounding by physicians and other nonpharmacists . some of the concerns respondents in these states reported were about a lack of regulation and oversight of compounding by physicians and other nonpharmacists , and whether physicians were complying with compounding standards , such as usp standards . further , respondents in some states were unsure which entity , if any , in their state had oversight responsibility for compounding by physicians and other nonpharmacists .