deployment information . dod officials considered the database used for tracking the deployment of air force and navy personnel inaccurate . “ ( a ) system required — the secretary of defense shall establish a system to assess the medical condition of members of the armed forces ( including members of the reserve components ) who are deployed outside the united states or its territories or possessions as part of a contingency operation ( including a humanitarian operation , peacekeeping operation , or similar operation ) or combat operation . expired term of service . servicemember separates from the military and their medical record is sent to st. louis , missouri , and therefore not available for review . record is not accounted for by the medical records department . are the military services meeting dod's force health protection and surveillance system requirements for servicemembers deploying in support of oef and ojg ? has dod corrected problems related to the accuracy and completeness of databases reflecting which servicemembers deployed to certain locations ? to accomplish these objectives , we obtained the force health protection and surveillance policies applicable to the oef and ojg deployments from the army , air force , combatant commanders , the office of the assistant secretary of defense , and the services' surgeons general . to test the implementation of these policies , we reviewed statistical samples totaling 1,071 active duty servicemembers selected from a universe of 8,742 active duty servicemembers at four military installations . to provide assurances that our review of the selected medical records was accurate , we requested the installations' medical personnel to reexamine those medical records that were missing required health assessments or immunizations and adjusted our results where documentation was subsequently identified . we also requested installation medical personnel to check all possible sources for missing pre - and post - deployment health assessments and missing immunizations . we also requested the u.s. special operations command ( socom ) to query its database for health - related documentation for servicemembers in our sample at one of the selected installations . we also examined , for army and air force servicemembers in our samples , the completeness of the centralized records at the army medical surveillance activity ( amsa ) , which is tasked with centrally collecting deployment health - related records . for more detailed information of our scope and methodology , see appendix i . in may 1997 , we reported on dod's actions to improve deployment health surveillance before , during , and after deployments , focusing on operation joint endeavor , which was conducted in the countries of bosnia - herzegovina , croatia , and hungary . we commented on the provisions of a joint medical surveillance policy draft that called for a comprehensive dod - wide medical surveillance capability to monitor and assess the effects of deployments on servicemembers' health . dod subsequently finalized its joint medical surveillance policy in august 1997 . our 1997 review disclosed problems with the army's implementation of the medical surveillance plan for operation joint endeavor in the following areas: medical assessments . many army personnel who should have received post - deployment medical assessments did not receive them and the assessments that were completed were frequently done late .