regulations . it is unknown to what extent individuals with serious medical conditions it is unknown to what extent individuals with serious medical conditions hold cdls and whether there are situations of medically unfit individuals hold cdls and whether there are situations of medically unfit individuals who hold a cdl . in this context , you asked us to ( 1 ) determine to the who hold a cdl . in this context , you asked us to ( 1 ) determine to the extent possible the number of individuals holding a current cdl who have extent possible the number of individuals holding a current cdl who have serious medical conditions , and ( 2 ) provide case - study examples of serious medical conditions , and ( 2 ) provide case - study examples of commercial drivers who hold an active cdl despite having a medical condition that should disqualify them from obtaining a cdl . to explore the overlap between cdl holders and people with serious medical conditions , we identified individuals who were in both dot's commercial driver license information system ( cdlis ) database and selected federal disability databases . we presumed that individuals receiving full federal disability benefits were eligible for these benefits because of the seriousness of their medical conditions . dot's cdlis database contains an archive of all cdls reported to dot by the states . we obtained this database and compared the cdl holders from cdlis with the disability recipients of selected federal programs administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) , department of veterans affairs ( va ) , office of personnel management ( opm ) , and department of labor ( dol ) . specifically , we identified cdl holders that are both currently receiving disability benefits and have been identified as 100 percent disabled according to the program's criteria . we further analyzed the recipient files to extract those medical conditions that would likely disqualify a driver from a cdl , such as deafness and epilepsy . because cdlis contains inactive cdls in its population , we obtained data of active cdls from a nonrepresentative selection of 12 states to identify those cdl holders in cdlis that have an active cdl . further , because commercial drivers may contract a serious medical condition after the issuance of the cdl , we determined the number of individuals that received their cdl subsequent to the federal agencies determination that the individual is eligible for full benefits due to their medical condition . in addition , our estimate does not include drivers with severe medical conditions that are not in the selected federal programs we analyzed . to provide case - study examples of commercial drivers who hold active cdls and also receive full federal benefits due to a cdl disqualifying medical condition , we focused on four states as agreed to with your staff — florida , maryland , minnesota , and virginia . from these four states , we selected , for detailed investigation , 15 commercial drivers that we identified based on our data analysis and mining .