we disagree . as discussed in the report , we identified multiple examples of additional information that we determined could have been included to make the report more consistent with the relevant presentation standards for soundness , completeness , and clarity . dod also stated that we are not correct in our assertion that the report was not shared or coordinated with participants and stakeholders , explaining that the september 2014 report was fully staffed with the army's assistant secretary for acquisition , logistics and technology ; the deputy chief of staff for logistics ; and the army materiel command . we do not disagree that the report was coordinated with the organizations identified in dod's comments . are the report's conclusions sound and complete ? are the study results presented in a clear manner ? are study participants / stakeholders informed of the study results and recommendations ? we determined that the remaining three research presentation standards were not relevant , given our review's objectives and based on the content of dod's report . for example , because the report did not include recommendations , we did not apply the generally accepted presentation standard on whether recommendations were supported by analyses . to determine the extent to which dod's september 2014 report is consistent with the four relevant presentation standards , we then applied those standards to the contents of the report and available supporting documentation — such as dod policy , guidance , assessments , and briefings . the extent to which the report's presentation of results is consistent with these relevant standards is an indication of the ease with which the evidence can be evaluated and of the soundness and completeness of the report and , thus , its usefulness in enabling decision makers to make fully informed decisions . we considered dod's response to a statutory reporting element to be consistent with relevant generally accepted defense research presentation standards when the report explicitly addressed ( eg , included meaningful facts , figures , or clearly discussed ) all aspects of the element and included sufficient specificity and detailed support . we considered dod's response to a reporting element to be inconsistent with these standards when the report neither explicitly addressed all aspects of the element nor included sufficient specificity and detailed support . in such cases , we provided examples of additional information that , although not statutorily required , we believe would have made the report more consistent with the four relevant generally accepted research presentation standards . in addition , we discussed the results of our assessment of the september 2014 report with odasd ( mpp ) officials — who had the lead for developing the report — and obtained their perspectives regarding the approach they used to develop it . further details about our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from june 2014 to november 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .