ii ) . a 10-minute maximum wait time for processing passengers and checked baggage . originating passenger and baggage load factors by airport based on a representative week during each airport's peak month ( the 85th percentile assumption ) , which tsa expects will give fsds some time during less busy periods to allow tsos to obtain required training , perform operational support functions , and take annual or other forms of leave . a desired ratio of 80 percent full - time to 20 percent part - time tso staff , expressed as full time equivalents , at each category x , i , and ii airport to allow for heavier staffing during busier periods ( eg , the hours when business travelers typically depart ) and to minimize overstaffing during less busy periods , times during which part - time tsos would not be scheduled to work . nonpassenger throughput rate of 4 percent . table 5 provides information on the airports we visited during the design phase . aft air small airports . we select of categories x , i , and ii with a similar number of annual passenger enplanements er completing the design phase of our study , we visited eight additio ports , shown in table 6 , representing a geographic mix of large and ed these airports by choosing two airports in each , but which have significantly different passenger wait times and full time equivalent allocations under the screening allocation model . we also selected two additional airports in category iii based solely on their geographic proximity to two of the airports we visited in the larger airport categories . all of the nation's airports in the categories we select ( categories x , i , ii , and iii ) to visit collectively comprise more than 90 percent of tsa's total tso allocation nationwide . in total , since we selected a limited nonprobability sample of 14 airports , the information and results obtained cannot be generalized to all airports nationwide . rather , the results from our airport visits were designed to help identify aspects of the screening allocation model that may not be adequately addressing unique airport characteristics . also , on a year - to - year basis , tsa may change the data inputs and assumptions used to calculate tso allocations nationwide and at individual airports . in reviewing tsa's staffing allocation model , we did not ( 1 ) review the statistical algorithm used in the model , ( 2 ) verify the model's computer programming , or ( 3 ) run test data through the model . more details about the scope and methodology of our work regarding each of the objectives are presented in the following sections , respectively . to determine how tsa ensures its staffing allocation model provides a sufficient number of transportation security officers ( tso ) to perform passenger and checked baggage screening at each airport and what challenges it has faced while implementing the model , we first sought to obtain an understanding of how the staffing allocation model works to provide the appropriate number of tso staff at the nation's airports .