this approach should: 1 . identify milestones and the entity responsible for integrating the outcomes of its privacy - related initiatives , including the results of its four health it contracts and recommendations from the ncvhs and ahic advisory committees . ensure that key privacy principles in hipaa are fully addressed . address key challenges associated with legal and policy issues , disclosure of personal health information , individuals' rights to request access and amendments to health information , and security measures for protecting health information within a nationwide exchange of health information . in commenting on a draft of our report , hhs disagreed with our recommendation and referred to “the department's comprehensive and integrated approach for ensuring the privacy and security of health information within nationwide health information exchange.” however , in recent discussions with gao , the national coordinator for health it agreed with the need for an overall approach to protect health information and stated that the department was initiating steps to address our recommendation . further , since our report was issued , hhs has reported that it has undertaken additional activities to address privacy and security concerns . for example: ● ncvhs's subcommittee on privacy and confidentiality is drafting additional recommendations for the secretary of hhs regarding the expansion of the hipaa privacy rule coverage to entities that are not currently covered . the recommendations are expected to be presented to the ncvhs at its meeting later this month . ● the privacy and security solutions contractor is in the process of analyzing and summarizing 34 states' final assessments of organization - level business practices and summaries of critical observations and key issues . its initial assessment identified challenges that closely parallel those identified in our report . hhs plans to finalize the findings and final reports from the contractor after the contract ends at the end of this month . ● hhs awarded another contract , the state alliance for e - health , which is intended to address state - level health it issues , including privacy and security challenges and solutions . in january 2007 , the alliance identified the protection of health information as a guiding principle for its work . the alliance plans to identify privacy practices and policies to help ensure the protection of personal health information exchanged within a nationwide health information network . in summary , concerns about the protection of personal health information exchanged electronically within a nationwide health information network have increased as the use of health it and the exchange of electronic health information has also increased . hhs and its office of the national coordinator for health it have initiated activities that , collectively , are intended to protect health information and address aspects of key privacy principles . while progress continues to be made through the various initiatives , it remains highly important that hhs define a comprehensive approach and milestones for integrating its efforts , resolve differences and inconsistencies among them , fully address key privacy principles , ensure that recommendations from its advisory committees are effectively implemented , and sequence the implementation of key activities appropriately .