( see app . for state / inl , we selected two letters of agreement with international organizations , four grants , three contracts , and two interagency agreements implemented by dod , two interagency agreements implemented by dhs , and two interagency agreements implemented by doj . for usaid , we selected two contracts and three grants . we selected the projects from a list provided by state / inl and usaid . state's list included 388 projects , and usaid's list included 57 projects for a total of 445 projects under the mérida initiative . we conducted this performance audit from november 2018 to may 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . this appendix provides a list of the 15 department of state ( state ) , bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( state / inl ) mérida initiative projects , and five united states agency for international development ( usaid ) mérida initiative projects selected for our review . we assessed state / inl and usaid monitoring of these projects against key monitoring practices as described in appendix i . the subset of these projects ( four state / inl and two usaid ) selected for our analysis of the agencies' tracking of performance data is noted below . state / inl provided the details in table 6 , and usaid provided the details in table 7 . state / inl requires that staff responsible for monitoring mérida initiative projects be certified as a cor , gor , or aor . state / inl also assigns roles and responsibilities to monitoring staff through a designation letter in which a contract or grant officer designates a cor , gor , or aor to oversee each project . however , of the 15 projects we reviewed , one had a gap in the documentation for staff certifications , and four had gaps in the documentation of designation letters . for example , in one case state / inl could not provide documentation to demonstrate that the official responsible for monitoring a project on police training had been officially designated or that the official had a valid certification during the full implementation period of the project . according to state / inl staff , the monitoring staff roles and responsibilities are also outlined in other documents such as the state department's foreign affairs manual and the aor handbook , of which staff are expected to be aware . figure 2 illustrates the extent to which state / inl followed each related key practice for assigning monitoring duties . state / inl generally followed key practices for planning a monitoring approach a third of the time . two projects — one for helicopter pilot training and the other for aviation maintenance training — did not have monitoring plans and thus did not meet any of the three key practices for planning a monitoring approach .