these will include several components . first , tsa will conduct a security threat assessment that may include , for example , checks of terrorism databases or watch lists , such as tsa's no - fly and selectee lists . second , a federal bureau of investigation criminal history records check will be conducted to identify if the worker has any disqualifying criminal offenses . third , workers' immigration status and mental capacity will be checked . workers will have the opportunity to appeal the results of the threat assessment or request a waiver in certain limited circumstances . twic card production: after tsa determines that a worker has passed the background check , the worker's information is provided to a federal card production facility where the twic card will be personalized for the worker , manufactured , and then sent back to the enrollment center . card issuance: transportation workers will be informed when their cards are ready to be picked up at enrollment centers . once a card has been issued , workers will present their twic cards to security officials when they seek to enter a secure area , and in the future will enter secure areas through biometric card readers . since we reported on the twic program in september 2006 , tsa has made progress in implementing the program . although we have not yet independently assessed the effectiveness of these efforts , tsa has taken actions to address legislative requirements to implement and test the program and our recommendations regarding conducting additional systems testing to ensure that twic technologies work effectively , strengthening contractor oversight , and improving communication and coordination efforts with maritime stakeholders . in january 2007 , tsa and the coast guard issued a twic rule that sets forth the requirements for enrolling workers and issuing twic cards to workers in the maritime sector , and awarded a $70 million contract for enrolling workers in the twic program . tsa missed the july 1 , 2007 , safe port act deadline to implement the twic program at the 10 highest risk ports , citing the need to conduct additional tests to ensure that the enrollment and card issuance systems work effectively . however , tsa recently announced that this testing is complete , and began enrolling and issuing twic cards to workers at the port of wilmington , delaware on october 16 , 2007 . tsa also plans to begin enrolling workers at 11 additional ports by november 2007 . in addition , tsa has also begun planning a pilot program to test twic access control technologies in the maritime environment as required by the safe port act . an attack would also be costly . according to testimony by a port of los angeles official , a 2002 labor dispute which led to a 10-day shutdown of west coast port operations cost the nation's economy an estimated $1.5 billion per day . a terrorist attack at a port facility could have a similar or greater impact . one potential security threat stems from those individuals who work in secure areas of the nation's transportation system , including seaports , airports , railroad terminals , mass transit stations , and other transportation facilities .