tsa concurred with both of these recommendations and has taken actions to implement them . specifically , in september 2013 , tsa disseminated written guidance to local tsa inspection officials and passenger and freight rail agencies that provides clarification about the requirements of the rail security incident reporting process . this guidance includes examples and descriptions of the types of incidents that should be reported under the regulatory criteria , as well as details about the type of information that should be included in the incident report provided to the tsoc . further , as of august 2013 , tsa had established an rsi - dashboard report that provides weekly , monthly , and quarterly information about the number of inspection reports that have been reviewed , accepted , and rejected . according to tsa officials , this helps ensure that rail agencies are inspected regularly , by providing the rsi - ss with greater insight into inspection activities . tsa has also enhanced the utilization of the rsi - ss by providing them with the ability to review both passenger and freight rail inspections before the inspection reports are finalized and enforcement action is taken . according to tsa officials , this allows the rsi - ss to ensure that enforcement actions are applied consistently by local tsa inspection officials . tsa also developed a mechanism for tracking the recommendations rsi - ss make to local tsa inspection officials regarding changes to local compliance inspections , as well as any actions that are taken in response . collectively , we believe that these changes should allow the rsi - ss to provide better management oversight of passenger and freight rail regulatory inspections and enforcement actions , though we have not assessed whether they have done so . we also believe these actions , if implemented effectively , will help ensure that the rail security incident reporting process is consistently implemented and enforced , and will address the intent of our recommendations . in december 2012 , we also found that tsa's incident management data system , known as webeoc , had incomplete information , was prone to data entry errors , and had other limitations that inhibited tsa's ability to search and extract basic information . these weaknesses in webeoc hindered tsa's ability to use rail security incident data to identify security trends or potential threats . specifically , at the time of our 2012 report , tsa did not have an established process for ensuring that webeoc was updated to include information about rail security incidents that had not been properly reported to the tsoc . as a result , of the 18 findings of noncompliance we reviewed that were a result of failure to report an incident , 13 were never entered into webeoc , and consequently could not be used by tsa to identify potential security trends . we received responses from 337 stakeholders ( a 70 percent response rate ) . we also reviewed tsa policy documents and guidance on rail security reporting requirements , and passenger rail security incident data from january 2011 through june 2012 . the reports cited in this statement provide detailed information about our scope and methodology . the tsise describes , among other things , the information – sharing process .