content . ovds purchase content from the same content providers as do traditional mvpds , and content providers and mvpds have long - standing and lucrative business relationships . as discussed above , high - valued content , such as professionally produced movies and television programs , is costly to produce . therefore , even if some ovds are successful in developing some independent content , they will remain largely dependent on traditional sources of content . content providers enjoy a stable and secure business model distributing programs on mvpd systems . in particular , content providers benefit from mvpds packaging many channels because it ensures that most households purchase a large set of channels . similarly , mvpds benefit from their purchase of high - quality content , which most households value enough to induce them to purchase a large tier of mvpd programming.there is a symbiotic benefit in the business relationship between the content producers and mvpds . at the same time , content providers are also interested in selling their programs to ovds . in particular , representatives of several such companies , as well as experts , said that through these new outlets , content providers are able to monetize their products in new ways . for example , ovds can distribute content separate from the bundles of content offered by broadcast and cable networks , which may have a unique commercial appeal and attract new consumers to content providers' programs . however , content providers are also wary about the extent to which they contract for ovd distribution of their programs . if ovd offerings become attractive enough that households begin to drop mvpd subscriptions and rely solely on online viewing , revenues earned through traditional subscription service will decline , affecting both content providers and mvpds . the issue is the extent to which this happens: the impact of a small number of households doing so may not be of concern to content providers , but if a substantial number of households choose to “cut the cord,” revenues of both the content providers and the mvpds could be reduced enough to be worrisome for these companies . thus , while content providers are interested in providing some content to ovds , their incentive to do so is somewhat constrained by the potential effect on subscriptions to traditional mvpds . some stakeholders with whom we spoke stated that the critical challenge for the ovd business model is access to quality content and that as long as content providers do not see ovds as a viable outlet for the highest quality content , the growth of the ovd business model will be limited . broadband . most households with broadband purchase that service from either a cable or a telephone company . entertainment . since 2005 , the introduction of telephone - based video service has brought additional mvpd competition to some areas . traditional telephone companies at&t and verizon — through their respective u - verse and fios products — have led this change , introducing video services in various areas across the country and competing with cable and satellite companies .