” he asked . another panelist also considered the federal budget process incompatible with strategic planning . in his words , “it is absolutely a problem at faa” that “budget drives strategy and strategy does not drive budget.” although faa is good at forecasting demand , he said , it does not evaluate “the anatomy of demand” and determine how that demand will be served . panelists noted , for example , that the number of regional jets , low - fare airlines , and unmanned aerial vehicles are increasing , but faa has not developed a business model or plans for managing the increased air traffic . congress,” one panelist said , rather than integrated , organized , and periodically revised . “who anywhere would have a capital investment plan that was predominantly about standing still ? another panelist observed that faa asks for more than it can get and then carries the difference over from year to year , creating “a bow wave” of unfunded requests for capital projects that it seldom reduces . furthermore , as a third panelist pointed out , the budget process establishes incentives for unrealistic planning: project managers first overpromise capabilities and underestimate costs to increase the chances that new projects will be accepted . then , after projects are accepted , they overestimate costs because they assume their requests will be cut . although managers could include options in their budget submissions to indicate what could be accomplished at different funding levels , they do not do so because they assume items identified as options will be cut . finally , managers are reluctant to revise ongoing projects because they do not want to be seen as fickle . by contrast , another panelist said , a private company that operates under a board of directors and obtains revenue from customers does not have incentives to play budget games to get projects approved . “your money is your own money,” he said . some panelists criticized the federal budget for failing to show priorities and relationships among proposed investments . in the budget , one panelist said , “everything is as important as everything else.” another panelist observed that the budget sets no capital investment priorities . according to a third panelist , a line item budget tears apart a highly layered , interdependent system and does not reveal synergies between projects . then , when the budget request goes to congress , he said , “you have no opportunity to try to explain to anybody the interconnections of these programs.” as a result , when the appropriators decide not to fund a project , they may not understand how their decision will affect other projects . firewall discourages analyses of life - cycle costs and may lead , in some instances , to investments in technologies that end up in a warehouse because the ato cannot afford to operate them .