● effective it management . leading organizations execute their information technology management responsibilities reliably and efficiently . a little over 80 percent of the cios reported that they faced one or more challenges related to implementing effective it management practices at their agencies . this is not surprising given that , as we have previously reported , the government has not always successfully executed the it management areas that were most frequently cited as challenges by the cios — information security , enterprise architecture , investment management , and e - gov . ● sufficient and relevant resources . one key element in ensuring an agency's information and technology success is having adequate resources . accordingly , in order to effectively implement change , it is important that cios build understanding , commitment , and support among those who will be affected by the change . effectively tackling these reported challenges can improve the likelihood of a cio's success . until these challenges are overcome , federal agencies are unlikely to optimize their use of information and technology , which can affect an organization's ability to effectively and efficiently implement its programs and missions . virtually all agency cios cited resources , both in dollars and staff , as major challenges . the funding issues cited generally concerned the development and implementation of agency it budgets and whether certain it projects , programs , or operations were being adequately funded . we have previously reported that the way agency initiatives are originated can create funding challenges that are not found in the private sector . for example , certain information systems may be mandated or legislated , so the agency does not have the flexibility to decide whether to pursue them . additionally , there is a great deal of uncertainty about the funding levels that may be available from year to year . the government also faces long - standing and widely recognized challenges in maintaining a high - quality it workforce . in september 2005 , we reported the results of our study of cios at leading private - sector organizations , in which we described the cios' responsibilities and major challenges , as well as private - sector approaches to information and technology governance . the set of responsibilities assigned to cios in the private sector were similar to those in the federal sector . in most areas , there was little difference between the private and federal sectors in the percentage of cios who had or shared a particular responsibility . in 4 of the 12 areas — enterprise architecture , strategic planning , information collection , and information dissemination and disclosure — the difference between the private - and federal - sector cios was greater ; in each case , fewer cios in the private sector had these responsibilities . in all , the six functions least likely to be the cio's responsibility in the federal sector were equivalent to the five functions least likely to be his or her responsibility in the private sector . some of the federal cios' functions , such as information collection and statistical policy , did not map directly to the management areas in several of the private - sector organizations we contacted .