iii ) . the rate of response to our survey was about 83 percent . a detailed description of our scope and methodology appears in appendix ii . we also reviewed the strategic plans and reports that dot filed under the government performance and results act of 1993 . to address the third objective we reviewed the requirements of tea - 21 , the appropriations acts for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 , and applicable case law . we also sent a letter of inquiry to fta to obtain its explanation of the actions taken in response to the designations in the conference reports that accompanied dot's appropriations acts for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 . our review focused on fta's processes for implementing the job access program . our objectives did not include reviewing individual grants made in fiscal years 1999 , 2000 , or 2001 and the associated projects , or individual grant applications under the job access program . in addition , sam abbas , alan belkin , helen desaulniers , ernie hazera , alex lawrence , bonnie pignatiello leer , sara ann moessbauer , luann moy , and frank taliaferro made key contributions to this report . we conducted our review from july 2001 through november 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the cognizant congressional committees ; the secretary of transportation ; the administrator , federal transit administration ; and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others on request . if you have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or e - mail me at heckerj@gao.gov . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . we recommended that dot ( 1 ) establish specific objectives , performance criteria , and goals for measuring the program's progress ; ( 2 ) require grantees to coordinate transportation strategies with local job placement and other social service agencies ; and ( 3 ) work with other federal agencies to coordinate welfare - to - work activities . tea - 21 reflected these recommendations and required appropriate action by dot . in november 1999 , we reported on the implementation of the program in fiscal year 1999 — its first year . we found that dot had implemented our second and third recommendations in carrying out tea - 21 . dot had also taken preliminary steps to implement our recommendation that it establish specific objectives , performance criteria , and goals for measuring the program's progress . however , we also found that dot's process for selecting job access grant proposals was not consistent in fiscal year 1999 , and the basis for some selections was unclear . our december 2000 report examined dot's implementation of the program in fiscal year 2000 . we found that dot had taken steps to improve its process for selecting job access proposals . for example , to promote greater consistency in the evaluation and selection of grantees , dot developed a standard format for reviewing job access proposals and provided more detailed guidance to its reviewers . public transportation facilities , such as buses or subways , often offer limited or no access to many of these jobs .