both hea and nclba funds supported efforts to recruit teachers . many hea grantees we interviewed used their funds to fill teacher shortages in urban schools or to recruit new teachers from nontraditional sources — mid - career professionals , community college students , and middle - and high - school students . for example , one university recruited teacher candidates with undergraduate degrees to teach in a local school district with a critical need for teachers while they earn their masters in education . the program offered tuition assistance , and in some cases , the district paid a full teacher salary , with the stipulation that teachers continue teaching in the local school district for 3 years after completing the program . hea initiatives also included efforts to recruit mid - career professionals by offering an accelerated teacher training program for prospective teachers already in the workforce . some grantees also used their funds to recruit teacher candidates at community colleges . for example , one of the largest teacher training institutions in one state has partnered with six community colleges around the state to offer training that was not previously available . finally , other grantees targeted middle and high school students . then i will discuss the allowable activities and how recipients are using the funds . finally , i will summarize our findings related to education's support and evaluation of these activities . my remarks today are drawn from previous gao reports covering hea teacher quality programs and title ii under nclba , supplemented with updated information . we updated information by interviewing state officials , officials from institutions of higher education , and education officials . we also reviewed recent studies and education documents . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . while the overall goal of title ii in both hea and nclba is to improve teacher quality , some of the specific approaches differ . for example , hea focuses more on training prospective teachers than nclba . in addition , hea and nclba are funded differently , with hea funds distributed through competitive grants , while title ii under nclba provides funds annually to all states through a formula . both acts provide states , districts , and grantees with the flexibility to use funds for a broad range of activities to improve teacher quality , including many activities that are similar , such as professional development and recruitment . a difference is that nclba's title ii specifies that teachers can be hired to reduce class size , while hea does not specifically mention class - size reduction . with the broad range of activities allowed , we found both similarities and differences in the activities undertaken . under both hea and nclba , education has provided assistance and guidance to recipients of these funds and is responsible for holding recipients accountable for the quality of their activities . our previous work identified areas in which education could improve its assistance to states on their teacher quality efforts and more effectively measure the results of these activities .