plains snowpack . the corps uses plains snowpack data in its runoff forecasting for operations . the corps and nws have found limitations in this snowpack data . for example , a nws report assessing the 2011 missouri river flood found that modeled information on snow - water equivalent is available , but observational data are sparse and not always representative of basin - wide conditions . wrrda 2014 included a requirement that the secretary of the army , in coordination with other specified agencies , carry out snowpack and soil moisture monitoring in the upper missouri basin . as of june 2015 , those agencies had not yet developed the monitoring system due to funding constraints according to agency officials . under executive orders 13514 and 13653 , agencies are to create and update climate change adaptation plans that integrate consideration of climate change into their operations and overall mission objectives . specifically , executive order 13514 , issued in 2009 , directed agencies to participate in an existing interagency climate change adaptation task force . based on the work of the task force , the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) issued implementing instructions for the executive order in march 2011 . the instructions directed agencies to , among other things , issue an agency - wide climate change adaptation policy statement and submit their climate adaptation plans to ceq and the office of management and budget . executive order 13653 , issued in 2013 , directed agencies to continue developing and regularly updating their climate adaptation plans . in response to these executive orders , the corps submitted its climate change adaptation plans in 2012 , 2013 , and 2014 ( adaptation plan ) . the corps' adaptation plan is implemented , in part , through its responses to climate change program . this program is charged with developing the methods , tools , and guidance to improve the resilience of the corps' built and natural infrastructure through a collaborative , proactive , nationally consistent , and regionally sensitive framework and program of actions . according to the adaptation plan , these actions include improving the agency's understanding of climate impacts to missions and operations , assessing vulnerabilities , and identifying specific actions to minimize risk and capitalize on opportunities to improve infrastructure resilience . according to corps documents , infrastructure resilience is the ability to anticipate , prepare for , respond to , and adapt to changing conditions and to withstand and recover rapidly from disruptions with minimal damage . as directed by ceq instructions and guidance implementing executive order 13514 , the assistant secretary of the army for civil works released the corps' policy regarding adaptation in june 2014.that “mainstreaming climate change adaptation means that it will be considered at every step in the project life cycle for all usace [u.s. army corps of engineers] projects , both existing and planned … to reduce vulnerabilities and enhance the resilience of our water resource infrastructure.” this policy also established the corps' committee on climate preparedness and resilience to oversee and coordinate the agency's climate change adaptation planning and implementation .