gao - 02-500t . washington , d.c.: march 12 , 2002 . ( see fig . in addition , more than half of the local boards reported that most or all of the youth council members typically attended the youth council meetings , and 36 percent said that about half of the members attended . finally , 56 percent of all local boards reported that their youth council membership included all four categories of wia - required members asked about in our survey . among the wia - required members , personnel experienced in youth activities were represented on the greatest proportion — 93 percent — of youth councils . in contrast , parents of wia - eligible youth were represented on the lowest proportion ( about 71 percent ) of youth councils . board officials and service providers in many local areas we visited stated that wia boards and youth councils were important to coordinating a broad array of youth services in the community and leveraging resources . board officials in sonoma county , california , for instance , told us that the youth council brought key stakeholders to the table for the first time , including representatives that had seldom collaborated with each other , such as those from the juvenile justice and school systems . service providers in san jose , california , and cheyenne , wyoming , stated that the youth council meetings were a good forum for sharing information and learning how providers could complement one another's youth services to eliminate service gaps or duplication . in addition , board officials in madison , wisconsin , told us that the large membership size of the local board and youth council offered the potential to leverage additional community resources . establishing youth councils , however , was not without its challenges . nationwide , 65 percent of local boards reported difficulty in getting youth members and 54 percent found it difficult to get parents of eligible youth to participate on the council . one local board official we visited told us that securing youth participation on the council was challenging , in part because youth lacked transportation to youth council meetings , found it intimidating to attend large meetings dominated by adults , or had class and work schedules that conflicted with council meetings . a state board official said that parents of wia - eligible youth , often low - income themselves , were also difficult to recruit onto councils because they could not attend council meetings without taking unpaid time off from work . to establish a network of wia youth service providers , local boards competitively selected youth service providers based on youth council recommendations , but some boards reported that their youth councils found it difficult to obtain multiple responses to the requests for proposals ( rfps. ) nationwide , 80 percent of youth councils issued competitive rfps in program year 2000 , and most of those that issued the rfps identified between 2 and 12 eligible service providers . about 10 percent of the councils that issued rfps reported that they identified only one eligible provider . while youth councils received responses to their rfps , generally there was little competition for service provider contracts in many local areas .