thank you . for information on this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or sciremj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made major contributions to this statement include lynda downing , harry medina , john karikari ( lead assistant directors ) ; tania calhoun ; emily chalmers ; william chatlos ; grace cho ; rachel demarcus ; marc molino ; mary osorno ; jared sippel ; winnie tsen ; jim vitarello ; and heneng yu . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . extensive program requirements for hafa . all six of the large mha servicers we spoke with identified extensive program requirements as reasons for the slow implementation of hafa , including the initial requirement that applicants first be evaluated for a hamp first - lien modification . because of this requirement , potential hafa borrowers had to submit extensive income and other documentation required for a modification , even if they simply wanted to sell . we visited 6 of them for our june 2010 report . restrictive short - sale requirements and a requirement that mortgage insurers waive certain rights may have also contributed to the limited activity under hafa . servicers said that given these requirements , they did not expect hafa to increase their overall number of short sales and deeds - in - lieu . because eligibility for 2mp required a first - lien hamp modification , treasury contracted with a database vendor to provide data on existing second liens that corresponded with these modifications . however , the servicers we contacted noted that even differences in the spelling of addresses — for example , in abbreviations or spacing — could prevent an accurate identification . initial 2mp guidelines stated that servicers could not offer a second - lien modification without confirming a match with the database vendor , even if they had serviced both first and second liens on the same property . in november 2010 , treasury provided updated program guidance that allowed servicers to offer a 2mp modification if they could identify a first - and second - lien match within their own portfolio or had evidence that a corresponding first lien existed , even if the database had not identified it . in cases where a borrower had already identified a potential buyer before executing a short - sale agreement with the servicer , the additional time required for a hamp first - lien evaluation may have dissuaded the buyer from purchasing the property . in response to this concern , treasury released updated hafa guidance on december 28 , 2010 , to no longer require servicers to document and verify a borrower's financial information to be eligible for hafa . voluntary nature of the pra program .