customer service . among those users who contacted customer service , we estimate that 21 percent were very or somewhat dissatisfied with how the carrier handled the problem . our analysis of fcc consumer complaint data also indicates that billing , terms of the service contract , and customer service are areas where wireless consumers have experienced problems in recent years . furthermore , fcc complaint data indicate that call quality is an area of consumer concern . specifically , our analysis of fcc data indicates that the top four categories of complaints from 2004 through 2008 regarding service provided by wireless carriers were billing and rates , call quality , early termination of contracts , and customer service , as shown in figure 3 ( see app . ii for additional discussion of fcc wireless consumer complaint data ) . our survey of state utility commissions also found that billing , contract terms , and quality of service were the top categories of consumer complaints related to wireless phone service that commissions received in 2008 . specifically , among the 21 commissions that track wireless consumer complaints , 14 noted billing , 10 noted contract terms , and 10 noted quality of service as among the top three types of complaints commissions received in 2008 . additionally , 3 commissions specifically cited early termination fees as one of the top three categories of complaints they received in 2008 . in response to the areas of consumer concern noted above , wireless carriers have taken a number of actions in recent years . for example , officials from the four major carriers — at&t , sprint , t - mobile , and verizon — reported taking actions such as prorating their early termination fees over the period of the contract , offering service options without contracts , and providing web - based tools consumers can use to research a carrier's coverage area , among other efforts . in addition , in 2003 , the industry adopted a voluntary code with requirements for dealing with customers and , according to ctia – the wireless association , the wireless industry spent an average of $24 billion annually between 2001 and 2007 on infrastructure and equipment to improve call quality and coverage . also , carriers told us they use information from third - party tests and customer feedback to determine their network and service performance and identify needed improvements . ( see app . iii for additional information about industry actions to address consumer concerns. ) i for a more detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) this report does not contain all of the results from the consumer and state utility commission surveys . the surveys and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed by accessing gao - 10-35sp . we conducted this performance audit from september 2008 to november 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .