mpdc had no technical corrections . we are providing copies of this report to the chairman and ranking minority members of the senate committee on governmental affairs , the senate and house committees on appropriations , and the senate and house committees on the judiciary . we are also providing copies of this report to the deputy mayor for public safety and justice for washington , d.c. ; the chief , metropolitan police department of washington , d.c. ; secretary of the department of the interior ; the director of the national park service ; and the chief , united states park police . copies of this report will be made available to other interested parties . this report will also be available on gao's web site at http: / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or by e - mail at stanar@gao.gov or linda watson , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-8685 or by e - mail at watsonl@gao.gov . key contributors to this report were leo barbour , christine davis , glenn dubin , michele fejfar , jamila jones , nettie richards , amy rosewarne , and carrie wilks . to determine how the metropolitan police department of the district of columbia ( mpdc ) and the u.s. department of the interior's united states park police have implemented their closed - circuit television ( cctv ) systems , we interviewed officials from both agencies . we obtained and reviewed congressional hearing records related to the use of cctv in washington , d.c. we attended a d.c. city council public hearing and obtained testimonies of officials and civilians who addressed the city council . at the united states park police , we obtained documents related to the use of cctv as well as congressional testimony regarding their use of cctv . we interviewed representatives from the american bar association ( aba ) , the american civil liberties union ( aclu ) , the electronic privacy information center ( epic ) , the international association of chiefs of police ( iacp ) , and the security industry association ( sia ) to obtain their views on the use of cctv and obtained documentation from them regarding issues of concern to their organizations . in addition , we toured mpdc's joint operations command center . to determine how mpdc and the united states park police have implemented management controls to respond to the issues surrounding their use of cctv , we interviewed mpdc and united states park police officials and obtained and reviewed relevant laws , regulations , policies , and other documents . we also obtained and reviewed testimonies of officials and civilians at d.c. city council public hearings and reviewed draft comments by the constitution project that critiqued mpdc's regulations . we did not evaluate or test compliance with mpdc's or the united states park police's management controls . to learn about the experiences of other cctv users in the united states and the united kingdom ( uk ) we reviewed various studies and reports on cctv use by law enforcement . we reviewed studies and reports by or for sia , the california research bureau , rand , and the uk home office , among others .