( see app . white youth reported being bullied at higher percentages than african - american youth in two of the three surveys ( yrbs and hbsc ) , while the other survey found no difference . in two of the three surveys ( yrbs and hbsc ) , differences between the overall prevalence for white compared with hispanic youth and for african - american youth compared with hispanic youth were not statistically significant.hispanics reported a lower percentage of bullying than whites or african - americans . asian - american youths reported a lower percentage of bullying in the one survey ( ncvs ) that captured information for that demographic group . what is known about the prevalence of school bullying and its effects on victims ? what approaches are selected states and local school districts taking to combat school bullying ? when bullying leads to allegations of discrimination , what legal options do federal and selected state governments have in place ? how are key federal agencies coordinating their efforts to combat school bullying ? to identify what is known about the prevalence of school bullying and its effects on victims , we interviewed knowledgeable federal officials , compared estimates and methodologies of four nationally representative surveys that captured information on bullying , and conducted a literature review of meta - analyses on the subject of the effects of bullying on victims.aged youths and were conducted by federal statistical agencies from 2005 to 2009 . the results of the meta - analyses are not generalizable , but represent a systematic approach to summarizing or analyzing findings across studies included in the meta - analyses . to describe approaches that selected states and local school districts are taking , we reviewed relevant state bullying laws , regulations , guidance , and documents from eight selected states and conducted interviews with state education officials . we selected eight states — arkansas , california , illinois , iowa , massachusetts , new mexico , vermont , and virginia — based on the following criteria: each has bullying laws or regulations , and they vary with respect to bullying definitions and enumeration of protected classes , geographic variation , and student enrollment . further , we selected three states — new mexico , vermont , and virginia , which vary on the characteristics listed above — to review policies and guidance of six local school districts , two in each state . school districts and schools were selected to reflect a range of size and urbanicity ( urban , suburban , and rural ) , as well as racial and socioeconomic diversity . participation in the national school lunch program is used as a proxy for socioeconomic status . in these school districts , we conducted interviews with central administrators , principals , school staff , and parents . to identify legal the four surveys focused primarily on middle and high school - options that federal and selected state governments have in place when bullying leads to allegations of discrimination , we reviewed relevant federal anti - discrimination laws , as well as state anti - discrimination laws for the eight states included for review .