ii ) . forty - five states required insurance policies to cover specific services or supplies for diabetes . two more states , mississippi and missouri , required “mandated offerings” ; that is , these states required insurance policies to provide coverage for diabetes at the option of purchasers . some states' requirements applied only in narrow circumstances . for example , arizona and wisconsin required coverage of diabetes supplies only when a health insurance policy covered the treatment of diabetes . to what extent do state laws or regulations require health insurance policies to cover diabetes services and supplies ? to what extent does health coverage not subject to state insurance requirements — specifically , coverage provided by the largest health plans participating in fehbp and the largest private self - funded health plans — include diabetes services and supplies ? to what extent do individuals with diabetes , including those with health coverage and those without , receive diabetes services and supplies ? to answer these questions , we obtained information from federal health agencies and national organizations concerned with diabetes patient care , and we identified 10 services and nine supplies that individuals with diabetes may need . to examine the extent to which states require health insurance policies to cover diabetes services and supplies , we reviewed state laws and regulations related to diabetes coverage . to assess the extent to which health coverage not subject to state requirements — such as coverage provided by the largest plans participating in fehbp and by selected large employers' self - funded plans — includes diabetes services and supplies , we contacted the three largest national plans participating in fehbp — blue cross and blue shield , mail handlers , and government employees hospital association , inc. — as well as a random sample of 15 of the largest 50 fortune 500 companies regarding their plans' coverage of diabetes services and supplies in 2004 . we received responses from all three fehbp plans , which covered approximately 5.3 million people in 2003 , and from 13 of 15 of the employers we contacted , which together employed about 2.4 million people in 2003 . to collect information on the extent to which individuals with diabetes with and without health coverage receive diabetes services and supplies , we analyzed data provided by cdc from an annual national survey of individuals ages 18 and older known as the behavioral risk factor surveillance system ( brfss ) . this survey , conducted by the states , consists of self - reported data gathered from telephone interviews . we used data collected during 2003 , the most recent year available . we also obtained data from another cdc survey known as the national health and nutrition examination survey ( nhanes ) . unlike brfss , this survey combines an in - home interview with a physical examination to assess the health of a nationally representative sample of the noninstitutionalized u.s. population , including a representative sample of individuals with diabetes . we used data collected by this survey from 1999 through 2002 for individuals ages 18 and older . to assess data reliability , we reviewed cdc documentation of its data collection and discussed the data and their appropriate use with cdc officials .