ii . in addition to the individual named above , lon chin , west coile , debbi conner , kristi dorsey , kenneth johnson , hal lewis , duc ngo , thomas payne , henry sutanto , and christopher warweg made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to e - mail alerts” under the “order gao products” heading . it remains so today . how well federal agencies are addressing these risks is a topic of increasing interest in both the congress and the executive branch . this is evidenced by recent hearings on information security and recent legislation intended to strengthen information security . in addition , the administration has taken other important actions to improve information security , such as integrating information security into the president's management agenda scorecard . moreover , the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) have issued security guidance to agencies . fms is the bureau of the u.s. department of the treasury that serves as the federal government's financial manager . its mission is to provide central payment services to federal agencies , operate federal collection and deposit systems , manage delinquent debt owed to the federal government , and provide governmentwide accounting and reporting services . fms processes about $3 trillion in collections and disbursements annually . to help it accomplish its mission , fms maintains multiple financial and information systems to help it process and reconcile monies disbursed and collected by the various government agencies . these banking , collection , and disbursement systems are also used to process agency transactions , record relevant data , transfer funds to and from the treasury , and facilitate the reconciliation of those transactions .