the permits are also acceptable to the public because they are free . only about half the field unit officials were satisfied with existing fines for ohv violations in their units . blm field unit officials were less likely to be satisfied with their existing fines than forest service or park service officials . additionally , about half the field unit officials indicated that existing fines were insufficient to deter illegal or unsafe ohv use . for example , one blm official in utah pointed out that the fine amount for driving in a closed area is $150 . although this fine is one of the highest fines for an ohv violation in the moab area , the official said the amount is negligible when compared with the overall expense that most ohv enthusiasts invest in their sport , including the cost of an ohv , the trailer to transport it , and safety gear for the rider . consistent with applicable laws , forest service and blm maximum fine amounts for violations of ohv regulations are $500 and $1,000 , respectively . but fine amounts for specific ohv - related violations are developed at the local level . specifically , the 94 federal court districts throughout the country maintain fine schedules for violations of federal regulations . the u.s. attorney in each federal court district is responsible for prosecuting individuals who violate ohv regulations within that district . local judicial authorities , such as magistrates presiding in those federal court districts , have discretion to increase or decrease the existing fine schedules through local court rules . consequently , fine amounts for similar ohv violations can vary substantially , depending on which federal court district the violation occurs in . for example , among california's four federal court districts , the fine for disturbing land or wildlife while traveling off road in an ohv ranges from $50 in the central district up to $250 in the eastern district . to modify the fine schedule in a particular federal court district , agency officials must work with the relevant u.s. attorney to petition the local magistrate within that district . in 2001 , blm proposed comparing fine amounts across various u.s. district courts to determine the range of fines for motorized ohv - related violations and then petitioning the courts to modify the fines where appropriate . blm officials told us , however , that this analysis has not been conducted at a national level . in addition , officials at some of the field units we visited said they had recently petitioned to change the fine schedules or were planning such a petition in the future . for example , officials from the forest service and park service in colorado said that they had successfully petitioned the local magistrate to raise the fines . an uncompahgre national forest official said that the new fine for riding an ohv off a designated route is $250 , which he said is more appropriate . some ohv violations are adjudicated in federal court , either because a law enforcement officer requires an ohv rider to make a court appearance or because the ohv rider decides to appeal a citation .