other differences resulted from rounding . as would be expected , our review of the descriptive information on ehs projects found that those agencies with missions directly related to protecting the environment or human health and safety devoted a greater percentage of their nanotechnology research budgets to studying ehs risks . for example , in fiscal year 2006 , niosh reported devoting 100 percent of its fiscal year 2006 nanotechnology research funds to support 23 projects to study ehs risks . these projects focused primarily on worker safety and exposure , such as gathering data on workplace exposure to nanomaterials and evaluating the extent to which particle size affects the toxicity of inhaled nanomaterials . similarly , epa reported devoting 82 percent of its nanotechnology research budget to study ehs risks . this research included human health - focused projects to examine the toxicity of manufactured nanomaterials at the molecular and cellular level , as well as environmentally focused projects to evaluate how nanomaterials disperse and change under different environmental conditions and the extent to which nanomaterials accumulate in the bodies of various animal species . in contrast , we found that agencies with broader missions devoted a smaller portion of their nanotechnology research funds to study ehs issues . for example , nist , an agency oriented toward measurement science and standards , dedicated 3 percent of its nanotechnology research budget to ehs risks in fiscal year 2006 . the majority of its research funding focused on such pcas as fundamental phenomena and processes ; nanoscale devices and systems ; and instrumentation research , metrology , and standards . similarly , nsf dedicated 6 percent of its fiscal year 2006 nanotechnology research funds on research related to ehs risks as compared with 41 percent focused on fundamental phenomena and processes . in fiscal year 2008 , funding for both ehs - related research and nanoscale research in general is projected to grow . overall nanotechnology research is projected to increase in fiscal year 2008 to about $1.4 billion , or an increase of 20 percent over fiscal year 2005 figures . funding for ehs - related research is expected to increase to approximately $59 million , an increase of 68 percent over fiscal year 2005 levels . as a result , ehs research would grow to about 4 percent of projected nanotechnology research in fiscal year 2008 . about 18 percent of the total research dollars reported by the agencies as being primarily focused on the study of nanotechnology - related ehs risks in fiscal year 2006 cannot actually be attributed to this purpose . specifically , our analysis found that 22 of the 119 projects funded by five federal agencies were not primarily related to studying ehs risks . these 22 projects accounted for about $7 million of the total that the nni reported as supporting research primarily focused on ehs risks . almost all of these projects — 20 out of 22 — were funded by nsf , with the two additional projects funded by niosh . see table 2 for our analysis of the nanotechnology research projects reported as being primarily focused on ehs risks .