pub . 110-85 , § 1113 , 121 stat . serious and life - threatening infectious diseases.to counter some of the business risks a drug sponsor must undertake when developing antibiotics . for example , the orphan drug act provides incentives including a 7-year period of marketing exclusivity to sponsors of approved orphan drugs , a tax credit of 50 percent of the cost of conducting human clinical testing , research grants for clinical testing of new therapies to treat orphan diseases , and exemption from the fees that are typically charged when sponsors submit ndas for fda's review . sponsors may also be eligible for a faster review of their applications for market approval . sponsors of all drugs are required to keep the information on their drug labels accurate . unlike labels for most other types of drugs , labels for antibiotics contain breakpoints . these breakpoints may continue to change over time , and the sponsors of antibiotics are tasked with the additional responsibility of maintaining up - to - date breakpoints on labels . although sponsors are required to maintain up - to - date breakpoints on their labels , fda has acknowledged that many antibiotics are labeled with outdated breakpoints . outdated breakpoints can result in health care providers unknowingly selecting ineffective treatments , which can also contribute to additional bacterial resistance to antibiotics . monitoring breakpoints on labels and keeping them up to date can be a challenging process . the most accurate way to monitor and determine if a breakpoint on a label is up to date is to conduct both clinical trials and laboratory studies , but these can be difficult and expensive and may not be appropriate in all circumstances . for example , clinical trials require the enrollment of large numbers of patients , which may be difficult to achieve , to ensure an understanding of a drug's safety and effectiveness against specific bacteria . enrollment may also be difficult for clinical trials involving antibiotic - resistant bacteria . unlike clinical trials for a new cancer drug , for example , where researchers are able to target drugs to a patient population with a specific type of cancer , this may not necessarily be the case for antibacterial drugs . there are no rapid diagnostic tests available to help a researcher identify patients with antibiotic - resistant infections who would be eligible for such trials . laboratory studies , such as susceptibility testing , can be less costly than clinical trials ; however , they still require significant microbiology expertise . susceptibility testing reveals an antibiotic's breakpoint — that is , its ability to kill or inhibit the growth of a specific bacterial pathogen . as such , the results of such tests can provide a sponsor with some data to help update its antibiotic label with more accurate information . guidelines for developing appropriate susceptibility tests are available from standards - setting organizations , such as the clinical and laboratory standards institute . sponsors may obtain information from such organizations to help them conduct susceptibility tests for their antibiotics or otherwise determine if the breakpoints on their antibiotic labels are up to date . according to fda officials , much of this information is available free online and at conferences .