the department agreed with our recommendations . the department's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . in addition , the department provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members , house and senate committees on armed services , and other interested committees . we are also sending a copy to the director of the office of management and budget , the secretary of the army , the chief of staff of the army , and the chief , u.s. army reserve , and we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4402 or by e - mail at stlaurentj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . major contributors to this report are included in appendix iii . ( see fig . members of all three categories are subject to mobilization in the event of national emergency . the army's ready reserve includes about 310,000 members and is made up of two subcategories: the selected reserve , which has about 197,500 members , and the individual ready reserve , which comprises about 112,500 members . the selected reserve includes soldiers who are assigned to units and participate in at least 48 scheduled drills or training periods each year and serve on active duty for training at least 14 days each year ; soldiers who voluntarily serve on extended tours of active duty ; and soldiers assigned on an individual basis to various headquarters where they would serve if mobilized and train on a part - time basis to prepare for mobilization . members of the individual ready reserve include individuals who were previously trained during periods of active service , but have not completed their service obligations ; individuals who have completed their service obligation and voluntarily retain their reserve status ; and personnel who have not completed basic training . most of these members are not assigned to organized units , do not attend weekend or annual training , and do not receive pay unless they are called to active duty . the army's standby reserve represents about 1,030 personnel who maintain their army affiliation without being in the ready reserve . standby reserve personnel have been designated key civilian employees who have responsibilities that would keep them from being mobilized , such as members of the congress , or have temporary hardships or disabilities that prevent them from participating in reserve activities . these personnel can be mobilized if necessary to fill manpower needs in specific skills . the army retired reserve comprises all reserve officers and enlisted personnel who receive retired pay on the basis of active or reserve service and may be ordered to active duty in emergency situations . currently , about 747,000 personnel are in the retired reserve .