we also interviewed agency officials . specifically , we interviewed officials with phmsa , the federal energy regulatory commission , the bureau of land management within the department of the interior , and the environmental protection agency , to understand how they participated in the task force and to what degree they have responsibilities related to natural gas storage safety enforcement . in addition , we obtained data from phmsa and doe's energy information administration about natural gas storage sites to gain an estimate of the number and regulatory status of various natural gas storage sites , their locations , and other details . we assessed the reliability of these data by ( 1 ) corroborating these data with other sources , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . ( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dot for review and comment . in written comments , dot concurred with the report's recommendations and provided additional information on steps they are taking or plan to take as part of their oversight of natural gas storage sites . in addition , dot stated that it would provide a detailed response to each recommendation within 60 days of our final report's issuance . we have previously reported that requirements under gpra and the gpra modernization act of 2010 can serve as leading practices for planning at lower levels of the agency . we also interviewed phmsa officials — including budgetary , policy , and programmatic officials — about their planning efforts for the natural gas storage program . in addition , we reviewed regulations and documents that reflect agency planning efforts , including: phmsa's interim final rule on the safety of underground natural gas storage facilities ; agency guidance , such as frequently asked questions for operators of natural gas storage sites ; and agency planning documents , such as the training implementation plan for natural gas underground storage regulation training , phmsa 2021 business plan - 2017 , and workload and budget estimates for the program . using information obtained from these sources about phmsa's efforts to plan for its natural gas storage program , we compared phmsa's planning efforts with leading practices for strategic planning identified in our prior reports . we conducted this performance audit from november 2016 to november 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . table 3 identifies the 415 natural gas storage sites active as of january 2016 , by state and jurisdiction . the number of natural gas storage sites that fall under federal or state jurisdiction in each state is presented , along with the total storage capacity of the sites .