some of these were related to gprama requirements . for example , more than a quarter ( 14 of 46 ) of goal leaders identified practices related to measuring goal progress , such as assigning responsibility for meeting milestones , as helpful in managing apgs . gprama states that apgs are to have clearly defined quarterly milestones and balanced performance measures for assessing goal progress . goal leaders emphasized the importance of not only developing measures but developing ones that are meaningful and reliable indicators of goal progress . for example , the chief operating officer at the office of personnel management ( opm ) , who led the agency's ensure high quality federal employees apg , said that she had worked to make sure the agency used appropriate and consistent measures to track goal progress . other commonly - cited practices include several related to coordination across an agency or program , which omb guidance specifies that goal leaders should have the authority to do . goal leaders noted effective methods of coordination such as reaching out to agency field staff , employee unions , and non - federal entities . goal leaders also identified practices that stem from the gprama requirement that agencies review apg progress quarterly . as noted earlier , goal leaders cited benefits from quarterly performance review ( qpr ) meetings , which they said have promoted coordination , accountability , and attention to goal progress , and have provided opportunities to get feedback directly from agency leaders . goal leaders reported that they share information on apg challenges and practices for managing their goals , although information sharing outside of their agencies is generally limited to officials with whom they are already working . they reported several examples of sharing information within their agencies , most frequently through agency meetings , such as qprs . for example , the director of the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) international space station division , who is the goal leader for the agency's sustain operations and full utilization of the international space station apg , told us that the agency's baseline performance review meetings , through which the agency holds qprs , have facilitated his sharing of lessons learned with another nasa goal leader whose apg also involves human space flight . the written response from the social security administration is reproduced in appendix iii . we are sending copies of this report to the director of omb as well as appropriate congressional committees and other interested parties . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or mihmj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . agency / goal department of agriculture: assist rural communities build and maintain prosperity through increased agricultural exports .