the following provides some suggestions in that regard . we believe that the congress should consider providing governmentwide authority to implement broad banding , other pay for performance systems , and other personnel authorities whereby whole agencies are allowed to use additional authorities after opm has certified that they have the institutional infrastructures in place to make effective and fair use of those authorities . to obtain additional authority , an agency should be required to have an opm - approved human capital plan that is fully integrated with the agency's strategic plan . these plans need to describe the agency's critical human capital needs and how the new provisions will be used to address the critical needs . the plan should also identify the safeguards or other measures that will be applied to ensure that the authorities are carried out fairly and in a manner consistent with merit system principles and other national goals . furthermore , the congress should establish statutory principles for the standards that an agency must have in place before opm can grant additional pay flexibilities . the standards for dod's performance management system contained in the national security personnel system act are the appropriate place to start . an agency would have to demonstrate , and opm would have to certify , that a modern , effective , credible , and , as appropriate , validated performance management system with adequate safeguards , including reasonable transparency and appropriate accountability mechanisms , is in place to support more performance - based pay and related personnel decisions before the agency could put the new system in operation . opm should be required to act on any individual certifications within prescribed time frames ( eg , 30 – 60 days ) . consistent with our suggestion to have dod evaluate and report on its efforts , agencies should also be required to evaluate the use of any new pay or other human capital authorities periodically . such evaluations , in consultation with or subject to review of opm , could be broadly modeled on the evaluation requirements of opm's personnel demonstration program . additional efforts should be undertaken to move the ses to an approach where pay and rewards are more closely tied to performance . this is consistent with the proposed senior executive service reform act of 2003 . any effort to link pay to performance presupposes that effective , results - oriented strategic and annual performance planning and reporting systems are in place in an agency . that is , agencies must have a clear understanding of the program results to be achieved and the progress that is being made toward those intended results if they are to link pay to performance . the ses needs to take the lead in matters related to pay for performance . we believe it would be highly desirable for the congress to establish a governmentwide fund where agencies , based on a sound business case , could apply to opm for funds to be used to modernize their performance management systems and ensure that those systems have adequate safeguards to prevent abuse . too often , agencies lack the performance management systems needed to effectively and fairly make pay and other personnel decisions .