gao - 15-221 . ( washington dc: january 2015 ) . faa is developing an approach , called an enterprise approach , to connect and protect its information systems enterprise - wide . the enterprise approach views ip - networked systems as subsystems within the larger enterprise - wide system . under this approach , the subsystems can interoperate while an enterprise - wide set of shared cybersecurity controls , called “common controls,” and a monitoring program protect and increase the resiliency of the subsystems . according to faa officials and cybersecurity experts we spoke to , using common controls in an enterprise approach increases the efficiency of cybersecurity efforts . for example , nist recommends the use of common controls because when new threats to the system are discovered and those threats can be addressed by revisions to common controls , agencies can then immediately protect all the interoperating subsystems by revising just the common control . for isolated , legacy systems , cybersecurity control revisions have to be developed and implemented uniquely for each individual system . faa officials said that they apply both common controls and individual system controls , where appropriate , to ip - connected systems interoperating within an enterprise domain , in accordance with nist guidance and omb policy . twelve of our 15 cybersecurity experts discussed enterprise - level holistic threat modeling , and all 12 agreed that faa should develop such a model to strengthen cybersecurity agency - wide . nist and the 12 experts we consulted said that threat modeling , a cybersecurity best practice , enables an organization to identify known threats , including insider threats , across its organization and align its cybersecurity efforts and limited resources accordingly to protect its mission . nist guidance also states that an integrated , agency - wide view for managing risk can address the complex relationship among missions , the business processes needed to carry out missions , and the information systems supporting those missions and processes . faa's acquisition management system is evolving to stay up - to - date on federal cybersecurity guidance as faa designs and develops nextgen systems ; and faa has made significant strides in incorporating requirements for security controls recommended by nist guidelines into its acquisition of these systems . while faa generally followed many of the nist guidelines for establishing security controls in the two key nextgen acquisitions we examined , we found instances where faa lacked assurance that security weaknesses were properly addressed . for sbss , faa did not ensure that weaknesses identified during security reviews were adequately tracked and in some cases were not resolved on a timely basis . as a result , faa lacked assurance that weaknesses that could compromise system security were addressed , exposing systems to potential compromise . faa has taken steps to ensure future incidents do not occur , such as creating a more robust remediation system for tracking weaknesses . also , for both systems , faa has not yet adopted , as directed by omb , the latest security controls recommended by nist guidelines , which reflect updates to deal with the evolving cybersecurity threat to information . these combined aviation operations are known as the enterprise .