iii ) . we also received comments from the acting administrator of cms on our draft , who did not disagree with our two recommendations ( see app . iv ) . fms did not have any comments on the draft . the statute provides for both mandatory and permissive exclusions . mandatory exclusions are confined to health - related criminal offenses , while permissive exclusions concern primarily non - health - related offenses . the federal acquisition regulation cites conviction of tax evasion as one of the causes for debarment ; indictment on tax evasion charges is cited as a cause for suspension . moreover , while a felony offense , the deliberate failure to remit taxes , in particular payroll taxes , will likely not result in an individual or entity being placed on the oig exclusion or gsa debarment lists unless the taxpayer is convicted . based on our work , we believe that it is unlikely that companies will be excluded or debarred for failure to pay delinquent payroll taxes . even if a taxpayer is convicted of tax evasion or other tax - related crime , the individual or business still may not be placed on the oig exclusion or gsa debarment lists . to place them on these lists , federal agencies must identify those individuals and businesses and provide them with due process . as part of due process , the agency must determine whether the exclusion or debarment is in the government's interest . for example , in our march 2007 testimony , we noted several cases involving conviction of tax - related crimes where the providers were not reported on the oig exclusion or gsa debarment lists . further complicating cms decision making on the consideration of tax debts for medicare , federal law does not permit irs to disclose taxpayer information , including tax debts , to cms or medicare contractor officials unless the taxpayer consents , which cms does not currently require . thus , certain tax debt information can only be discovered from public records if irs files a federal tax lien against the property of a tax debtor or a record of conviction for tax offense is publicly available . consequently , cms and its contractors do not have ready access to information on unpaid tax debts to consider in making decisions on medicare providers . further , cms has not implemented a process for continuously levying payments made by medicare contractors . as a result , irs does not capture at least a portion of payments made to medicare providers that owe federal tax debts . thus , none of the 25 providers on which we performed a detailed review had their medicare fee - for - service payments subject to the continuous levy program . as stated earlier , federal law allows irs to continuously levy federal vendor payments until the tax debt is paid . irs implemented this authority by creating a continuous levy program that utilizes fms's treasury offset program system .