reg . 66533 ) , provide contracting officers and grant officers with ample discretion to consider tax - related problems as a criterion for making awards . specifically , they noted that far 9.104-1 ( d ) requires prospective contractors to have , among other things , satisfactory records of integrity and business ethics . accordingly , they said , failure to pay taxes or abuse of the tax system would be a factor in making this determination . omb's comments provide us no basis to change our recommendation that omb develop and pursue policy options for prohibiting federal contract awards to contractors that abuse the tax system . while we agree with omb that the definition of “tax abuse” should be developed in consultation with those government officials responsible for administering the nation's tax laws , as the agency responsible for governmentwide procurement policy , we believe that omb should assume a leadership role in ensuring that contractors that abuse the tax system are prohibited from receiving federal contracts . as we discussed in this report , contracting officers have the discretion to consider tax - related concerns in making determinations as to a contractor's responsibility , specifically as to its record of integrity and business ethics . however , contracting officers are not required to consider a prospective contractor's tax noncompliance , other than tax evasion , in deciding whether to award a contract and , as all 47 case studies in our report clearly illustrate , contracting officers are not doing so . there is no guidance for contracting officers on considering tax information , even if the information is legally available to them , nor is there any coordinated mechanism to help contracting officers obtain accurate information on contractors that abuse the tax system . as omb pointed out , the existing suspension and debarment process includes an “other” category that provides for consideration of matters of “so serious or compelling a nature” that they affect a contractor's present responsibility . however , omb did not explain how this effectively prevents awards to contractors that abuse the federal tax system or provide examples of such debarred or suspended contractors . because the debarment and suspension process does not appear to be preventing federal awards to contractors that abuse the tax system , we continue to suggest that tax abuse be specifically designated or authorized as a cause for debarment , suspension , or ineligibility . as agreed with your offices , unless you announce the contents of this report earlier , we will not distribute it until 30 days after its date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the treasury ; the director , office of management and budget ; the commissioner of the financial management service ; the commissioner of internal revenue ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ; the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) ; the director , defense finance and accounting service ; the director , defense logistics agency ; and interested congressional committees and members . we will make copies available to others upon request .