equipment manufacturers . however , bep was not able to do so because it found that the potential costs to the federal reserve and industry are dependent on the height of the tactile feature , which has not been determined . bep obtained information from the atm industry on the potential impact of an added tactile feature . the industry estimated a range of $1.3 billion to $1.8 billion for non - recurring equipment changes to atms and a range of $600 million to $3.4 billion for increased annual transportation costs.the industry cannot make reasonable estimates until bep announces the specific height and application method of the tactile feature . as a result , the introduction of a tactile feature would require a major currency redesign . bep has faced difficulties developing a raised tactile feature , and it has fallen behind its estimated schedule . developing a durable - raised tactile feature has proved challenging internationally and for bep . a 2009 study bep commissioned showed that the tactility of features used by several other countries diminishes over time as the notes circulate . bep has not developed a raised tactile feature before , so it had to create an internal structure and process for testing and evaluating potential features . officials stated that bep had to test some options for application methods externally because it did not have the equipment . this lack of equipment lengthened the time to make a recommendation on an application method . as discussed previously , bep did not make a recommendation until 3 months after its milestone date of december 2013 . according to bep , it now anticipates finalizing an application method , which is needed to move forward on a tactile feature , by march 2015 . bep has had challenges in the past with the design and production of new features , challenges that have led to significant changes to bep's processes . specifically , in 2010 bep began producing the new $100 note , which included , among other new features , a plastic 3-d security ribbon woven into the paper . this composite of paper and plastic is unlike any other denomination of u.s. currency . after full production began , bep officials found creases in some of the notes . the creasing occurred on a sufficient number of notes that bep suspended production 9 months after it had started . testing found that there were several contributing factors , including the paper's moisture content , the amount of recycled material in the paper , and the amount of time between paper manufacture and printing . however , bep did not discover these problems until over a year after the problem occurred . the treasury inspector general determined that bep did not sufficiently validate its ability to produce the notes in normal production , which may have identified technical problems earlier . instead , the creasing issue was not discovered until bep had produced 1.4 billion notes , including an unknown quantity of defective notes . the problem delayed the issuance of the $100 note by 2 years and was resolved with assistance from the currency quality assurance program ( cqa ) .