i will refer to these payments as rent subsidies . public housing agencies ( pha ) administer the voucher and public housing programs , and private property owners administer the project - based section 8 programs . these program administrators are responsible for ensuring that tenants meet hud's eligibility criteria and for accurately calculating rent subsidies . each year hud makes improper payments — that is , payments that are too high or too low — under these programs primarily because it cannot ensure that rent subsidies are determined correctly . because of their vulnerability to waste , fraud , and abuse , gao has designated hud's rental assistance programs as high risk since early 2001 . in addition , the president's management agenda for fiscal year 2002 identified hud's rental assistance programs as one of nine program areas that have severe management challenges and that are in need of immediate reform . in response to these assessments , hud established the rental housing integrity improvement project ( rhiip ) in 2001 to increase accountability and reduce improper subsidy payments . my statement today is based on our february 2005 report to the subcommittee on housing and community opportunity , house committee on financial services , which requested that we examine hud's efforts to measure and reduce improper rent subsidy payments . specifically , my statement discusses ( 1 ) the sources and magnitude of improper payments that hud has identified ; ( 2 ) the actions hud is taking under rhiip to reduce improper payments in the voucher , public housing , and project - based section 8 programs ; and ( 3 ) the status and potential impact of hud's efforts to reduce the risk of improper payments by simplifying the process for determining rent subsidies . in preparing the report , we obtained and analyzed data on improper payments that hud collected for fiscal years 2000 and 2003 . we also interviewed officials from hud's headquarters and field offices , phas , and contract administrators ; examined laws , regulations , policies , and guidance related to subsidy determinations ; and reviewed relevant hud reports and studies . hud has identified three sources of errors that contribute to improper rent subsidy payments: ( 1 ) incorrect subsidy determinations by program administrators , ( 2 ) unreported tenant income , and ( 3 ) incorrect billing . hud has attempted to estimate the amounts of improper subsidies attributable to each source but has developed reliable estimates for only the first — and likely the largest — source . hud paid an estimated $1.4 billion in gross improper subsidies ( consisting of $896 million in overpayments and $519 million in underpayments ) in fiscal year 2003 as a result of program administrator errors — a 39 percent decline from hud's fiscal year 2000 baseline estimate . we estimate that the amount of net overpayments could have provided another 56,000 low - income households with vouchers in fiscal year 2003 . hud has initiated several efforts under rhiip to address improper subsidies in its public housing , voucher , and project - based section 8 programs .