dod partially concurred with our recommendations . efforts to protect u.s. ground forces with increased body and truck armor have been characterized by shortages and delays , which have reduced operational capabilities and forced combat commanders to accept additional risk in completing their missions . we are currently reviewing force protection measures , including body armor , for current operations , as well as the organization and management of the joint ied defeat to counter the ied threat . in prior reports , we recommended that the process for identifying and funding urgent wartime requirements be improved and that funding decisions be based on risk and an assessment of the highest priority requirements . more recently , we have recommended actions to ensure that the services make informed and coordinated decisions about materiel solutions developed and procured to address common urgent wartime requirements . dod generally agreed with these recommendations . dod has relied extensively on contractors to undertake major reconstruction projects and provide logistical support to its troops in iraq . despite making significant investments through reconstruction and logistics support contracts , this investment has not always resulted in the desired outcomes . many reconstruction projects have fallen short of expectations , and dod has yet to resolve long - standing challenges in its management and oversight of contractors in deployed locations . these challenges often reflect shortcomings in dod's capacity to manage contractor efforts , including having sufficiently focused leadership , guidance , a match between requirements and resources , sound acquisition approaches , and an adequate number of trained contracting and oversight personnel . the challenges encountered in iraq are emblematic of the systemic issues that dod faces . in fact , gao designated dod's contract management activities as a high - risk area more than a decade ago and have reported on dod's long - standing problems with its management and oversight of support contractors since 1997 . for example , because information on the number of contractor employees and the services they provide is not aggregated within dod or its components , dod cannot develop a complete picture of the extent to which it relies on contractors to support its operations . dod recently established an office to address contractor support issues , but the office's specific roles and responsibilities are still being defined . in assessing acquisition outcomes government - wide over many years , we have applied a framework of sound acquisition practices that recognizes that a prerequisite to having good outcomes is to match well - defined requirements and available resources . shifts in priorities and funding invariably have a cascading effect on individual contracts . further , to produce desired outcomes with available funding and within required time frames , dod and its contractors need to clearly understand dod's objectives and needs and how they translate into the contract's terms and conditions ; they need to know the goods or services required , the level of performance or quality desired , the schedule , and the cost . when such requirements were not clear , dod often entered into contract arrangements that posed additional risks .