credible information . state guidance notes that the legislative history indicates that credible information is not intended to mean only evidence that would be admissible in a court of law and that the standard should generally be regarded as low . the guidance provides latitude in evaluating the credibility of information and advises personnel conducting human rights vetting to exercise good judgment and common sense . it notes that major international nongovernmental organizations and most independent newspapers are considered to be relatively credible , whereas credibility among opposition groups and smaller nongovernmental organizations varies . according to dod's office of general counsel , while dod retains legal authority for final decisions regarding specific cases funded with dod appropriations , it relies on state's judgment in assessing the credibility of available information . however , embassy cairo did not submit a proposal for funding under the blue lantern post support program in 2015 . according to state officials , they did not conduct any outreach in egypt in fiscal years 2011 through 2015 because the number of blue lantern checks conducted in egypt during this period was small and because they prioritized outreach to other countries . without the cooperation of the egyptian government , state may continue to face challenges in obtaining complete and timely responses to blue lantern inquiries . the u.s. government completed human rights vetting for 5,581 egyptian security forces before providing u.s. - funded training in fiscal year 2011 through march 31 , 2015 ; however , our analysis of a sample of names from training rosters of egyptian security forces who received u.s. - funded training shows that that the u.s. government did not complete all required vetting prior to providing training , in violation of state's and dod's policies . in contrast to state's vetting requirements for training , state's policies and procedures encourage , but do not specifically require , vetting for foreign security forces that receive u.s. - funded equipment , including those in egypt . the primary method state uses in egypt to comply with leahy law requirements when providing equipment is to attest in memos that state is in compliance with leahy law requirements . various factors have posed challenges to the u.s. government's efforts to vet recipients of u.s. assistance . gaps and uncertainties in information have made it challenging for u.s. officials to vet some cases before providing training . dod's overall assessment based on this visit was “needs improvement.” according to the manager of the golden sentry program , dod planned to conduct another compliance assessment visit in egypt in february 2016 . under the golden sentry program in egypt , dod policy requires that its personnel conduct annual serial number inventories for certain sensitive equipment , including harpoon block ii missiles , certain types of nvds , and stinger missile systems . as of june 1 , 2015 , dod data indicate that omc - e was compliant with required annual inventory requirements for fiscal year 2015 and was able to account for 100 percent of the items subject to enhanced end - use monitoring , including harpoon missiles , stinger missiles , and nvds .