substation . this subproject included construction of an electrical power substation to provide power to the upf and y - 12 , replacing an existing substation at y - 12 . process support facilities . this subproject includes work to provide chilled water and storage of chemical and gas supplies for the upf . salvage and accountability building . this subproject includes construction of a nuclear facility for the decontamination of wastes and recovery of chemicals associated with uranium processing . main process building . this subproject includes construction of the main nuclear facility to contain casting and special oxide production capabilities and a secure connecting portal to the heumf . mechanical electrical building . this subproject includes construction of a building to house mechanical , electrical , heating , ventilation , air conditioning , and utility equipment for the salvage and accountability building and main process building . nnsa is required to manage construction of capital asset projects with a total project cost of greater than $50 million , such as the upf , in accordance with doe order 413.3b . nnsa's office of acquisition and project management manages the upf project under doe order 413.3b with funding from nnsa's office of defense programs through the uranium program . doe order 413.3b requires that the project go through five management reviews and approvals , called “critical decisions” ( cd ) , as the project moves from planning and design to construction and operation . ( see fig . doe order 413.3b also requires that , before project completion ( cd - 4 ) , nnsa issue a transition - to - operations plan , which is to ensure efficient and effective management as a project becomes operational and provide a basis for attaining initial and full operational capability . for projects likely to have an extended period of transition to the start of operations , an august 2016 memorandum from doe requires that nnsa develop a more detailed plan to attain full operational capability . the plan must be developed earlier in the project management process — before start of construction ( cd - 3 ) . in addition , nnsa must provide quarterly updates to doe's project management risk committee after completing construction until full operational capability is attained . the memorandum notes that doe's complex nuclear facilities can have significant risks that continue after project completion . these ongoing risks may impact achievement of full operational capability and thus require more efficient management . in september 2019 , we reported that doe officials stated that the august 2016 memorandum was largely created in response to experience with the integrated waste treatment unit facility at idaho national laboratory . this facility , which is intended to treat two forms of nuclear waste , is not operating as expected approximately 7 years after the completion of its construction . doe order 413.3b also states that projects with a total estimated cost of more than $100 million should have an independent cost estimate and external independent review prior to approval of the project's performance baselines for cost and schedule ( cd - 2 ) .