gao - 05-715r . washington , d.c.: june 9 , 2005 . we also interviewed officials and stakeholders . we did not evaluate dod's decision to implement the families first program or develop dps , nor did we evaluate the solicitation process for awarding the dps contract . we conducted this performance audit from september 2006 through may 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , lawson gist , jr. , assistant director ; krislin bolling ; renee s. brown ; michelle cooper ; arthur l. james , jr. ; tina m. kirschbaum ; lonnie mcallister ; maewanda michael - jackson ; charles w. perdue ; and bethann ritter made key contributions to this report . defense transportation: dod has adequately addressed congressional concerns regarding the cost of implementing the new personal property program initiatives . defense transportation: monitoring costs and benefits needed while implementing a new program for moving household goods . gao - 03-367 . washington , d.c.: april 18 , 2003 . defense transportation: final evaluation plan is needed to assess alternatives to the current personal property program . gao / nsiad - 00- 217r . washington , d.c.: september 27 , 2000 . defense transportation: the army's hunter pilot project is inconclusive but provides lessons learned . gao / nsiad - 99-129 . washington , d.c.: june 23 , 1999 . defense transportation: plan needed for evaluating the navy personal property pilot . gao / nsiad - 99-138 . washington , d.c.: june 23 , 1999 . defense transportation: efforts to improve dod's personal property program . gao / t - nsiad - 99-106 . washington , d.c.: march 18 , 1999 . defense transportation: the army's hunter pilot project to outsource relocation services . gao / nsiad - 98-149 . washington , d.c.: june 10 , 1998 . defense transportation: reengineering the dod personal property program . gao / nsiad - 97-49 . washington , d.c.: november 27 , 1996 . additional coverage options are available for the servicemember to purchase . under the current program , a servicemember has two options . under option one , the servicemember can purchase depreciated value coverage above what the government currently pays , and under option two , the servicemember can purchase full replacement value coverage . under both options , the servicemember shares the cost with the government . for moves within the united states and overseas or stored shipments , servicemembers can obtain additional coverage from a commercial insurance company . some private insurance companies and moving companies sell insurance to cover certain items of personal property during moves . additionally , some homeowner policies may cover some items in shipment . see table 1 for coverage and cost comparisons for the current dod personal property program versus what is planned under families first . we have completed several assessments that evaluated dod's pilot programs and plans for implementing families first .