according to the u.s . extremist crime database ( ecdb ) , since the september 11 attacks , 85 attacks in the united states by violent extremists — associated with both radical islamist and far right ideologies — have resulted in 225 fatalities . in response to this threat , in 2011 , the u.s. government developed a national strategy and a strategic implementation plan ( sip ) for countering violent extremism ( cve ) . primarily led by the departments of homeland security ( dhs ) and justice ( doj ) through an interagency task force , the federal government's leadership in cve is aimed at educating and providing resources to communities for preventing violent extremist acts . specifically , cve activities outlined in the 2011 sip and updated in the 2016 sip are aimed at enhancing the ability of local police and community organizations — including religious , educational , and non - profit entities — to provide information and resources to communities targeted by violent extremists and individuals who may have started down a road to violent extremism . these activities generally aim to provide alternative messages and options to terrorist or violent extremist recruitment and radicalization efforts through civic engagement . given the broad scope of activities associated with cve and the importance of effective programs to address domestic threats , you asked us to review the implementation and organization of cve efforts . this report addresses the extent to which ( 1 ) dhs , doj , and other key stakeholders tasked with cve in the united states implemented the 2011 sip and ( 2 ) the federal government has developed a strategy to implement cve activities , and the cve task force has developed a process for assessing overall progress . to assess the extent to which dhs , doj , and other key stakeholders tasked with cve in the united states implemented the 2011 sip , we collected information from each agency responsible for leading 44 domestically related tasks in the 2011 sip . specifically , we asked for information — including , for example , program descriptions , internal progress reports , and materials distributed to the public — from each agency on the status of actions taken to address their assigned activities between december 2011 and december 2016 . we assessed the information to determine whether each task had been implemented , was still in progress , or had not yet been addressed . to determine the extent to which the federal government has developed a strategy to implement cve activities and the cve task force has developed a process for assessing overall progress , we reviewed the 2011 national strategy for empowering local partners to prevent violent extremism in the united states ( national strategy ) , the 2011 and 2016 strategic implementation plans for the strategy , and other documents related to the creation and activities of the cve task force . specifically , we reviewed these documents to identify whether measurable outcomes and associated metrics had been defined , and compared this information against practices for creating effective interagency collaborative efforts and managing cross - cutting issues .