the federal reserve has been examining this issue . staff from tch and eccho noted that , until a regulatory change in 1994 , the reserve banks had a statutory advantage over private - sector competitors when presenting paper checks to paying banks . they considered this to be an anticompetitive pricing practice . they noted that tch faces difficulty obtaining smaller financial institutions as customers because the costs in switching providers may outweigh the pricing benefits for these institutions . federal reserve staff said that volume - based pricing is a common practice they believe helps maintain the efficiency of payment services . federal reserve staff said that they follow volume - based pricing principles when establishing pricing tiers and do not price their services below marginal cost . they added that they assign items drawn on a financial institution to a tier based on the number of checks the reserve banks present to that financial institution , with those institutions with more volume assigned to a lower - priced tier . they also noted that the private sector similarly establishes tiers based on volume . because private - sector competitors have similar price structures , and because any higher prices paid by lower - volume customers likely do not increase their overall costs significantly ( as discussed later ) , this practice also appears to benefit the payment services market overall . some private - sector competitors raised concerns that certain protections that helped ensure fair competition for processing paper checks have not been carried over into the electronic environment . according to the federal reserve act and federal reserve regulations , the federal reserve can obtain a same - day payment from a paying bank by debiting the paying bank's account at a reserve bank without being charged a presentment fee . to address this advantage the board adopted regulation cc's same - day settlement rule in 1992 , effective beginning in 1994 . the same - day settlement rule allowed any bank to present paper checks to any other bank by 8:00 a.m. for settlement that same day without presentment fees . see appendix iii for further details on the psaf methodology . over the years , the psaf has declined significantly , following similar trends in declining transactions , revenues , and assets associated with the federal reserve banks' payment service activities . following declining payment services revenues and assets , as well as changes in practices among payment services customers , the total imputed costs arising from the federal reserve's psaf calculations declined from $150 million in 2002 ( or an inflation - adjusted basis of nearly $194 million using 2015 dollars ) to $13 million in 2016 . however , as a percentage of total payment services assets , the psaf increased slightly from 1.3 percent to 1.5 percent during this period . federal reserve staff said that they use publicly available information to calculate the imputed elements of their psaf methodology and publish the methodology and its results annually in the federal register . additionally , all proposed and finalized changes to the psaf methodology , as well as a summary of the public comments on these changes , are published in the federal register and posted to the federal reserve's website .