gao - 13-270 . washington , d.c.: may 31 , 2013 . we did not consider the timeliness of the submitted reports . we received project documentation through may 15 , 2013 . additionally , for follow - on reports , we could assess only the projects funded in fiscal years 2005 through 2007 because the dod strategic plan's milestone requires submission of follow - on reports for completed projects within 2 years after the projects have been completed and transitioned to use within the military departments . we determined that the project - reporting data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of determining the extent to which the military departments met the corrosion office's reporting requirements . we did not assess elements of the actual report . we interviewed officials from the corrosion office , as well as the army , navy , and air force corrosion executives , to understand the process of what reports are required and when ; challenges and limitations , if any , in completing the reports ; and how projects are tracked if required reports have not been submitted . further , we interviewed these officials to determine why the required reports were not submitted . also , we determined what actions , if any , they planned to take to complete the reports . moreover , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of 43 projects for further review and conducted an in - depth analysis of the projects selected . we selected the sample using a random systematic approach . we ordered the population first by service , then by fiscal year , location , and project manager . next we selected a random starting point and then selected every third project . our nongeneralizable , sample - selection methodology ensured selection of a variety of projects over all fiscal years , locations , and services . we used a semistructured interview tool to obtain information from project managers and project personnel to understand reporting requirements and time frames as well as challenges and limitations , if any , that they had in completing the reports . we also reviewed prior gao work on dod's corrosion - prevention and mitigation program . to determine the extent to which dod has collected the information needed to determine whether benefits and other measures have been achieved from equipment - related corrosion projects , we reviewed key documents , including dod instruction 5000.67 and dod's strategic plan . we examined dod instruction 5000.67 to gain an understanding of the roles and responsibilities to develop procedures for corrosion planning and implementation , and to review , manage , and document project results . we examined dod's strategic plan to gain an understanding of the department's strategy to justify funding for corrosion projects by verifying the initial investment of corrosion projects and guidance on collecting information to check on any changes to the assumptions used in the initial estimated return on investment ( roi ) in order to compare , or recompute , the roi and determine whether the roi is lower than expected , as expected , or better than expected . finally , we examined guidance on internal controls to identify relevant responsibilities and practices that could be used as criteria .