we would be happy to answer any questions you may have . table 1 summarizes the three civilian corps . in 2006 , state established the arc within s / crs , whose members would deploy during the initial stage of a u.s. stabilization and reconstruction operation . these first responders would deploy to unstable environments to assess countries' or regions' needs and help plan , coordinate , and monitor a u.s. government response . since 2006 , s / crs has deployed arc staff to sudan , eastern chad , lebanon , kosovo , liberia , iraq , and haiti . when not deployed , arc members engage in training and other planning exercises and work with other s / crs offices and state bureaus on related issues to gain relevant expertise . members of the src would deploy during the second stage of a stabilization and reconstruction operation and would supplement arc staff or provide specialized skills needed for the stabilization and reconstruction operation . when not deployed , src employees serve in other capacities throughout state . through october 2007 , s / crs has deployed src members to sudan in support of the darfur peace agreement and to chad to support darfur refugees who had migrated into the country . in 2007 , congress granted state the authority to make available up to $50 million of diplomatic and consular programs funds in the fiscal year 2007 supplemental to support and maintain the crc . however , the legislation specified that no money may be obligated without specific authorization for the crc's establishment in a subsequent act of congress . legislation that would authorize the crc is pending in both the senate and the house of representatives , but as of october 2007 , neither chamber had taken action on the bills . in addition , state needs congressional authority to provide key elements of a planned compensation package for crc personnel . proposed legislation would allow state to provide the same compensation and benefits to deployed crc personnel as it does to members of the foreign service , including health , life , and death benefits ; mission - specific awards and incentive pay ; and overtime pay and compensatory time . however , the proposed legislation does not address whether deployed crc personnel would have competitive hiring status for other positions within state or whether the time deployed would count toward government retirement benefits . in addition , deployed crc personnel would not have reemployment rights similar to those for military reservists . currently , military reservists who are voluntarily or involuntarily called into service have the right to return to their previous places of employment upon completion of their military service requirements . further , s / crs is moving the crc concept forward without a common interagency definition of stabilization and reconstruction operations . according to s / crs staff and pending legislation that would authorize crc , reservists would deploy to nonhumanitarian stabilization and reconstruction missions . however , s / crs has not defined what these missions would be and how they would differ from other foreign assistance operations .