section 12302 . the secretary of defense delegated to the secretary of the army the authority to order army reserve soldiers to active duty . since september 2001 , the army has mobilized unprecedented numbers of army reserve soldiers ( as well as other reserve and national guard forces ) to active duty on lengthy tours . dod reported that as of april 2004 , about 96,000 army reserve soldiers have been mobilized to active duty at some point since september 2001 to carry out critical missions . in contrast to the army national guard forces that may be assigned traditional combat roles , army reserve forces are generally assigned combat support missions . the army national guard and army reserve both include military police and intelligence units . however , while the army national guard has special forces and other units that have combat mission assignments , army reserve units are generally limited to combat support mission assignments , such as supply , medical , and transportation operations . army reserve soldiers' mobilizations during the period of our audit were also affected by two other army actions . first , the army issued a “stop loss” order affecting army reserve soldiers in november 2002 . the stop loss order was authorized by statute and allows the army to retain soldiers in the service beyond their date of separation or retirement for an open - ended period . second , in november 2003 , the army extended the orders for all mobilized army reserve soldiers expected to return from active duty on december 1 , 2003 , for an additional year . there have been three major contingency operations involving mobilized army reserve soldiers since september 2001: operation noble eagle , operation enduring freedom , and operation iraqi freedom . in general , missions to provide domestic defense were funded through operation noble eagle , missions to fight terrorism outside the united states were initially funded under operation enduring freedom . more recently , missions related to the combat in iraq and subsequent policing operations in that region were funded under operation iraqi freedom . for example , army reserve soldiers participated in combat support missions in afghanistan that were carried out as part of operation enduring freedom , whereas army reserve soldiers participating in homeland security missions , such as assisting in intelligence data analysis , were considered part of operation noble eagle . according to army reserve data , approximately 45,700 army reserve soldiers were activated as of april 2004 . at that time , army reserve soldiers accounted for about 27 percent of all mobilized dod reserve components . many of these army reserve soldiers were mobilized as small units , including about 2,800 units with 10 or fewer soldiers and about 1,000 one - soldier units . the army assigns a separate unit identification number to each of these small groups or detachments of army reserve soldiers ( these units are known as derivative units ) . according to army reserve data as of april 2004 , the army reserve had soldiers assigned to almost 6,000 different unit numbers . while on active duty , all army reserve soldiers earn various statutorily authorized types of pays and allowances .