we agree . our point , however , is that applications that are lost could be easily identified and forwarded by a routine status review . currently , the time required to process these lost applications , as we point out in the report , averages about 7 months . in terms of the delayed applications , the department commented that it does not keep detailed diaries on every application and that the lack of an audit trail should not be a basis for “unqualified conjecture or speculation.” our statement that thousands of applications were delayed is based solely on detailed data provided by the state department . the department stated that we trivialized the role of the licensing officer when we explained that there are no formal guidelines to assist in referring license applications and the department further stated that decisions to refer license applications rely on practice , precedent , and the current state of foreign policy . the comments explained that licensing officers are trained to consider applications with the utmost seriousness . in our opinion , the lack of agreement and understanding between the licensing office and reviewing offices on the referral process demonstrates the problems that can occur when a process that requires actions and interpretations by a variety of people lacks formal guidelines . our findings and recommendations were based on lengthy and structured interviews with all licensing officers who had over one year of experience and officials in state department offices that receive these referrals . based on the information provided by these officials , it is clear that state department offices that receive referrals are at times confused about the referral process and licensing officers believe that further guidance would assist in making decisions to refer or not to refer a license application . in regard to the department's comment that our report is inaccurate concerning its automation plans , we held lengthy discussions with managers from the office of defense trade controls concerning their information technology plans and evaluated existing copies of automation plans . based on the state department comments , we requested any additional information on technology modernization plans that we had not seen . the department provided no further information concerning its plans . as stated in the report , the director of the office of defense trade controls told us that he plans to correct inadequacies in the licensing process during the modernization . as we pointed out , past gao work has proven that proceeding with information technology modernization without first correcting problems in current systems risks merely automating inefficient ways of doing business . the state department did not agree with our recommendation to develop criteria for determining which license applications to refer to other agencies and offices and to develop guidelines and training for offices that receive referrals . the department commented that they have made a conscious , deliberate , decision not to develop guidelines that address every country or commodity . the department explained that they have written operational and policy guidelines that are used extensively . the guidelines , however , are not written down in a single document and are heavily reliant on practice and the current state of foreign policy .