gao - 08-950 . washington , d.c.: august 12 , 2008 . this is illustrated in figure 4 . this means that the domestic corporation may be taxed on income that it has not received from the foreign corporation ( called a deemed dividend in figure 4 ) . this income is taxable when earned by the subsidiary , although cfc rules generally permit the domestic taxpayer to offset some or all of their domestic tax liability through credits on the foreign taxes paid on the income . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of internal revenue , and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or whitej@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vii . the objectives of this report were to ( 1 ) describe , for select case study countries that take a territorial approach , what types of foreign - source income the countries exempt and the rules governing those exemptions ; and ( 2 ) describe , to the extent information is available , the compliance risks and taxpayer compliance burdens that the taxation of foreign - source corporate income presents for each of these countries . to address our objectives , we selected five countries — australia , canada , france , germany , and the netherlands — to study based on several criteria , including range of tax treatments for foreign - source corporate income , unique tax system features , and organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) membership . to gather information related to our selection criteria , we interviewed a number of corporate income tax experts , including academics , corporate tax practitioners , corporate taxpayers , officials at the oecd , and government officials . we contacted those experts that we identified through our literature review , which is described immediately below , along with experts that were recommended by other experts . our literature review consisted of academic articles and books , national government publications , oecd and other multinational - organization publications on worldwide and territorial tax systems , and private sector research pertaining to various international aspects of corporate income tax systems and administration . to describe the corporate income tax systems of our study countries , we consulted with corporate taxpayers , business representatives , government tax officials , and academic experts . we performed an in - depth literature review on each country's corporate income tax system , focusing on the rules governing international taxation . we also reviewed research - based publications produced by professional services organizations , academic experts , and international organizations .