according to the u.s . global change research program's may 2014 national climate assessment and a 2010 national research council's report , precipitation patterns are changing , and the frequency and intensity of some extreme weather events are increasing . in addition , a 2009 usgs report found that changes in the climate could affect water resources management and require changed operational assumptions about resource supplies , system demands or performance requirements , and operational constraints . for example , according to the report , a shift in precipitation from snow to rain , combined with earlier melting of mountain snowpack , has been documented in western states . these two reported actions change the timing of runoff , affecting the corps' operational decisions about when to release water from reservoirs . section 1046 of the water resources reform and development act of 2014 includes a provision for us to audit the corps' reviews of project operations , including an assessment of whether the corps' practices could result in greater efficiencies to better prepare for extreme weather . according to a 1992 corps' report , project operations are defined as water control management that is routinely required to control either water level or flow , or both . our report ( 1 ) examines the extent to which the corps has reviewed or revised selected water control manuals and ( 2 ) describes the corps' efforts , if any , to improve its ability to respond to extreme weather . section 1046 of the water resources reform and development act of 2014 also required the corps to update its 1992 report about authorized and operating purposes of its reservoirs by june 10 , 2016 . the updated report is , among other things , to include a plan for reviewing the operations of individual projects that meet specified requirements . the act also includes a provision for us to review the plan in the updated report . however , according to officials from the corps and from the office of the assistant secretary of the army for civil works , the corps did not update the report as required by the statutory deadline because of funding constraints ; therefore , we were unable to review the updated report . to address both objectives , we reviewed relevant laws and executive orders , as well as our past reports on corps operations and preparation for extreme weather . we interviewed officials who are responsible for project operations at headquarters and all eight corps divisions . in addition , we interviewed officials from a nonprobability sample of 15 of the 38 corps districts responsible for water control management . we selected these districts based on criteria such as the corps division where the district resides , regional differences in weather conditions , and a range in the number of projects operating within the district . because this was a nonprobability sample , our findings cannot be generalized to all corps districts but provide illustrative examples of the corps' actions and strategies . we also visited two district offices ( los angeles and sacramento districts ) from our sample , where we reviewed documents , interviewed agency officials , and observed some of the corps' efforts to help prepare its operations for extreme weather .