sexual harassment . while sexual harassment is not a defined term in title ix , it can constitute sex discrimination under title ix in some circumstances if , among other things , the harassment is “so severe , pervasive , and objectively offensive that it effectively bars the victim's access to an educational opportunity or benefit.” some federal agencies and nasem define sexual harassment based on specific behaviors . specifically , according to nasem , sexual harassment encompasses three types of behavior: sexual coercion: favorable treatment conditioned on sexual activity . unwanted sexual attention: verbal or physical sexual advances that are unwelcome , including sexual assault . conducting periodic compliance reviews of funding recipients . grant funding agencies are required to conduct periodic title ix compliance reviews of university grantees . a title ix compliance review is an agency's assessment of whether a grantee is complying with the law . according to doj's title ix legal manual , federal agencies have broad discretion in determining which grantees to review for compliance . federal agencies may conduct these reviews on - site at a university ( grantee ) or via a desk audit . in both types of review , agency officials , among other things , review documentation that indicates compliance , such as the universities' policies and procedures for receiving , investigating , and resolving title ix complaints . during on - site reviews , officials interview staff , faculty , and students about their awareness of title ix and any issues of potential sex discrimination that they have encountered . investigating written complaints of sex discrimination against recipients in a timely way . federal agencies are required to establish and publish procedures for the prompt processing and disposition of complaints . an individual alleging discrimination on the basis of sex by a university can file a discrimination complaint with multiple entities , including the university or one of the federal agencies that provides funding to the university , which could include education or another funding agency . in 2015 , we reported on six federal agencies' grant making to women in stem research , including their title ix compliance activities . we found that the departments of defense , and health and human services were not conducting required title ix compliance reviews at universities they funded and recommended that they periodically do so . in response to our recommendation , hhs conducted three title ix compliance reviews in 2018 and according to officials , the agency initiated additional title ix compliance reviews in 2019 and 2020 . education and doj also have responsibilities for administering title ix . education plays a key role in ensuring compliance with title ix as it provides funding to most universities in the united states . doj's civil rights division is responsible for enforcing federal statutes prohibiting discrimination of protected classes , including title ix . under executive order 12250 , doj also has the responsibility for playing a leadership role in coordinating the “consistent and effective implementation” of several civil rights laws , including title ix . in 2015 , we reported that doj had no formal information - sharing process for federal agencies to exchange best practices on title ix compliance activities , and we recommended that it establish such a process .