the jassm - er is in developmental testing . developmental testing of jassm - er is primarily addressing the differences of jassm - er from the baseline system ( i.e. , larger engine and fuel tanks ) and will verify integration on the b - 1 aircraft . air force officials also stated that workers have to reroute wires and remove the engine so that the self - destruct mechanism can be installed and all of this rework inside the missile has the potential to lead to more errors and cause additional reliability issues . the impact of retrofitting missiles has become evident in the weapon system evaluation program , which is operationally representative flight testing run by users of the system and focuses on the performance of missiles in the inventory . jassm's performance in this evaluation program has not been good , with 7 failures in 12 tests from 2006 through 2007 , and with at least some of the failures attributable to the retrofit process . the addition of telemetry kits has also contributed to 3 no tests during other jassm flight testing . the air force has not yet flight tested any of the jassm inventory missiles that have been retrofitted with all of the corrective actions to address reliability issues . this type of test would be important in determining the viability of the current inventory of jassm missiles and would be a key input in the air force deciding whether or not to retrofit the entire inventory of missiles . the air force plans more flight tests in the next few years of new production missiles to meet missile reliability goals . for the jassm baseline missile to meet its reliability requirement , the air force is planning to conduct up to 48 additional flight tests , at a cost of about $120 million . in addition , most reliability issues with the baseline variant will directly affect the progress of the jassm - er variant as the missiles are at least 70 percent common in hardware and 95 percent common in software . anything learned during these flight tests about the baseline applies to jassm - er . program officials stated that , for example , they now know how many engineers are needed to perform a certain task and the number of hours it takes to assemble a missile . the air force can directly verify the costs charged by subcontractors . increased authority over design: in recent contract negotiations , the air force gained approval authority over certain design changes that may affect current and future lots , including those that may increase cost , require retrofit , or affect safety . previously , lockheed martin had full authority over most design changes . while the effectiveness of the cost control measures is not yet known , the air force appears to have limited options to actually reduce those costs . for example , annual production rates are expected to remain well below the levels projected at the start of the program . the 2008 air force cost estimate was based on an annual production rate of 280 missiles per year .