we disagree with this inference . the company's lines of credit are designed to be solely a liquidity facility . the committed lines ensure liquidity of asi's invested funds ; i.e. , they provide a mechanism for asi to quickly generate cash to meet liquidity needs , without having to liquidate the portfolio . resources available for funding losses are not the same as resources available for providing liquidity . lines of credit are not intended to be a source for funding insurance losses . in fact , banks would not provide a loan for such a purpose . asi's assets and its off - balance sheet sources of funding ( i.e. , the power to recapitalize the fund by insured credit unions under the asi's governing statute and insurance policy ) are its capital sources for funding losses , not the bank lines of credit . proportionately , asi's lines of credits are greater than that of the ncusif . asi's $90 million in committed lines of credit equates to approximately 47% of the company's total assets . ncusif's $1.6 billion maximum borrowing capacity ( $100 million from the u.s. treasury and $1.5 billion from the central liquidity facility , as disclosed in the ncusif's and clf's audited financial statements for the year ended december 31 , 2002 ) , equates to approximately 28% of its total assets . asi has other sources of liquidity when it liquidates a credit union - - that is the credit union's own liquid assets . approximately 42% of asi's primary insured credit unions' total assets are comprised of cash and investments – we believe this is significant . in addition , the non - liquid assets ( namely loans and fixed assets ) of a failed institution can be pledged as collateral for additional borrowings to generate short - term liquidity until such loans and other assets can be collected and / or sold . in essence , a failed credit union's total assets over time often generate sufficient liquidity to pay shareholders . any shortage ( historically less than 4% of total assets of the failed institution ) is usually funded as a loss by asi's assets . this is the same principle under which ncusif operates . d. 	 many privately insured credit unions have failed to make required consumer disclosures about the absence of federal insurance of member accounts as required under the federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act of 1991 ( fdicia ) , and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) is the appropriate federal agency to enforce such compliance .