dhs biosurveillance efforts . in 2015 , we identified persistent challenges related to two of dhs's biosurveillance capabilities , nbic and the biowatch program . we reported in 2009 that nbic was not fully equipped to carry out its mission because it lacked key resources — data and personnel — from its partner agencies , which may have been at least partially the result of collaboration challenges it faced . for example , some partners reported that they did not trust nbic to use their information and resources appropriately , while others were not convinced of the value that working with nbic provided because nbic's mission was not clearly articulated . in the 2009 report , we recommended that nbic develop a strategy for addressing barriers to collaboration and develop accountability mechanisms to monitor these efforts . dhs agreed , and in august 2012 , nbic issued the nbic strategic plan , which is intended to provide nbic's strategic vision , clarify the center's mission and purpose , and articulate the value that nbic seeks to provide to its partners , among other things . in september 2015 , we reported that despite nbic's efforts to collaborate with interagency partners to create and issue a strategic plan that would clarify its mission and efforts , a variety of challenges remained . notably , many of its federal partners continued to express uncertainty about the value nbic provided . we identified options for policy or structural changes that could help nbic better fulfill its biosurveillance integration mission , such as changes to nbic's roles , but we did not make specific recommendations . additionally , since 2012 , we have reported that dhs has faced challenges in clearly justifying the need for the biowatch program and its ability to reliably address that need ( to detect aerosolized biological attacks ) . animal surveillance capabilities . in the area of animal surveillance , we reported in may 2013 that usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) had developed a new approach for its livestock and poultry surveillance activities , but had not yet integrated these efforts into an overall strategy with goals and performance measures aligned with the nation's larger biosurveillance policy . under its prior approach , aphis focused its disease surveillance programs on preventing the introduction of certain foreign animal diseases and monitoring , detecting , and eradicating other reportable diseases already present in domestic herds . under this previous approach , information about nonreportable diseases , including those that are new or reemerging , was not always captured by the agency's disease surveillance efforts . we also reported in 2013 that under its new approach aphis had begun to broaden its approach by monitoring the overall health of livestock and poultry and using additional sources and types of data to better detect and control new or reemerging diseases . for example , aphis had been monitoring for the presence of pseudorabies — a viral swine disease that may cause respiratory illness and death — at slaughter facilities , but under the new approach , it proposed monitoring these facilities for a range of other diseases as well .