the smart office . in administering the standards set forth in sorna , the smart office is responsible for making determinations on whether covered jurisdictions have substantially implemented the minimum requirements of the law . when making a substantial implementation determination , the office is required to follow the standards set forth ( 1 ) in the act ; ( 2 ) in the sorna national guidelines for sex offender registration and notification ( national guidelines ) , which were issued in july 2008 ; and ( 3 ) in the supplemental guidelines for sex offender registration and notification ( supplemental guidelines ) , which were issued in january 2011 . these guidelines state that doj cannot approve jurisdictions' programs if they substitute a different approach to sex offender registration and notification that does not incorporate sorna's baseline requirements . likewise , the smart office cannot approve implementation programs if they dispense wholesale with categorical requirements set forth in the act . the substantial implementation standard does allow for some latitude to approve a jurisdiction's implementation efforts . as such , the national guidelines require the smart office to consider , on a case - by - case basis , whether jurisdictions' rules or procedures implement sorna . accordingly , for each jurisdiction , the office must assess whether any deviations in a jurisdiction's sex offender registration and notification program from a sorna requirement will or will not substantially disserve the objectives of the requirement . as a result , according to the smart office , it must review each jurisdiction's implementation program , sometimes iteratively . each jurisdiction is to submit a comprehensive set of materials ( which we refer to as a complete implementation package in this report ) so as to allow an assigned smart office policy adviser to conduct a substantial implementation review . these materials can include applicable state statutes , codes , administrative policy and procedures manuals , and documentation of database or data - sharing systems and the jurisdiction's public sex offender website . to assist covered jurisdictions , the smart office developed the sorna substantial implementation checklist tool that jurisdictions can use in developing , organizing , and submitting these materials for review . while not intended to be a definitive guide to full implementation requirements , the checklist is organized into 14 sections covering the major requirements of the act , which are described in detail in appendix ii . after reviewing a jurisdiction's substantial implementation package , the smart office makes a determination as to whether a jurisdiction has substantially implemented sorna by taking all of the jurisdiction's efforts into account . ( see app . ii for a description of the 14 sections. ) according to the office , the substantial implementation standard allows it some latitude to approve a jurisdiction's implementation efforts that deviate from sorna as long as the deviation does not “substantially disserve,” or undermine , the intent of the act's requirement . for example , while one of the substantially implemented jurisdictions does not include employer address , school address , or vehicle information of offenders on its public registry website , as sorna requires , the jurisdiction does provide the public instructions on its website on how to access this information .