in case of an incident . the following are examples of the hrfs' response in support of civil authorities: washington landslide . members of the region x ( washington ) hrf participated in the response to the march 22 , 2014 , oso landslide in snohomish county , washington . the landslide claimed 43 lives — making it the deadliest landslide in u.s. history , completely destroying steelhead haven , a community of about 50 homes , and burying portions of state route 530 for 2 months . a state of emergency was declared following the landslide and a request was made to deploy some of the region x ( washington ) hrf capabilities . the hrf provided personnel to assist civilian fatality search and recovery responders , and personnel , logistics , operations , and finance to support the national guard headquarters staff during the operation . hrf personnel were on state active duty orders under the direct control of the incident commander . figure 9 shows the region x ( washington ) hrf responding to the landslide in snohomish county , washington , in march 2014 . region iii ( pennsylvania ) hrf planning . according to officials with the region iii ( pennsylvania ) army national guard , members of the pennsylvania hrf participated in planning from march 2015 through september 2015 for the papal visit to the united states in september 2015 . the hrf worked with the other pennsylvania air national guard forces , the pennsylvania emergency management agency , the federal emergency management agency , the u.s. secret service , and the philadelphia fire urban search and rescue . the region iii hrf used the papal visit as a concurrent training exercise covering three national special security events for the papal visit in washington , d.c. ; new york city , new york ; and philadelphia , pennsylvania . the deliberate participation in the planning phase and in the on - site stand - by during the event provided members of the hrf with an opportunity to interact with city , county , state and commonwealth , and federal officials . this provided an opportunity to integrate the region iii hrf capabilities into a tiered response plan in the event of a cbrn incident during the papal visit . region iv ( georgia ) hrf planning . according to officials with the georgia national guard , members of the region iv ( georgia ) hrf participated in planning for a coordinated response to a cbrn or other incident during the september 2012 democratic national convention held in charlotte , north carolina . along with state and local responders , hrf personnel participated in the planning by providing state and local officials information about the capabilities it could provide in a response to a cbrn incident . in total , the region iv hrf and other national guard personnel were prepositioned during the event in charlotte , north carolina , as well as in rock hill and columbia , south carolina , to support any flow of response forces into the city to reduce response time , save lives , and reduce human suffering after an incident .