part 139 . one standard included in part 139 is that holes in airport pavement must not exceed 3 inches in depth . an airport representative we met with indicated that if a hole less than 3 inches deep is noted through a reporting system implemented under sms , the airport may postpone that repair until a later time as it is within the maximum depth allowed under the regulations and the risk is acceptable . additionally , it would not likely negatively impact the operations of a large aircraft on the runway . what are the key challenges faa and the aviation industry face in implementing sms ? what additional actions do aviation stakeholders believe faa could take to improve sms implementation and potential effectiveness ? to assess the status of sms implementation within faa and four key segments of the aviation industry , we reviewed faa orders , advisory circulars , and pilot program reports as well as faa guidance for internal sms implementation and for implementation in the aviation industry . we also interviewed faa officials and industry trade group representatives . to determine the key challenges faa and the aviation industry face in implementing sms , we interviewed faa officials and representatives from 20 selected aviation stakeholders — commercial air carriers , certificated airports , repair stations , and design and manufacturing firms — that participated in sms pilot projects . these 20 stakeholders , 5 from each industry segment , were non - statistically selected based on size , sms implementation , and industry sub - segment represented . ( results of these interviews cannot be projected to all companies in any of the given industry segments ) . we also reviewed documents from faa's rulemaking projects for commercial air carriers and certificated airports . to identify additional actions faa could take to improve sms implementation and potential effectiveness , we interviewed the industry stakeholders described above and foreign aviation authorities that are overseeing sms implementation , including australia's civil aviation safety authority , the european aviation safety agency , and transport canada . in addition , we interviewed two canadian airlines and one canadian airport that have implemented sms . we also interviewed faa officials to obtain their perspectives on potential actions . see appendix i for a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from may 2013 to june 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . when fully implemented , sms provides a continuous approach to managing safety risk , which faa expects will improve aviation safety . sms is not an additional safety program that is distinct from existing activities that accomplish an entity's safety mission , such as quality management , quality assurance , or similar activities .