large impact . department of energy officials from the state energy program explained that in some of the areas hardest hit economically , construction workers are paid less than the prevailing wage rate for the county . therefore , paying the davis - bacon prevailing wage rate will increase costs . likewise , department of justice officials responsible for the correctional facilities on tribal lands program explained that in some cases the prevailing wage rate may be significantly higher than what the tribe would normally pay for construction . department of energy officials responsible for the energy efficiency and conservation block grants program anticipated a potentially large impact as a result of the large number of grantees and significant proportion of funds that would be spent on construction labor wages . state and local officials we interviewed also had mixed views about the expected impact of the prevailing wage rate requirement on program costs . district of columbia weatherization officials explained that the prevailing wage rates were generally in line with what they would expect to pay and some state weatherization officials in california said the prevailing wage rates may be less than what some service providers are currently paying . data provided by state energy program officials in georgia indicated that contractor wage rates are higher than davis - bacon prevailing wage rates in a subset of counties . conversely , iowa state weatherization officials explained that the average cost increase would be about 9 percent per home , and one local lead hazard reduction program official reported that , based on historical experience , the prevailing wage rate requirement could increase program costs by 10 to 13 percent per home . one mississippi contractor we interviewed said the wage rates would not have an impact on costs because the hourly rates that the company pays its employees are and always have been higher than the davis - bacon rates . as table 2 also shows , federal officials reported mixed views on the extent to which they expected davis - bacon administrative requirements , such as paying workers weekly , to affect program administrative costs . for example: little to no impact . department of health and human services officials responsible for the capital improvement program and facility investment program for health centers said the requirements should have no impact on program costs since grantees were asked to include davis - bacon compliance in their proposals . department of energy officials responsible for the solar energy technologies program expected the administrative requirements to have a small impact because less than 5 percent of funds will be used for construction - related activities subject to davis - bacon requirements . department of housing and urban development officials responsible for the green retrofit program for multifamily housing said the administrative requirements would have a small impact because the grant recipients had previous experience with the davis - bacon requirements through other federal housing programs and were accustomed to requirements such as paying workers on a weekly basis . environmental protection agency officials responsible for the diesel emission reduction act grants program said the impact would be small because the majority of the grant funds are used to purchase equipment and are therefore not subject to the administrative requirements .