but the challenges are not exclusively those of the united states . the iraqis face the challenge of forming a government that has the support of all ethnic and religious groups . they also face the challenge of addressing those constitutional issues left unresolved from the october referendum — power of the central government , control of iraq's natural resources , and the application of islamic law . iraq plans to spend more resources on its own defense . iraq's security - related spending is currently projected to be about $5.3 billion in 2006 , growing from 7 to about 13 percent of projected gdp . the amount reflects rising costs of security and the transfer of security responsibilities from the united states to iraq . the iraqi government also owes over $84 billion to victims of its invasion of kuwait and international creditors . as of december 2005 , iraq owed about $33 billion in unpaid awards resulting from its invasion and occupation of kuwait . the pds continues to provide food subsidies to iraqis . the insurgency intensified through october 2005 and has remained strong since then . as we reported in march 2005 , the insurgency in iraq — particularly the sunni insurgency — grew in complexity , intensity , and lethality from june 2003 through early 2005 . according to a february 2006 testimony by the director of national intelligence , insurgents are using increasingly lethal improvised explosive devices and continue to adapt to coalition countermeasures . as shown in figure 1 , enemy - initiated attacks against the coalition , its iraqi partners , and infrastructure increased in number over time . the highest peak occurred during october 2005 , around the time of ramadan and the october referendum on iraq's constitution . this followed earlier peaks in august and november 2004 and january 2005 . according to a senior u.s. military officer , attack levels ebb and flow as the various insurgent groups — almost all of which are an intrinsic part of iraq's population — rearm and attack again . as the administration has reported , insurgents share the goal of expelling the coalition from iraq and destabilizing the iraqi government to pursue their individual and , at times , conflicting goals . iraqi sunnis make up the largest portion of the insurgency and present the most significant threat to stability in iraq . in february 2006 , the director of national intelligence reported that the iraqi sunnis' disaffection is likely to remain high in 2006 , even if a broad , inclusive national government emerges . these insurgents continue to demonstrate the ability to recruit , supply , and attack coalition and iraqi security forces . their leaders continue to exploit islamic themes , nationalism , and personal grievances to fuel opposition to the government and recruit more fighters . according to the director , the most extreme sunni jihadists , such as al - qaeda in iraq , will remain unreconciled and continue to attack iraqi and coalition forces . in addition , the imf estimated that iraq's external debt was about $51 billion at the end of 2005 .