ii. ) to describe how payment adjustments under the hvbp program have changed over time for safety net , small rural , small urban , and all participating hospitals , we analyzed data provided by cms on payment adjustments — the hospitals' bonuses or penalties — which are made prior to each fiscal year . we examined these adjustments for each of the hospital types , as described above , during fiscal years 2013 through 2017 . we analyzed hospital payment adjustments to determine what changes , if any , occurred over time and what differences , if any , existed in payment adjustments for hospitals overall as compared to safety net , small rural , and small urban hospitals . to determine what effect , if any , the inclusion of the efficiency domain score beginning in fiscal year 2015 had on payment adjustments , we compared these adjustments , efficiency scores , and weighted composite quality scores of our different hospital types . we made these comparisons by specific year for those hospitals that had an efficiency score during fiscal year 2015 , 2016 , or 2017 . what effect , if any , has the inclusion of the efficiency score beginning in 2015 had on payment adjustments ? to determine how safety net , small rural , and small urban hospitals performed relative to all participating hospitals in the hvbp quality and efficiency performance categories used for payment , we analyzed cms data on these performance categories , or domains , collected from 2013 through 2017 for approximately 3,000 hospitals . ( see app . i for a list of the measures associated with each domain each year. ) since a complete set of domain scores was not required to participate in the hvbp program after 2015 , we also analyzed the impact missing domain scores had on weighted composite quality scores , efficiency scores , total performance scores , and payment adjustments . specifically , we analyzed hvbp hospital domain scores , which , for the purposes of our reporting , we divided into two groups: ( 1 ) quality domains , which include the clinical processes , patient experiences , patient outcomes , and safety domains ; and ( 2 ) an efficiency domain , which contains a single cost metric — medicare spending per beneficiary . not all of the domains were included in the hvbp program each year , and the individual measures that make up the domains changed year over year . as a result , we did not compare the performance scores of hospitals from one year to the next . we compared the median hospital domain scores and total performance scores — the sum of the quality and efficiency domains after they are weighted , which serves as the basis for the hvbp payment adjustments — for fiscal years 2013 through 2017 for all hospitals participating in the hvbp program ( “all hospitals” ) with other types of participating hospitals within a given year . we therefore compared the median scores of all hospitals to those of safety net , small rural , and small urban hospitals in each year .