cap goals . another area in which transparency is important is in communicating progress on performance goals , but our june 2014 report on cap goal reviews found that the quarterly updates for the 14 interim cap goals did not always provide a complete picture of progress . for each of the cap goals , gprama requires omb to coordinate with agencies to establish annual and quarterly performance targets and milestones and to report quarterly the results achieved compared to the targets . the updates we reviewed were inconsistent , and some were missing key performance information , such as performance targets , milestone due dates , and key contributors to the goals , that was needed to track progress toward the goals . in one case , we were told that the data needed to track progress toward a goal were not available . staff from the real property interim cap goal team told us that they did not have data available for tracking progress toward the goal of holding the federal real property footprint at its fiscal year 2012 baseline level . in addition , we found that in some cases information on the organizations and program types that contributed to an interim cap goal , such as relevant tax expenditures , was missing . we concluded that the incomplete information in many of the updates provided a limited basis for ensuring accountability for progress toward targets and milestones for those interim cap goals and recommended that omb take a number of actions to ensure that all key contributors were identified and that quarterly and overall progress toward cap goals could be fully reported . these included identifying all key contributors to the achievement of the goals ; identifying annual planned levels of performance and quarterly targets for each of the goals ; developing plans to identify , collect , and report data necessary to demonstrate progress being made toward each of the goals or developing an alternative approach for tracking and reporting on progress quarterly ; and reporting the time frames for the completion of milestones , the status of milestones , and how milestones are aligned with strategies or initiatives that support the achievement of each goal . as described previously , omb has increased its emphasis on cap goal governance for the current set of cap goals , and omb has taken actions to address concerns our work raised about cap goal reviews . one of the actions omb has taken , together with the pic , was to develop revised guidance , in the form of a template , for cap goal teams to use to report quarterly progress updates for these goals . this template responded to three of our recommendations related to cap goal progress reporting by including a section for the cap goal teams to identify programs that contribute to their goals ; directing the teams to list targets for the key indicators they use to track progress ; and directing the teams to establish work plans with a list of specific milestones that should include milestone due dates and information on milestone status . the template also indicated that goal teams can organize milestones by each identified sub - goal , aligning specific activities with the objectives to which they contribute .