some of the missing restricted items had been improperly sold to the public . further , our may 2005 report noted that during fiscal years 2002 and 2003 , the military services needlessly spent at least $400 million to purchase new items instead of reusing identical excess items in new and unused condition ( a - condition ) . as a result , the new , unused excess items were sold for pennies on the dollar while the military services paid the full acquisition price to order these items from defense logistics agency ( dla ) supply depots . our recent investigative tests of controls over sensitive excess military equipment and technology items that require demilitarization focused on determining whether ( 1 ) dod was improperly selling these items to the public and ( 2 ) excess property warehouse facilities had adequate security to prevent unauthorized parties from obtaining excess military items with demilitarization restrictions . our investigative tests of controls for preventing liquidation sales of new , unused excess items that dod is continuing to buy or that are in demand by the military services focused on whether these items were continuing to be sold to the public . we used publicly available information to develop undercover identities and techniques used in our investigations . we conducted our investigations from november 2005 through june 2006 in accordance with quality standards for investigators as set forth by the president's council on integrity and efficiency . today , we will summarize the results of our recent work with respect to whether ( 1 ) unauthorized parties could obtain sensitive excess military equipment that requires demilitarization when no longer needed by dod and ( 2 ) systems and process improvements are adequate to prevent liquidation sales of a - condition items that dod is continuing to buy or that are in demand by the military services . in addition , we will highlight the status of dod corrective actions on the recommendations in our may 2005 report . the details of our work are included in our investigative report , which the subcommittee is releasing today . posing as private citizens , our undercover investigators purchased several sensitive excess military equipment items that were improperly sold to the public at dod liquidation sales . these items included three ceramic body armor inserts identified as small arms protective inserts ( sapi ) , which are the ceramic inserts currently in demand by soldiers in iraq and afghanistan ; a time selector unit used to ensure the accuracy of computer - based equipment , such as global positioning systems and system - level clocks ; 12 digital microcircuits used in f - 14 tomcat fighter aircraft ; guided missile radar test sets used to check the operation of the data link antenna on the navy's walleye ( agm - 62 ) air - to - ground guided missile ; and numerous other electronic items . we paid a liquidation sales price of $87 for the x - ray enclosure which had a reported acquisition cost of $7,235 . one of these instances involved an f - 14 fin panel assembly that we had targeted for an undercover purchase .