this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact jayetta hecker at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or by e - mail at heckerj@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include paul aussendorf , anne dilger , steve martin , richard swayze , and pamela vines . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . pension funding rules are flawed . existing laws and regulations governing pension funding and premiums have also contributed to the underfunding of defined benefit pension plans . such claims have been made for more than a decade . in 1993 , for example , a national commission to study airline industry problems cited bankruptcy protection as a cause for the industry's overcapacity and weakened revenues . more recently , airline executives have cited bankruptcy protection as a reason for industry over capacity and low fares . however , we found no evidence that this had occurred and some evidence to the contrary . first , as illustrated by figure 6 , airline liquidations do not appear to affect the continued growth in total industry capacity . if bankruptcy protection leads to overcapacity as some contend , then liquidation should take capacity out of the market . however , the historical growth of airline industry capacity ( as measured by available seat miles , or asms ) has continued unaffected by major liquidations . only recessions , which curtail demand for air travel , and the september 11th attack , appear to have caused the airline industry to trim capacity . this trend indicates that other airlines quickly replenish capacity to meet demand . in part , this can be attributed to the fungibility of aircraft and the availability of capital to finance airlines . similarly , our research does not indicate that the departure or liquidation of a carrier from an individual market necessarily leads to a permanent decline in traffic for that market . we contracted with intervistas / ga2 , an aviation consultant , to examine the cases of six hub cities that experienced the departure or significant withdrawal of service of an airline over the last decade ( see table 1 ) . in four of the cases , both local origin - and - destination ( i.e. , passenger traffic to or from , but not connecting through , the local hub ) and total passenger traffic ( i.e. , local and connecting ) increased or changed little because the other airlines expanded their traffic in response . in all but one case , fares either decreased or rose less than 6 percent . we also reviewed numerous other bankruptcy and airline industry studies and spoke to industry analysts to determine what evidence existed with regard to the impact of bankruptcy on the industry .