i and ii ) . we assessed the reliability of the data used in our analyses , and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted our review from may 2005 through june 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix iii for a more complete description of our scope and methodology . usstratcom's global missions provide a wide range of capabilities that are intended to respond to a dramatically changing security environment brought about by emerging global , transregional , and asymmetric threats to u.s. national security . unlike the command's nuclear deterrence and space operations missions , the command's global strike ; integrated ballistic missile defense ; intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ; information operations ; global command and control ; and combating weapons of mass destruction missions had not been previously assigned to a unified command . these newer missions have been performed , mostly ad hoc , by multiple dod organizations and the military services but did not have a primary joint sponsor and central focus within dod . the command's most recent reorganization , begun in late 2004 , shifted the day - to - day planning and execution responsibility for most of its missions from its headquarters to several new subordinate organizations . usstratcom intends that its latest organizational construct will provide greater focus , continuity , and performance for its missions and better accommodate the execution of the command's global responsibilities by reducing organizational layers and enabling communication and information to flow more easily from the most senior levels of leadership to those producing the information . for example , at the time of the november 2005 global lightning exercise , some usstratcom mission organizations were executing their processes and procedures without the benefit of complete and approved doctrine because several key concepts of operations for its missions , such as the concept of operations for horizontally integrating its missions , were still in draft form . in regard to these four recommendations , dod commented that measures are already in place that address the issues raised by the report . we disagree that the actions taken by usstratcom to date fulfill the intent of our recommendations and are complete . while usstratcom has taken some positive actions on these issues , we do not believe that the command's actions go far enough , are specific enough , or are sufficiently transparent in improving evaluation of the command's progress in implementing its mission areas , providing more complete guidance to its mission and service component organizations , and strengthening its external communications with other organizations and commands . therefore , we believe our recommendations are still warranted and we have added a matter for congressional consideration for congress to direct the commander , u.s. strategic command , to develop and implement a longer - term results - oriented management process for assessing the command's overall progress and periodically reporting to congress its progress in achieving desired outcomes . dod's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix v and more specific information on dod's comments on our recommendations and our assessment of these comments follows below . dod generally agreed with our recommendations regarding usstratcom's exercise program .