iv. ) hhs' response is reprinted in appendix v. hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , the director of the centers for disease control and prevention , the acting director of the national institutes of health , and others who are interested . if you have any questions or would like additional information , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 . marcia crosse , donald keller , william hadley , and roseanne price made major contributions to this report . the initial stage of lyme disease is usually marked by one or more of the following: fatigue , chills and fever , headache , muscle and joint pain , swollen lymph nodes , and a characteristic skin rash called erythema migrans . late manifestations , possibly occurring weeks , months , or years after infection , include arthritis , nervous system abnormalities , and heart rhythm irregularities , but for some patients arthritis or nervous system abnormalities are the first and only signs . ( 2 ) what funds and other resources have cdc and nih devoted to lyme disease ? we focused our review on those agency components with significant lyme disease research and education programs , cdc's division of vector - borne infectious diseases and nih's national institute of allergy and infectious diseases ( niaid ) . we reviewed program plans , grant lists , and financial documents for activities occurring from fiscal years 1991 through 2000 . cdc and nih research and education on lyme disease were examined in light of the stated objectives of the programs , recommendations to initiate lyme disease activities , and program reviews made by independent experts , but were not judged for their scientific merit . in addition , we compared cdc allocations for lyme disease with cdc's overall appropriations and budget authority for infectious diseases , adjusted for inflation . we compared nih obligations for lyme disease with appropriations for nih and niaid , adjusted for inflation . we also interviewed agency officials , patients , officials of patient organizations , and nonfederal researchers and reviewed minutes from agency meetings related to lyme disease . we did not perform an audit allowing us to attest to the accuracy of the allocations and obligations data provided by the agencies . we conducted our work from june 2000 through may 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . lyme disease was identified as a separate disease in 1977 because of a cluster of cases in children in lyme , connecticut , who were first thought to have juvenile rheumatoid arthritis . it was not until 1982 , with the discovery of the causative bacterium , borrelia burgdorferi , that lyme disease could be defined by nonclinical observations . carriers of borrelia burgdorferi include the deer tick in the upper midwest and northeast and the western black - legged tick on the pacific coast , two areas where lyme disease is considered to be endemic . lyme disease symptoms generally appear 7 to 14 days after transmission , but this period may range from 3 to 30 days .