however , p.l . 108-18 requires the service to use the savings in fiscal years 2003 and 2004 to pay down outstanding debt and in fiscal year 2005 to extend the current rate cycle . therefore , according to the service , all of the overfunding generated by current rates will be completely consumed by the end of fiscal year 2005 . the service currently uses a pay - as - you go basis of accounting for its retiree health benefits obligation . we previously reported that we believe the service should consider whether the accrual basis of accounting is both the acceptable and appropriate method for this obligation , especially considering the importance of giving full consideration to economic realities as the service attempts to transform itself in order to respond to major operational and financial challenges . postal service management and the board of governors , the postal rate commission , congress , and other stakeholders need to have a clear understanding of the service's true financial condition as difficult transformation decisions are being considered . it is our understanding that the service would not adopt the accrual basis of accounting under either of the proposals presented , but would disclose the amount of its retiree health benefits obligation in the footnotes to its financial statements . while enhanced disclosure would be a positive step , we continue to believe that accrual accounting is needed in order to provide all stakeholders with the soundest and most transparent basis for decisionmaking . in our view , the enactment of p.l . 108-18 could be viewed as a significant event that triggers the need to reassess the accounting treatment currently used by the service with respect to these obligations , and even more strongly reinforces our view that full accrual accounting should be adopted for financial statement reporting purposes . given the unique nature of the postal service retiree health benefits obligation and the impact of p.l . 108-18 , it may be prudent for the service and its auditors to consult with the financial accounting standards board ( fasb ) on the appropriate accounting treatment for this obligation for financial statement reporting purposes . a postal official has expressed concern that accrual accounting for this obligation would result in immediate rate increases of significant magnitude . we recognize that such an approach may initially result in higher rate increases than would otherwise be the case under a pay - as - you - go basis ; however , rate increases would likely be more moderate in the longer term . various options may exist for addressing the effect of recognizing this obligation , including possible amortization of any current unfunded obligation over a reasonable time period , such as 20-40 years . to further explore these options , we believe that the service should work with the postal rate commission and other appropriate stakeholders to determine options for phasing in any potential effect on postal rates . we will be assessing the impact of the accounting treatment for the retiree health benefits obligation for whichever proposal is adopted , as well as for the service's pension obligation , as part of our ongoing work . the service faces an uncertain future .