( recommendation 1 ) . they should also be documented and approved by management . in fiscal year 2016 , 22 of the 24 agencies had 81 security control implementation weaknesses based on the reports we analyzed . for example , at least two agencies failed to develop or document security control procedures and at least three agencies did not update security control procedures . in addition , at least one agency did not implement security control procedures . if agencies do not develop , document , update , or implement security control procedures , they cannot ensure that information security is addressed throughout the life cycle of each agency information system . an ongoing security awareness program should be implemented that includes first - time awareness training for all new employees , contractors , and users ; and periodic refresher training for all employees , contractors , and users . in addition , specialized training for those individuals with significant security responsibilities should be offered . further , all affected personnel should receive and acknowledge understanding the organization's security policies detailing rules and expected behaviors . specifically , organized criminal groups use cyber exploits to commit identity theft , online fraud , and computer extortion . terrorists seek to destroy , incapacitate , or exploit critical infrastructures in order to threaten national security , cause mass casualties , weaken the economy , and damage public morale and confidence . unknown malicious outsiders are threat sources / agents that , due to a lack of information , remain anonymous and are unable to be classified as one of the five types of threat sources / agents listed above . descriptions a method by which threat actors exploit the vulnerabilities of websites frequented by users of the targeted system . malware is then injected to the targeted system via the compromised websites . a digital form of social engineering that uses authentic - looking e - mails , websites , or instant messages to get users to download malware , open malicious attachments , or open links that direct them to a website that requests information or executes malicious code . an exploit that takes advantage of a system's insufficient user authentication and / or any elements of cyber - security supporting it , to include not limiting the number of failed login attempts , the use of hard - coded credentials , and the use of a broken or risky cryptographic algorithm . an exploit that takes advantage of the security vulnerabilities of trusted third parties to gain access to an otherwise secure system . an exploit that involves the intentional transmission of more data than a program's input buffer can hold , leading to the deletion of critical data and subsequent execution of malicious code . an exploit that takes advantage of a network employing insufficient encryption when either storing or transmitting data , enabling adversaries to read and / or modify the data stream . structured query language ( sql ) injection an exploit that involves the alteration of a database search in a web - based application , which can be used to obtain unauthorized access to sensitive information in a database resulting in data loss or corruption , denial of service , or complete host takeover .