reg . in our september 2011 report , we found that hrsa's oversight of the 340b program was inadequate because it relied primarily on self - policing by program participants and because hrsa's guidance on key program requirements lacked the necessary level of specificity to provide clear we also found that changes in the settings direction for participants.where the 340b program was used resulted in heightened concerns about hrsa's inadequate oversight . we made four recommendations to address these oversight inadequacies and to ensure appropriate use of the program . in its oversight of the 340b program , we found in 2011 that hrsa primarily relied on covered entities and manufacturers to police themselves and ensure their own compliance with program requirements . upon enrollment into the program , hrsa required participants to self - certify that they would comply with applicable 340b program requirements and any accompanying agency guidance . hrsa also expected participants to develop the procedures necessary to ensure compliance , maintain auditable records that demonstrated compliance , and inform hrsa if violations occurred . for example , covered entities had to develop adequate safeguards to prevent drugs purchased at 340b prices from being diverted to non - eligible patients , such as by using inventory tracking systems that separately processed the purchase and logged the dispensation of 340b drugs . similarly , manufacturers had to ensure that they properly calculated the 340b price of their drugs . hrsa officials told us that covered entities and manufacturers could also monitor each other's compliance with program requirements , but we found that , in practice , participants could face limitations to doing so . beyond relying on participants' self - policing , we found that hrsa engaged in few activities to oversee the 340b program and ensure its integrity , which agency officials said was primarily due to funding constraints . for example , officials told us that they did not require a review of the procedures participants put in place to ensure program compliance . further , although hrsa had the authority to conduct audits of program participants to determine whether program violations had occurred , at the time of our report , the agency had never conducted an audit . we found that hrsa's guidance on key program requirements lacked the necessary level of specificity to provide clear direction , making it difficult for participants to self - police or monitor others' compliance and raising concerns that the guidance could be interpreted in ways that were inconsistent with its intent . specifically , we found that hrsa's guidance on the definition of an eligible patient lacked the necessary specificity to clearly define the various situations under which an individual was considered eligible for discounted drugs through the 340b program . as a result , covered entities could interpret the definition either too broadly or too narrowly . at the time of our report , agency officials told us that they recognized the need to provide additional clarity around the definition of an eligible patient , in part because of concerns that some covered entities may have interpreted the definition too broadly to include non - eligible individuals , such as those seen by providers who were only loosely affiliated with a covered entity .