no requirement . ability to perceive those colors necessary for safe performance of airman duties . demonstrate hearing of an average conversational voice in a quiet room , using both ears at 6 feet , with the back turned to the examiner or pass one of the audiometric tests below . audiometric speech discrimination test: score at least 70% reception in one ear . pure tone audiometric test . unaided , with thresholds no worse than: no ear disease or condition manifested by , or that may reasonably be expected to be maintained by , vertigo or a disturbance of speech or equilibrium . appendix iv: faa form 8500-8 ( medical application form ) . not disqualifying per se . used to determine cardiac system status and responsiveness . no specified values stated in the standards . the current guideline maximum value is 155 / 95 . not routinely required . no diagnosis of psychosis , or bipolar disorder , or severe personality disorders . a diagnosis or medical history of “substance dependence” is disqualifying unless there is established clinical evidence , satisfactory to the federal air surgeon , of recovery , including sustained total abstinence from the substance ( s ) for not less than the preceding 2 years . a history of “substance abuse” within the preceding 2 years is disqualifying . “substance” includes alcohol and other drugs ( i.e. the bulletin is prepared by the faa's civil aerospace medical institute , with policy guidance and support from the office of aerospace medicine . aerospace medical certification subsystem ( amcs ) e - mail notifications are sent to ames and their staff through amcs . amcs support is available by phone , ( 405 ) 954-3238 , or e - mail , 9-amc - aam - certification@faa.gov . faa tv , http: / / www.faa.gov / tv , is a central repository for faa videos related to pilot medical requirements , among other topics . for example , faa has produced two medxpress videos: http: / / www.faa.gov / tv / ? mediaid=554 or http: / / www.faa.gov / tv / ? various outcomes . alternatively , if faa determines that an applicant's medical condition is static and non - progressive and has found the applicant capable of performing pilot duties without endangering public safety , the faa may grant a statement of demonstrated ability ( soda ) to the applicant , which does not expire and authorizes ames to make future medical determinations of the applicant , without requiring the applicant to go through the special issuance review process . according to faa officials , pilot medical standards were developed to help manage safety risk . faa's current medical standards have been codified in federal regulation since march 19 , 1996 . the regulations set out 15 medical conditions that are specifically disqualifying . medical conditions identified during an evaluation that are not specifically listed as disqualifying but do not meet the general medical standard regarding safe performance of duties and exercise of privileges , are also disqualifying under general medical standards , according to faa . ( see app . ii for a summary of selected faa medical standards. )