see comment 1 . we have modified our report to reflect this additional information . however , although our discussion of schedule and cost changes preceded our discussion of risk management , we did not intend to imply that risk management weaknesses had contributed to these changes . the contract was awarded in september 2007 . however , the bureau had delayed the dads ii contract award date multiple times . the award date was originally planned for the fourth quarter of 2005 , but the date was changed to august 2006 . on march 8 , 2006 , the bureau estimated it would delay the award of the dads ii contract from august to october 2006 to gain a clearer sense of budget priorities before initiating the request for proposal process . the bureau then delayed the contract award again by about another year . because of these delays , dads ii will not be developed in time for the dress rehearsal . instead , the bureau will use the legacy dads system for tabulation during the dress rehearsal . however , the bureau's plan is to have the dads ii system available for the 2010 census . no cost information on the dads ii contract was available because it was recently awarded . operational testing helps verify that systems function as intended in an operational environment . for system testing to be comprehensive , system functionality must be completed . further , for multiple interrelated systems , end - to - end testing is performed to verify that all interrelated systems , including any external systems with which they interface , are tested in an operational environment . however , as described above , two of the projects have delayed planned functionality to later phases , and one project contract was recently awarded ( september 2007 ) . as a result , the operational testing that is to occur during the dress rehearsal period around april 1 , 2008 , will not include tests of the full complement of decennial census systems and their functionality . according to bureau officials , they have not yet finalized their plans for system tests . if further delays occur , the importance of these system tests will increase . delaying functionality and not testing the full complement of systems increase the risk that costs will rise further , that decennial systems will not perform as expected , or both . the project teams varied in the extent to which they followed disciplined risk management practices . for example , three of the four project teams had developed strategies to identify the scope of the risk management effort . however , three project teams had weaknesses in identifying risks , establishing adequate mitigation plans , and reporting risk status to executive - level officials . these weaknesses in completing key risk management activities can be attributed in part to the absence of bureau policies for managing major acquisitions , as we described in our earlier report . without effective risk management practices , the likelihood of project success is decreased . according to the software engineering institute ( sei ) , the purpose of risk management is to identify potential problems before they occur .