content validity is the alignment of the standards and the assessment . evidence of the assessment's relationship with other variables . this means documenting the validity of an assessment by confirming its positive relationship with other assessments or evidence that is known or assumed to be valid . for example , if students who do well on the assessment in question also do well on some trusted assessment or rating , such as teachers' judgments , it might be said to be valid . it is also useful to gather evidence about what a test does not measure . ( 4 ) to what extent has education supported state efforts to comply with esea assessment requirements ? to conduct our work , we used a variety of methods , including reviews of education and state documents , a 50-state survey , interviews with education officials , and site visits in 4 states . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . to learn whether state expenditures for assessments have changed since nclba enactment , and if so , how they have changed , and how states have spent these funds , we analyzed responses to our state survey , which was administered to assessment directors of the 50 states and the district of columbia in january 2009 . we received responses from 49 states , for a 96 percent response rate . we also conducted site visits to four states — maryland , rhode island , south dakota , and texas — that reflect a range of population size and results from education's assessment peer review . on these site visits we interviewed state officials , officials from two districts in each state , and technical advisors to each state . to gather information about factors states consider when making decisions about the item type and content of their assessments , we analyzed our survey and interviewed state officials and state technical advisors from our site visit states . we reviewed studies from our site visit states that evaluated the alignment between state standards and assessments , including the level of cognitive complexity in assessments , and spoke with representatives from four alignment organizations — organizations that evaluate the alignment between state standards and assessments — that states hire to conduct these studies . these alignment organizations included the three organizations that states most frequently hire to conduct alignment studies , and representatives of a fourth alignment organization that was used by one of our site visit states . in addition , we interviewed four assessment vendors that were selected because they work with a large number of states to obtain their perspectives on esea assessments and the assessment industry . we used our survey to collect information about challenges states have faced in ensuring validity and reliability . we also reviewed state documents from our site visit states , such as test security documentation for peer review and assessment security protocols , and interviewed state officials . we asked our site visit states to review a checklist created by the council of chief state school officers ( ccsso ) , an association of state education agencies . a ccsso official indicated that this checklist is still valid for state assessment programs .