ii and iii ) . what are the operating costs for each agency at the embassy ? to what extent could agency program and / or routine administrative functions ( procurement , logistics , and financial management functions ) be handled from a regional center or other locations ? however , we did not find evidence of these types of analyses at the posts we visited . officials from several embassies told us they had considered these factors ; yet , they did not consistently document their analyses or the rationales for their decisions . although officials at the embassies we visited said that these types of considerations are included as part of their annual mission performance plan process , there was little evidence of analyses of long - term needs . moreover , we found little or no documentation explaining how previous projections were developed or the justifications for these decisions . for example , by the time the new embassy compound is completed in yerevan , armenia , the embassy will be four administrative officers removed from the person who developed the original staffing requirements , and current embassy officials had no documentation on previous projection exercises or the decision - making processes . thus , there was generally no institutional memory of and accountability for previous iterations of staffing projections . as a result , future management teams will not have accurate information on how or why previous decisions were made when they embark on efforts to update and finalize staffing projections . according to obo , the relevant geographic bureaus are expected to review and verify the staffing projections developed by individual embassies and confirm these numbers with other agencies' headquarters before they are submitted to obo . however , we found that the degree to which the staffing projections were reviewed varied . for example , officials at embassy belgrade reported that their geographic bureau was not an active participant in projection exercises . but officials at embassy sarajevo reported that officials from the same geographic bureau were involved in the projection process and often requested justifications for some decisions . in addition , we found little evidence to show that staffing projections were consistently vetted with all other agencies' headquarters to ensure that the projections were as accurate as possible . indeed , state officials acknowledged that ( 1 ) state and other agencies' headquarters offices are not held accountable for conducting formal vetting exercises once projections are received from the embassies ; ( 2 ) there is no formal vetting process ; and , ( 3 ) the geographic bureaus expect that officials in the field consult with all relevant agencies ; therefore , the bureaus rarely contact agency headquarters officials . we found additional factors that further complicate the staffing projection process . first , frequent turnover of embassy personnel responsible for developing staffing projections results in a lack of continuity in the projection process . this turnover and the lack of formal documentation may prevent subsequent embassy personnel from building upon the work of their predecessors . second , we found that coordinating the projected needs of all agencies could be problematic .