implementing regulations for the ia fee are at 26 c.f.r . offer in compromise ( oic ) : an oic is an agreement between irs and a taxpayer to settle a tax liability for payment of less than the full amount owed . when submitting an offer for consideration , taxpayers must make a partial payment unless a waiver applies.amount in a lump sum , in which 20 percent of the offer amount is due when submitting the offer , or in installment payments , in which case the first installment payment is due with the offer ( unless the taxpayers qualify for low - income waiver , in which case the 20 percent or installment payment is not applicable ) . if irs accepts the offer amount , the user fee taxpayers may pay the offer is applied toward the remaining balance due.for the oic fee are at 26 c.f.r . pre - filing agreement ( pfa ) : taxpayers are subject to the $50,000 user fee only if they are selected to participate in the pfa program . if taxpayers are selected , irs will examine specific issues relating to their tax returns before they are filed . the objective of the pfa program is to resolve issues that are likely to be disputed in post - filing audits . revenue procedure 2009-14 provides guidance on the pfa program . this authority allows the agency independence and flexibility in the use of these funds . irs can obligate user fee collections for any activity for which it has an appropriation with omb approval , and it can carry over any unexpended fee collections for use in subsequent years . we have suggested that carryovers are one way agencies can establish reserves to sustain operations in the event of a sharp downturn in user fee collections or other events.reserve of unspent fee collections that can be used for critical needs . the carryover is what is left over after irs transfers fee collections to supplement its appropriations in order to meet agencywide needs . table 5 provides information on irs's mrf carryover balances , which have grown in recent years as fee activity has increased . at the end of fiscal year 2010 , $288 million in fee collections was carried over for use in future fiscal years . as directed by the cfo act of 1990 and omb circular a - 25 , irs conducts a general review of its user fees on a biennial basis . to initiate the biennial review , irs's cfo issues a memorandum to senior management in relevant business divisions and program offices requesting that they validate the cost of providing services for which they charge a user fee and provide suggestions for new user fees . based on the cost estimates developed and other considerations , senior management will propose whether to increase , decrease , or keep the current fee rates . these proposals are sent to the cfo and are then compiled and forwarded in a report to the commissioner for final review and approval . irs has made efforts to improve its cost estimation process in support of its user fees , with particular attention given to its largest fee by amount collected .