number of proposals . officials from some component agencies we interviewed said the number of proposals they receive affected the time spent reviewing proposals and notifying awardees . for example , officials from the department of transportation said that the number of proposals they receive can range between two and 40 , which makes it difficult to predict the workload of agency evaluators who perform the proposal reviews . similarly , national institute of standards and technology officials said that the number of proposals they receive fluctuates from year to year . because agencies must review all proposals that meet the minimum requirements , an increase in the number of proposals directly increases the workload of proposal reviewers . other agency - specific factors . some component agency officials identified factors specific to their agency or process as factors affecting the time needed . for example: two component agencies within the department of health and human services — the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and food and drug administration ( fda ) — notified none of their awardees within the required time in fiscal years 2016 through 2018 . cdc and fda participate in the solicitation and review process led by the nih . however , while the nih has 1 year to notify awardees , these agencies are required to notify awardees within 90 calendar days . cdc officials said that participating in the longer nih program is more efficient than creating their own review process and allows them to leverage additional programs at nih that support small business awardees . environmental protection agency officials told us that their review process includes three consecutive reviews , which leads the agency to regularly request waivers to exceed the 90-day notification requirement . these reviews include an administrative review for responsiveness to the solicitation , an external peer review process , and an internal review by the sbir program office . some agency officials also identified continuing resolutions , sequestration , or government shutdowns as factors that could slow proposal review . proposal review and notification activities could be affected because the availability or amount of funds for agency activities is uncertain in these instances . for example , a defense microelectronics activity official told us that their agency generally completes its proposal review process within 90 days , but does not notify awardees until it has determined funding availability for awards later in the fiscal year . national institute of standards and technology officials described a delay notifying one awardee , a replacement awardee , due to the initial awardee being determined ineligible during a pre - award assessment . the agency made a replacement selection immediately , but this replacement awardee was notified approximately 20 days after the 90-day requirement . overall , component agencies issued 11,710 of the 15,453 awards we reviewed ( 76 percent ) within the recommended time period , for fiscal years 2016 through 2018 . the sbir / sttr policy directive recommends that most agencies issue an award within 180 days and recommends that nih and nsf do so in 15 months . agencies issued 3,743 of the 15,453 awards ( 24 percent ) after the recommended time period .