ensuring interoperability . to avoid a major shortcoming of the lmr communication systems , it is essential that a public safety broadband network be interoperable across jurisdictions and devices . dhs , in conjunction with its safecom program , developed the interoperability continuum which identifies five key elements to interoperable networks — governance , standard operating procedures , technology , training , and usage — that waiver jurisdictions and other stakeholders discussed as important to building an interoperable public safety broadband network , as shown in figure 4 . for example , technology is critical to interoperability of the broadband network and most stakeholders , including public safety associations , experts , and manufacturers believe that identifying lte as the technical standard was a good step towards interoperability . to further promote interoperability , stakeholders indicated that additional technical functionality , such as data sharing and roaming capabilities , should be part of the technical design . if properly designed to the technical standard , broadband devices will support interoperability regardless of the manufacturer . testing devices to ensure they meet the identified standard could help eliminate devices with proprietary applications that might otherwise limit interoperability . in its fourth further notice , fcc solicited input on the technical design of the network and testing of devices to ensure interoperability . creating a governance structure . as stated previously , governance is a key element for interoperable networks . a governance authority can promote interoperability by bringing together federal , state , local , and emergency response representatives . each of the waiver jurisdictions we contacted had identified a governance authority to oversee its broadband network . jurisdictions we visited , as well as federal agencies , told us that any nationwide network should also have a nationwide governance entity to oversee it . although several federal entities are involved with the planning of a public safety broadband network , at the time we conducted our work no entity had overall authority to make critical decisions for its development , construction , and operation . according to stakeholders , decisions on developing a common language for the network , establishing user rights for federal agencies , and determining network upgrades , could be managed by such an entity . pending legislation , the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 , establishes a first responder network authority as an independent authority within ntia and gave it responsibility for ensuring the establishment of a nationwide , interoperable public safety broadband network . among other things , the first responder network authority is required to ( 1 ) ensure nationwide standards for use and access of the network ; ( 2 ) issue open , transparent , and competitive requests for proposals to private sector entities to build , operate , and maintain the network ; ( 3 ) encourage that such requests leverage existing commercial wireless infrastructure to speed deployment of the network ; and ( 4 ) manage and oversee the implementation and execution of contracts and agreements with nonfederal entities to build , operate , and maintain the network . building a reliable network . a public safety broadband network must be as reliable as the current lmr systems but it will require additional infrastructure to do so .