reorganization . possible outcomes , which can be used in combination , include ( 1 ) distribution under a plan of the proceeds of a pre - plan sale of the assets of the company ( in whole or in part ) , sometimes called a section 363 sale . section 363 of the code permits sales that are free and clear of creditor claims of property of the estate ; ( 2 ) liquidation of the company's assets with approval of the court , through means other than a 363 sale ; and ( 3 ) reorganization of the company , in which it emerges from bankruptcy with new contractual rights and obligations that replace or supersede those it had before filing for bankruptcy protection . the debtor , creditors , trustee , or other interested parties may initiate adversary proceedings — in effect , a lawsuit within the bankruptcy case to preserve or recover money or property , to subordinate a claim of another creditor to their own claims , or for similar reasons . furthermore , the the u.s. bankruptcy system involves multiple federal entities . bankruptcy courts are located in 90 federal judicial districts ; however , as we reported in 2011 , the southern district of new york and the district of delaware adjudicate a majority of larger corporate or business bankruptcy cases . the judicial conference of the united states serves as the judiciary's principal policymaking body and recommends national policies on all aspects of federal judicial administration . in addition , aousc serves as the central administrative support entity for the judicial conference and the federal courts , including bankruptcy courts . the federal judicial center is the education and research agency for the federal courts and assists bankruptcy courts with reports and assessments relating to the administration and management of bankruptcy cases . disclosure . the disclosure statement must include information on the debtor's assets , liabilities , and business affairs sufficient to enable creditors to make informed judgments about how to vote on the debtor's reorganization plan and must be approved by the bankruptcy court . plan of reorganization . a debtor has an exclusive right to file a plan of reorganization within the first 120 days of bankruptcy . the plan describes how the debtor intends to reorganize and treat its creditors . the plan divides claims against the debtor into separate classes and specifies the treatment each class will receive . the court may confirm the plan if , among other things , each class of allowed creditors has accepted the plan or the class is not impaired by the plan . if not all classes of impaired creditors vote to accept the plan , the court can still confirm the plan if it is shown that it is fair to all impaired creditors . finally , the department of justice's u.s . trustee program and the judiciary's bankruptcy administrator program oversee bankruptcy trustees and promote integrity and efficiency in the bankruptcy system by overseeing the administration of bankruptcy estates . a preference action can be asserted for payments made to an insider within a year prior to the bankruptcy filing .