down payment . most mortgage lenders require borrowers to make a down payment ( of 3 percent or more of the purchase price , depending on the mortgage ) that is applied to the purchase price of the home . a down payment also helps a borrower build home equity , assuming the down payment is not financed as a separate loan . interest rate . lenders charge borrowers a percentage of the mortgage amount , in exchange for providing funds to buy a home . an interest rate can be fixed or adjustable for the life of the mortgage ( adjustable - rate mortgage or arm ) . because a fixed - rate mortgage's interest rate does not change regardless of prevailing rates , a borrower's payments for principal and interest remain the same for the life of the mortgage . in contrast , an adjustable - rate mortgage's interest rate , for which the initial interest is generally lower than for a fixed - rate mortgage , will adjust at agreed - upon intervals . as a result , adjustable - rate mortgage payments can increase or decrease depending on the changes in interest rates and terms of the loan . payment frequency and amount . payments are generally made on a monthly basis . fixed - and adjustable - rate mortgages generally have fully amortizing payment schedules — that is , the regularly scheduled payments will fully pay down the principal and interest over the life of the mortgage , with the amounts allocated to reducing principal and interest changing over time ( see fig . the u.s. markets for single - family housing finance include a primary market , in which lenders make ( originate ) or refinance mortgage loans , and a secondary market , in which mortgage loans are purchased from lenders and packaged into securities — known as mortgage - backed securities — that are sold to investors . a higher priced mortgage loan that otherwise meets the definition of a qm is presumed to have complied with the ability - to - pay requirements , but the presumption can be rebutted if the consumer proves that the lender did not make a good faith and reasonable determination of the consumer's ability to repay . additionally , federal mortgage insurance is included in the determination of whether an fha - insured loan is a higher priced mortgage loan . existing federal homeownership assistance programs use features and mechanisms that can have equity - building effects , but the programs are not specifically designed to accelerate equity building . the programs can assist homeowners to build equity over time by providing access to homeownership , but the programs do not have an explicit focus on accelerating the ongoing pace of paying down the loan principal faster than a 30-year fixed - rate mortgage . rather , the overall focus of the programs is on providing affordable access to homeownership , according to officials of relevant agencies and entities and based on their mission goals . for example , the goal of fha's mortgage insurance program is to facilitate access to affordable mortgages for home buyers who might not be well - served by the private market .