increased staffing . corps district officials said the section 214 funds have provided a valuable way for them to augment their regulatory staff , particularly given the large permit workloads these districts face . as we discussed earlier , each district has used the section 214 funds received from the nonfederal public entities to add between one and four project managers to its regulatory staff . corps officials have faced the following challenges when implementing the section 214 authority: insufficient permit workloads . officials in each of the four districts said that , when they first started using the section 214 authority , they expected each participating entity to submit enough applications to keep one project manager busy full - time . however , this has not happened in any of the four districts . insufficient section 214 permit workloads have caused particular problems in two districts . in the seattle district , the permit workloads have been so small from some entities that the revenues generated from the agreement have not justified the costs of negotiating and establishing the agreement to accept section 214 funds . as a result , the seattle district decided eventually not to renew agreements with some entities and is considering not entering into any new agreements unless they can sustain at least half a full - time equivalent staff worth of work from each agreement . similarly , in the sacramento district , an insufficient section 214 permit workload has meant that section 214 project managers have had to work on some non - section 214 permit applications to maintain a full workload . according to officials in the sacramento district , this arrangement has meant that non - section 214 applications experienced some processing delays because project managers stopped working on them when higher priority section 214 applications came in . to avoid the need to make choices between section 214 and other applications , the sacramento district is currently considering assigning all section 214 applications to a small pool of project managers who will work exclusively on section 214 permit applications . delays in replacing project managers . officials in the sacramento district said that they were unable to hire new project managers to replace the ones they had transferred to work primarily on section 214 applications as quickly as they had anticipated . this lag in hiring project managers delayed permit processing for some non - section 214 applications because it meant that fewer staff hours could be devoted to processing these applications . according to these officials , one main reason for the hiring lag was that the district did not begin looking for new employees until after it had signed the section 214 agreements and transferred experienced project managers into the new positions . the district is considering adjusting its hiring policy to transfer experienced project managers into the new section 214 positions only after it has hired employees to fill the non - section 214 positions . decrease in project manager expertise . the corps districts that received section 214 funds typically replaced more experienced project managers that were transferred to work primarily on the section 214 permit applications with new staff .