see fig . we found a wide range in the amount of new transit - oriented development since transit operations began for our six case study transit lines . stakeholders in these cities attributed the amount of transit - oriented development to the influence of a variety of factors including conditions that support of transit - oriented development such as a demand for real estate , challenges that hinder transit - oriented development such as high associated construction costs , and local government policies that encourage transit - oriented development , such as transit supportive zoning . during our case study visits , we found a wide range in the amount of transit - oriented development that occurred since the implementation of a federally funded transit project . for each project , we found at least a minimal amount of transit - oriented development near at least one station ; however , for each project we also found examples of stations that have had little or no transit - oriented development . for example , in baltimore , md , local officials told us that there has been very little development around light rail stations — except near downtown baltimore's penn station , which also services commuter rail and amtrak — despite more than 20 years of operations and a significant upgrade in service in 2006 . in contrast , local stakeholders in charlotte , nc , told us that the south end portion of the light rail line has been largely successful in attracting transit - oriented development — although one of these stakeholders acknowledge that stations further down the transit line in charlotte are more auto - oriented and have generated little transit - oriented development . a more detailed description of examples of our findings from each case study can be found in figures 3 to 8 . stakeholders from across our case studies identified key conditions that can support transit - oriented development , including: demand for real estate , available land for development , supportive local residents , and a transit line that efficiently connects to established job and activity centers . specifically , we found that the following conditions support transit - oriented development: market demand for real estate: market demand for real estate is needed to support transit - oriented development . according to the literature we reviewed and stakeholders we spoke to , demand for real estate is driven in part by the strength of the local economy so cities with strong local economies are more likely to support transit - oriented development . one study has also shown that market demand is the primary factor developers consider when determining whether to build a transit - oriented development . for example , a developer that has built mixed - use development projects in both washington , dc , and baltimore told us that developers consider anticipated price growth and existing housing supply when determining locations for new development . this developer told us that consideration of these factors has led to a pipeline of about 30,000 units in washington , while baltimore only has a few thousand .