gao - 10-183t . washington , d.c.: october 29 , 2009 . national transportation safety board: progress made in management practices , investigation priorities , training center use , and information security , but these areas continue to need improvement . gao - 08-652t . washington , d.c.: april 23 , 2008 . national transportation safety board — insurance for employees traveling on official business . b - 309715 . washington , d.c.: september 25 , 2007 . the remaining three recommendations have not yet been fully implemented . gao - 07-866r . washington , d.c.: june 14 , 2007 . national transportation safety board: observations on the draft business plan for ntsb's training center . national transportation safety board: progress made , yet management practices , investigation priorities , and training center use should be improved . gao - 07-118 . washington , d.c.: november 22 , 2006 . national transportation safety board: preliminary observations on the value of comprehensive planning , and greater use of leading practices and the training academy . gao - 06-801t . washington , d.c.: may 24 , 2006 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . however , ntsb has initiated actions that could lead to closure of two of the recommendations . ntsb's deployment of an agencywide electronic information system based on microsoft sharepoint will allow ntsb to streamline and increase its use of technology in closing out recommendations and in developing reports . when fully implemented , this system should serve to close these two recommendations . ntsb has also made significant progress in implementing our recommendation to increase its use of safety studies , which are multiyear efforts that result in recommendations . they are intended to improve transportation safety by effecting changes to policies , programs , and activities of agencies that regulate transportation safety . while we , the department of transportation , and nongovernmental groups , like universities , also conduct research designed to improve transportation safety , ntsb is mandated to carry out special studies and investigations about transportation safety , including studies about how to avoid personal injury . although ntsb has not completed any safety studies since we made our recommendation in 2006 , it has three studies in progress , one of which is in final draft , and it has established a goal of developing two safety study proposals and submitting them to its board for approval each year . ntsb officials told us that because the agency has a small number of staff , it has difficulty producing large studies in addition to processing many other reports and data inquiries . ntsb officials told us they would like to broaden the term “safety studies” to include not only the current studies of multiple accidents , but also the research done for the other , smaller safety - related reports and data inquiries .