gao - 07-1257t . washington , d.c.: september 26 , 2007 . influenza pandemic: further efforts are needed to ensure clearer federal leadership roles and an effective national strategy . gao - 07-781 . washington , d.c.: august 14 , 2007 . hsc did not comment on our recommendation and has not indicated if it plans to implement it . we reported in june 2008 that , according to cdc , all 50 states and the three localities that received federal pandemic funds have developed influenza pandemic plans and conducted pandemic exercises in accordance with federal funding guidance . a portion of the $5.62 billion that congress appropriated in supplemental funding to hhs for pandemic preparedness in 2006 — $600 million — was allocated for state and local planning and exercising . all of the 10 localities that we reviewed in depth had also developed plans and conducted exercises , and had incorporated lessons learned from pandemic exercises into their planning . however , an hhs - led interagency assessment of states' plans found on average that states had “many major gaps” in their influenza pandemic plans in 16 of 22 priority areas , such as school closure policies and community containment , which are community - level interventions designed to reduce the transmission of a pandemic virus . the remaining six priority areas were rated as having “a few major gaps.” subsequently , hhs led another interagency assessment of state influenza pandemic plans and reported in january 2009 that although they had made important progress , most states still had major gaps in their pandemic plans . as we had reported in june 2008 , hhs , in coordination with dhs and other federal agencies , had convened a series of regional workshops for states in five influenza pandemic regions across the country . because these workshops could be a useful model for sharing information and building relationships , we recommended that hhs and dhs , in coordination with other federal agencies , convene additional meetings with states to address the gaps in the states' pandemic plans . as reported in february 2009 , hhs and dhs generally concurred with our recommendation , but have not yet held these additional meetings . hhs and dhs indicated at the time of our february 2009 report that while no additional meetings had been planned , states will have to continuously update their pandemic plans and submit them for review . we have also reported on the need for more guidance from the federal government to help states and localities in their planning . in june 2008 , we reported that although the federal government has provided a variety of guidance , officials of the states and localities we reviewed told us that they would welcome additional guidance from the federal government in a number of areas , such as community containment , to help them to better plan and exercise for an influenza pandemic . other state and local officials have identified similar concerns .