we discuss the aoa in appendix ii . brigades are also responsible for certifying that the equipment can be employed as required and for training the battalions . the brigade manages battalion personnel under its command , with the ability to transfer personnel among battalions to fill personnel gaps as needed . the air and missile defense architecture consists of several systems deployed together to provide a layered defense against various threats in a range of battlespaces . other air and missile defense systems can contain , like patriot , a sensor , a launcher , and a system - centric command and control station . these systems' command and control stations can share information with other air and missile defense systems or with other joint systems through external communication links , as seen in figure 1 . the air and missile defense architecture includes systems designed to counter threats at a low altitude — such as rockets , artillery , and mortar — as well as systems designed to defeat high - altitude threats intercepted above the earth's atmosphere . patriot serves as the army's primary element deployed to intercept targets in this middle range of battlespace — above the range of rockets , artillery , and mortar , but within the earth's atmosphere . the army has identified a number of air and missile defense communication and performance capability gaps in its ability to address evolving global threats . over the last decade , adversaries have acquired more robust , diverse , and complex threats . according to a 2010 ballistic missile defense review report , ballistic missiles are more technically sophisticated , more proliferated , include more advanced countermeasures , and continue to challenge u.s. ballistic missile defense system capabilities . cruise missiles have also become relatively simple to develop , are cheaper than ballistic missiles or aircraft , and are easy to export . additionally , advanced electronic attacks , such as jamming or spoofing , have become more widespread and easier to effectively produce . sophisticated enemies also have the ability to use a combination of integrated attacks including electronic and cyber warfare , a variety of inbound ballistic and cruise missiles , special operation forces , and other methods to complicate the battlespace . the army has identified some high - priority air and missile defense gaps in its ability to respond to the growing threats , as seen in table 1 . to assess the patriot system's current performance status , we reviewed operational test reports and discussed the results with officials in the office of the director of operational test and evaluation and army test and evaluation command . we also reviewed current combatant command warfighter operational needs statements for patriot system upgrades and discussed their status and mitigation plans with army officials . to determine patriot's upgrade plans , we analyzed detailed cost data derived from program budgets , program schedules for testing and fielding , and test and evaluation master plans , and discussed these plans with army and patriot program officials . to determine the level of oversight and accountability provided for the upgrades , we received information from army officials regarding how and why the upgrades were executed under the existing patriot program .