this concludes our statement for the record . for further information on this statement , please contact robin nazzaro at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or nazzaror@gao.gov . individuals making contributions to this testimony included roy judy , assistant director ; thomas armstrong , ulana bihun , denise fantone , doreen feldman , tim guinane , richard johnson , alison o'neill , and patrick sigl . visitor fees are also used to support park units . regional and headquarters officials determine which projects to fund . while an individual park unit may receive funding for several projects in one year , it may receive none the next . park units are authorized to collect revenue from outside sources such as visitor fees and donations — although how they are used may be limited to specific purposes . since 1996 , the congress has provided the park units with authority to collect fees from visitors and retain these funds for use on projects to enhance recreation and visitor enjoyment , among other things . these initiatives are in varying stages of development and implementation . for the most part , it is too soon to assess the effectiveness of these initiatives . allocations for projects and other support programs increased overall in both nominal and inflation - adjusted dollars . these allocations rose from about $478 million in 2001 to about $641 million in 2005 — an average annual increase of about 7.7 percent , or about $36.5 million . when adjusted for inflation , the increase was 3.9 percent , or about $18.7 million per year . figure 3 shows allocation trends of projects and other support programs for the park service from fiscal years 2001 through 2005 . three programs that include project funding for individual park units — cyclic maintenance , repair and rehabilitation , and inventory and monitoring — account for over half of the increase for the project and support program allocations . the park service is the caretaker of many of the nation's most precious natural and cultural resources . today , more than 130 years after the first national park was created , the national park system has grown to include 390 units covering over 84 million acres . these units include a diverse mix of sites — now in more than 20 different categories . the park service's mission is to preserve unimpaired the natural and cultural resources of the national park system for the enjoyment of this and future generations . its objectives include providing for the use of the park units by supplying appropriate visitor services and infrastructure ( eg , roads and facilities ) to support these services . in addition , the park service protects its natural and cultural resources ( eg , preserving wildlife habitat and native american sites ) so that they will be unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations . the park service receives its main source of funds to operate park units through appropriations in the onps account . the park service chooses to allocate funds to its park units in two categories — one for daily operations , and another for specific , non - recurring projects . daily operations allocations for individual park units are built on park units' allocation for the prior year .