by product . since fiscal year 2001 , cbp has assessed ad / cv duties related to 597 ad / cv duty orders on specific products . cbp hequarter , in trn , intrct ff t ech port of entry to liquidte the import t the finl dty rte determined commerce . the gencieve 6 month to complete thi process . of those , as of september 2007 , 120 duty orders have some amount of uncollected duties . at thi time , importer or suretieo file prote with cbp , which cignificntly prolong the process . commerce end cbp hequarter intrction to liquidte the import t the finl rte determined dring commerce' dminitrtive review . if the finl rte i greter or lesser thn the etimted rte , subsquent ill or refnd will e issued . cbp ttempt to collect on onding dty ill ending printed ill to the importer pproximtely every 30 d. after ill i over 237 d delinquent , cbp “sanctions” the importer . thesanction require the importer to y the fll mont of dtie owed t the time of entry on ll fre import . in addition to the contact named above , christine broderick ( assistant director ) , jason bair , joseph brown , deborah owolabi , lisa mirel , karen deans , etana finkler , grace lui , michael hoffman , and ken bombara made key contributions to this report . stephen caldwell , thomas costa , lucia demaio , ian ferguson , laurie hamilton , elisabeth helmer , evelyn logue , jackie nowicki , michael rohrback , ellery scott , and jena sinkfield also contributed to the report . approximately 84 percent of the total amount of uncollected ad / cv duties is associated with four products , all from china: crawfish tail meat , garlic , honey , and mushrooms . by country of origin . importers purchasing from china are responsible for 90 percent of all uncollected ad / cv duties . by exporter's “new shipper” status . importers that purchased goods from companies undergoing a special “new shipper” review account for a substantial amount of uncollected duties . as will be discussed in more detail later in this report , under u.s. law , these importers were allowed , until recently , to pay estimated ad / cv duties by posting a bond instead of paying in cash as other importers are required to do . importers that purchased goods from companies undergoing a “new shipper” review are responsible for approximately 40 percent of uncollected ad / cv duties . uncollected ad / cv duties also are highly concentrated among a group of importers . cbp data show that from october 2000 through july 2007 , about 27,000 importers were subject to ad / cv duties . of those , 520 ( or less than 2 percent ) had uncollected ad / cv duties as of september 2007 . among those importers that owe ad / cv duties , the majority of the amount of uncollected ad / cv duties is owed by a relatively small number of companies .