however , more needs to be done . does each agency's mission reinforce embassy priorities ? to what extent are mission priorities not being sufficiently addressed due to staffing limitations or other impediments ? to what extent are workload requirements validated and prioritized , and is the embassy able to balance them with core functions ? do the activities of any agencies overlap ? given embassy priorities and the staffing profile , are increases in the number of existing staff or additional agency representation needed ? to what extent is it necessary for each agency to maintain its current presence in - country , given the scope of its responsibilities and its mission ? could an agency's mission be pursued in other ways ? does an agency have regional responsibilities or is its mission entirely focused on the host country ? what is the embassy's total annual operating cost ? what are the operating costs for each agency at the embassy ? to what extent are agencies considering the full cost of operations in making staffing decisions ? to what extent are costs commensurate with overall embassy strategic importance , with agency programs , and with specific products and services ? what are the security , mission , and cost implications of relocating certain functions to the united states , regional centers , or to other locations , such as commercial space or host - country counterpart agencies ? to what extent could agency program and / or routine administrative functions ( procurement , logistics , and financial management functions ) be handled from a regional center or other locations ? do new technologies and transportation links offer greater opportunities for operational support from other locations ? do the host country and regional environments suggest there are options for doing business differently , that is , are there adequate transportation and communications links and a vibrant private sector ? to what extent is it practical to purchase embassy services from the private sector ? does the ratio of support staff to program staff at the embassy suggest opportunities for streamlining ? can functions be reengineered to provide greater efficiencies and reduce requirements for personnel ? are there best practices of other bilateral embassies or private corporations that could be adapted by the u.s. embassy ? to what extent are there u.s. or host country legal , policy , or procedural obstacles that may impact the feasibility of rightsizing options ? table 4 illustrates the 5-year rightsizing schedule , by fiscal year , that the office of rightsizing has developed . the schedule also depicts those posts that are proposed to receive a new embassy compound ( nec ) and the fiscal year that the facilities are scheduled to be built . the following are our comments on state's letter dated june 9 , 2006 . we modified our text to show that , although we have not been able to independently assess the office of rightsizing's estimates , it has presented evidence to show that some major cost avoidance and cost savings have occurred . we recognize that state has a standard methodology by which it performs cost analyses using the international cooperative administrative support services software .