goals . gao - 07-78 . washington , d.c.: nov. 15 , 2006 . afghanistan reconstruction: despite some progress , deteriorating security and other obstacles continue to threaten achievement of u.s . goals . gao - 05-742 . washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2005 . afghanistan security: efforts to establish army and police have made progress , but future plans need to be better defined . gao - 05-575 . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2005 . afghanistan reconstruction: deteriorating security and limited resources have impeded progress ; improvements in u.s. strategy needed . gao - 04-403 . washington , d.c.: june 2 , 2004 . foreign assistance: lack of strategic focus and obstacles to agricultural recovery threaten afghanistan's stability . gao - 03-607 . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2003 . ( see app . i for a complete description of our scope and methodology. ) in 2001 , when the united states and its allies removed the taliban regime , afghanistan was in economic crisis . the nation's roads had deteriorated , limiting economic growth and access to resources and services for its citizens . the afghan government has recognized that improving the country's roads is an important element in lifting the population from poverty . it considers a viable major road network essential to becoming a transport and trading hub in central asia . additionally , road access for rural areas would help to promote licit crops and broaden access to health and education . in 2003 , the afghan government and international donors proposed a road network for afghanistan , which they hoped to complete by 2015 . the proposed network ( as shown in fig . 1 ) identifies the country's major roads , including the ring road , which links afghanistan's major cities of kabul , kandahar , herat , and mazar - e sharif . in february 2006 , the afghan government introduced the interim afghanistan national development strategy and its accompanying implementation plan , the afghanistan compact . the compact included two benchmarks for roads: ( 1 ) a fully upgraded ring road as well as roads connecting the ring road to neighboring countries by the end of 2008 , and ( 2 ) a fiscally sustainable system for road maintenance by the end of 2007 . the afghan government and international donors established the joint coordination and monitoring board to oversee the implementation of compact benchmarks . in addition , representatives of relevant government ministries , agencies , and the international community have formed groups to address implementation issues . for example , the group working on roads is commonly referred to as the consultative group for the transport sector . several afghan ministries have transportation sector - related functions . the two ministries with road construction and maintenance responsibilities are the ministry of public works , which has jurisdiction over highways and provincial roads , and the ministry of rural rehabilitation and development , which oversees the rural roads . while agencies reported some examples of positive impact , these are based on limited data , a qualitative evaluation , or anecdotal information , and therefore cannot be generalized . several factors have limited agencies' abilities to conduct impact assessments .