clarity . the pipeline - related measures in the 2018 nsts are not clear because they do not describe the methodology used to calculate them , and the names and definitions are not clearly described . for example , nsts goal 1 includes an objective to conduct training of employees responding to terrorist attacks . the desired outcome is to improve the capability of industry employees to respond and recover from terrorist attacks . however , the performance measure is the percentage of critical pipeline systems implementing the tsa pipeline security guidelines . it is not clear if this measure is specific to the sections of the guidelines related to employee training or overall implementation of the guidelines . the cfsr status database measures include the percentage of recommendations implemented by topic , such as “site specific security measures,” “signage,” or “miscellaneous.” however , the database does not specifically define these topics or explain the methodology for calculating the measures . unclear measures could be confusing and misleading to users . core program activities . the pipeline - related measures in the 2018 nsts cover some of the agency's core program activities , such as conducting security exercises with the pipeline industry and providing intelligence and information products to the industry . however , the nsts pipeline security plan measures do not specifically include some core program activities , such as updating the tsa pipeline security guidelines or the results of conducting csrs and cfsrs in order to collect the information necessary for the existing performance measures . the csr goals and priorities database and the cfsr status database include measures intended to track some of the results of pipeline security reviews , such as the average percentage compliance with the guidelines by fiscal year and the percentage of cfsr recommendations implemented . if core program activities are not covered , there may not be enough information available in those areas to managers and stakeholders . limited overlap . the pipeline - related measures in the 2018 nsts do not have limited overlap . as discussed previously , four of the five nsts measures are based on the percentage of critical pipeline systems implementing tsa's pipeline security guidelines . the management measure is based on the number of complete pipeline security reviews . the cfsr status database measures are based on the percentage of recommendations implemented overall and by groups . finally , the csr goals and priorities database measures are based on the average compliance percentage of companies that had csrs conducted in fiscal years 2016 and 2017 . this is similar to four of the five nsts measures . significantly overlapping measures may lead to redundant , costly information that does not add value for tsa management . linkage . the pipeline - related measures in the 2018 nsts generally exhibited this key attribute . for example , all of the nsts measures were arranged by agency strategic goals and risk - based priorities . however , the management measure in dhs's fiscal year 2019 congressional budget justification and the cfsr status database measures did not specify the tsa goals and priorities to which they were aligned .