gao - 10-268r . washington , d.c.: january 29 , 2010 . coast guard: better logistics planning needed to aid operational decisions related to the deployment of the national security cutter and its support assets , gao - 09-497 . washington , d.c.: july 17 , 2009 . this has resulted in staffing challenges for some field units . officials we spoke with at seven of the nine districts stated that they faced staffing challenges because targeted civilian positions could not be redistributed until the civilians voluntarily transfer to a different position or retire . for example , officials from one district told us that one of its sectors was waiting for a civilian specialist to help manage hazardous materials , but they could not fill the position until a targeted civilian position was vacated . further , officials at another district told us that one of its sectors was waiting for a civilian port security specialist , but the sector could not fill this position until a civilian administrative position was vacated in another sector . because the business rules state that changes to civilian positions were not mandatory , it could be a number of years before some civilian positions are vacated , if the civilians in those positions have no desire to move to a different position and have years to work before they retire . coast guard headquarters officials told us they recognized that staffing gaps would remain in some civilian positions after ssm implementation , but noted they were waiting for the normal active duty transfer cycles to be completed by the end of 2017 before considering any updates to the ssm . further , the officials said they were cognizant of the difficulties that some field units are facing since some needed civilian positions have not been filled or some unneeded civilian positions have not been vacated as identified in the ssm . these officials noted , though , that ssm business rules state that field units can request headquarters' consideration of staff reprogramming proposals to make changes to their existing staff to align with the ssm and that they have been working to rectify these staffing imbalances and accommodate staffing changes as field units make staff reprogramming requests . given the declining availability of its aging assets and the constrained budgets in recent years to replace legacy assets , together with growing strategic commitments , the coast guard will continue to face critical decisions about how to best allocate its limited assets to meet its mandated mission responsibilities . the coast guard uses the standard operational planning process ( sopp ) to allocate asset resource hours to its field units for meeting their missions , but this planning process allocates maximum asset resource hour capacities and does not also include more realistic operational targets . however , by incorporating data that field units provide to coast guard headquarters on assets' performance — such as operational performance assessment reports and planning assessments — to inform asset hour allocations in headquarters' annual strategic planning directions , the coast guard would be better positioned to ensure it is identifying any operational limitations of its assets , making more informed asset resource hour allocation decisions , and more effectively communicating strategic intent to its field units .