gao - 11-335 . ( washington , d.c. , may 5 , 2011 ) . overstay enforcement: additional mechanisms for collecting , assessing , and sharing data could strengthen dhs's efforts but would have costs . gao - 11-411 . ( washington , d.c. , april 15 , 2011 ) . ice had not established a time frame for completing this assessment . we reported in april 2011 that by developing such a time frame and utilizing the assessment findings , as appropriate , ice could strengthen its planning efforts and be better positioned to hold staff accountable for completing the assessment . we recommended that ice establish a target time frame for assessing the funding and resources ero would require in order to assume responsibility for civil overstay enforcement and use the results of that assessment . dhs officials agreed with our recommendation and stated that ice planned to identify resources needed to transition this responsibility to ero as part of its fiscal year 2013 resource planning process . dhs has not yet implemented a comprehensive biometric system to match available information provided by foreign nationals upon their arrival and departure from the united states . in 2002 , dhs initiated the united states visitor and immigrant status indicator technology program ( us - visit ) to develop a comprehensive entry and exit system to collect biometric data from aliens traveling through u.s. ports of entry . in 2004 , us - visit initiated the first step of this program by collecting biometric data on aliens entering the united states . in august 2007 , we reported that while us - visit biometric entry capabilities were operating at air , sea , and land ports of entry , exit capabilities were not , and that dhs did not have a comprehensive plan or a complete schedule for biometric exit implementation . moreover , in november 2009 , we reported that dhs had not adopted an integrated approach to scheduling , executing , and tracking the work that needed to be accomplished to deliver a comprehensive exit solution as part of the us - visit program . we concluded that , without a master schedule that was integrated and derived in accordance with relevant guidance , dhs could not reliably commit to when and how it would deliver a comprehensive exit solution or adequately monitor and manage its progress toward this end . we recommended that dhs ensure that an integrated master schedule be developed and maintained . dhs concurred and reported , as of july 2011 , that the documentation of schedule practices and procedures was ongoing , and that an updated schedule standard , management plan , and management process that are compliant with schedule guidelines were under review . in the absence of a comprehensive biometric entry and exit system for identifying and tracking overstays , us - visit and ctceu primarily analyze biographic entry and exit data collected at land , air , and sea ports of entry to identify overstays . in april 2011 , we reported that dhs's efforts to identify and report on visa overstays were hindered by unreliable data .