see figure 1 . the jcl is a quantitative probability analysis that requires the project to combine its cost , schedule , and risks into a complete quantitative picture to help assess whether the project will be successfully completed within cost and on schedule . nasa introduced the analysis in 2009 , and it is among the agency's initiatives to reduce acquisition management risk . the move to probabilistic estimating marks a major departure from nasa's prior practice of establishing a point estimate and adding a percentage on top of that point estimate to provide for contingencies . nasa's procedural requirements state that mission directorates should plan and budget programs and projects with an estimated life - cycle cost greater than $250 million based on a 70 percent jcl , or at a different level as approved by the decision authority , and any jcl approved at less than 70 percent must be justified and documented . nasa procedural requirements ( npr ) 7120.5e , nasa space flight program and project management requirements , paras . 2.4.4 and 2.4.4.1 ( aug. 14 , 2012 ) ( hereinafter cited as npr 7120.5e ( aug. 14 , 2012 ) ) . 2018 as schedule reserve and the $1.3 billion difference between the $8.4 billion goal and the $9.7 billion baseline as funding for that schedule reserve . unlike cost reserves , however , that funding largely corresponds to those 11 months and cannot be used separately from schedule to address problems as they arise . in december 2014 , we testified that the ground systems and orion programs will likely not be ready to support em - 1 before november 2018 even if sls is able to meet its earlier internal goal . during this testimony , nasa witnesses stated that the sls program would not be able to meet its internal goal of december 2017 and that the program would likely slip the internal goal to summer 2018 . see table 1 for more specifics on estimated launch dates . nasa generally followed best practices in preparing the sls cost and schedule baseline estimates for the limited portion of the program life cycle covered , that is , through launch readiness for the first test flight of sls . we found that the sls program cost and schedule estimates for this limited portion of development substantially met three of four cost characteristics — comprehensive , well documented , and accurate — and both schedule characteristics — comprehensive and well constructed — that gao considers best practices for preparing a reliable estimate . however , because the cost estimate only partially met best practice criteria for credibility , the fourth cost characteristic , the estimates could not be deemed fully reliable . see figure 2 . while the cost and schedule estimates were prepared largely in accordance with best practices , they only represent costs for the first flight of sls , em - 1 , as opposed to the program's full life cycle . in may 2014 , we recommended that nasa establish a separate cost and schedule baseline for missions beyond em - 1 and report this information via its annual budget submission .