we have been told that some of these steps are now being taken . madam chairwoman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for information about this testimony , please contact ann m. calvaresi - barr , director , acquisition and sourcing management , at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or calvaresibarra@gao.gov . other individuals making key contributions to this product include thomas j. denomme , gregory k. harmon , paula j. haurilesko , john j. marzullo , russell reiter , karen sloan , and marie ahearn . our understanding of the committee's process is based on our 2005 work but built on our review of the process and our discussions with agency officials for our 2002 report . for our 2005 review , and to expand our understanding of the committee's process for reviewing foreign acquisitions of u.s. companies , we met with officials from the departments of commerce , defense , homeland security , justice , and the treasury — the agencies that are most active in the review of acquisitions — and discussed their involvement in the process . further , we conducted case studies of nine acquisitions that were filed with the committee between june 28 , 1995 , and december 31 , 2004 . we selected acquisitions based on recommendations by committee member agencies and the following criteria: ( 1 ) the committee permitted the companies to withdraw the notification ; ( 2 ) the committee or member agencies concluded agreements to mitigate national security concerns ; ( 3 ) the foreign company had been involved in a prior acquisition notified to the committee ; or ( 4 ) gao had reviewed the acquisition for its 2002 report . we did not attempt to validate the conclusions reached by the committee on any of the cases we reviewed . to determine whether the weaknesses in provisions to assist agencies in monitoring agreements that gao had identified in its 2002 report had been addressed , we analyzed agreements concluded under the committee's authority between 2003 and 2005 . we conducted our review from april 2004 through july 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the committee allowed it to withdraw the notification to provide more time to answer the committee's questions and provide assurances concerning export control matters . the company refiled , and was permitted to withdraw a second time because there were still unresolved issues . finally , because very few cases required a presidential decision — the criterion for reporting to the congress on specific cases — the congress had little insight into the committee's process . in the second case , the company — which filed with the committee more than 6 months after completing its acquisition — was also allowed to withdraw its notification .