pub . 111-5 , 123 stat . 7 percent — contained information that was fully consistent with agency records for all 21 data elements we examined . in that regard , i would like to underscore the vital importance of building the necessary agency capacities to implement such standards . the c - der is designed to include data standards that have been approved through the implementation of the data act . specifically , as of july 16 , 2015 , the c - der is populated with 112 data elements from a variety of sources.finalized by omb and treasury under the data act on may 8 , 2015 , are included in the c - der ; however the remaining 12 that have been finalized since then are not yet included . a number of the terms included in the c - der go beyond the data elements that are required to be standardized under the data act , such as definitions for audit finding , auditee , auditor , and hospital . according to hhs officials , the c - der was developed through an analysis of 1,000 data elements from 17 different sources . hhs officials stated that key findings that led to the creation of the c - der were ( 1 ) lessons learned from the development of uniform grants guidance that different communities , such as grants , acquisitions , and procurement , use terms and concepts differently ; ( 2 ) that it is difficult for the public to access common definitions across these different communities ; and ( 3 ) that data standards in and of themselves are not helpful unless they are used . the best standards in the world will be of little value if agencies are not prepared to collect and report quality data in conformance with those standards . as you know , the data act requires gao to issue reports in 2017 , 2019 , and 2021 assessing and comparing the quality of data submitted under the data act as well as agency implementation and use of data standards . consistent with these requirements , we are committed to assisting congressional oversight by being a continuing presence to monitor omb , treasury , and federal agencies' actions as data standards are developed and implemented , and to work with inspectors general to ensure an efficient and effective audit process is in place to help ensure data quality . toward that end , we plan to provide congressional and executive branch decision makers with information and recommendations , as appropriate , throughout the data act implementation process . our overall oversight approach is structured around two high - level themes: the first focuses on issues and challenges related to the design and implementation of the act's provisions , and the second concerns opportunities and challenges related to the different uses of the information collected under the act . these themes are drawn from a variety of sources including the data act's stated purposes , our prior work on federal data transparency and the implementation of the recovery act , and key oversight and management challenges .