an active status . we also found that dod's plans to eliminate excess facilities in the future were unclear , as were its plans for taking into account external factors , such as management of historical - preservation requirements and environmental restrictions , which affect the disposal of long - standing excess facilities that were identified before fiscal year 2008 . for example , we found that dod had not defined the strategies and measures it intended to employ to eliminate excess facilities on its installations . we concluded that , to the extent that dod has identified unutilized and underutilized facilities , additional cost savings might be realized through the consolidation or disposal of such real property inventory . we made two recommendations to dod , with which it partially concurred , related to improving its data and developing strategies and measures to enhance the management of its facilities , as discussed later in this report . house report 113-102 , accompanying a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 , mandated gao to report to the congressional defense committees on dod's efforts to improve the accuracy of its real property database and the effect of those efforts on dod's consolidation activities . this report addresses the extent to which ( 1 ) osd has improved the completeness and accuracy of facility utilization data in its real property assets database , and the military departments use the data contained in their respective real property inventory databases to identify potential consolidation opportunities ; and ( 2 ) osd has a strategic plan to manage dod's real property efficiently and to facilitate the identification of unutilized and underutilized facilities . to determine the extent to which osd has improved the completeness and accuracy of facility utilization data in its real property assets database and the military departments use the data contained in their respective real property inventory databases to identify potential consolidation opportunities , we obtained selected data fields containing the military departments' real property records from osd's real property assets database . we selected the same data fields we had used as part of our methodology and analysis for our september 2011 report . specifically , we analyzed the utilization - rate data fields for fiscal years 2010 through 2013 — the most recent full year available at the time of this review — to determine whether more complete utilization - rate data had been entered since our previous review of the fiscal year 2010 data . we assessed the reliability of dod's real property inventory data by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable to assess the trends of the utilization data reported in osd's real property assets database for fiscal years 2010 through 2013 . we also reviewed our prior work on excess and underutilized real property to understand issues previously identified with real property management .