we have reported in the past on preparedness efforts for the ncr . our past work for congress has tracked the evolution and development of increasingly effective efforts to develop a coordinated ncr preparedness strategy , along with some opportunities for continuing improvement in strategy - related efforts . see appendix ii for more information about our past ncr work . we have previously identified six characteristics of effective strategies that could be applied to the ncr . we noted that these six characteristics would help to enable its implementers to effectively shape policies , programs , priorities , resource allocations , and standards and enable relevant stakeholders to achieve intended results . these characteristics call for strategies to include ( 1 ) purpose , scope , and methodology ; ( 2 ) problem definition and risk assessment ; ( 3 ) goals , subordinate objectives , activities , and performance measures ; ( 4 ) resources , investments , and risk management ; ( 5 ) organizational roles , responsibilities , and coordination ; and ( 6 ) integration and implementation . more information about the six desirable strategy characteristics and their application to a regional preparedness strategy appears in appendix iii . the 2010 ncr strategy addresses why the strategy was produced , the scope of its coverage , and the process by which it was developed . the introduction to the plan specifies that it was produced to help identify the capabilities needed to strengthen the region's homeland security efforts and to define the framework for achieving those capabilities . the scope of the plan , as outlined in the introduction , is strategic investment in new and existing capabilities to help all localities in the ncr prepare for , prevent , protect against , respond to , and recover from all - hazards threats and events . those living and working in the ncr rely on a variety of critical infrastructure and key resources including transportation , energy , and water . the transportation system contains the nation's second - largest rail transit and fifth - largest bus systems . the intricate network of major highways and bridges serve the region's commuters and businesses , and the ncr also has two major airports within its borders . this statement is based on work we recently completed for you . to conduct this work , we compared the 2010 strategic - plan update with six characteristics of an effective homeland - security strategy we previously identified.strategic plan and associated documents — such as investment plans — but we did not evaluate whether and how well ncr has fostered , implemented , and executed coordinated capability efforts . we have recently initiated a review of ncr preparedness efforts for these subcommittees and expect to issue a report late next year . we reviewed the content of the we conducted this work from november 2011 through december 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .