ii ) . climate reference network . according to our survey results , 12 offices did not meet the requirement at a total of 35 stations . in reviewing files at the 8 weather forecast offices we visited , we also found instances where the annual inspection requirement was not met in 2008 and 2009 . specifically , the results of our file reviews show that 3 of the 8 offices did not meet the annual inspection requirement for five stations in 2008 , and 1 office did not meet the requirement for one station in 2009 . in contrast , for the stations where the requirement had been met , the weather forecast offices had frequently conducted multiple inspections during a year . for example , office staff may have visited a station multiple times to repair equipment , to temporarily relocate temperature - measuring instruments to allow for construction at the observer's property , or to meet the requirement for semiannual inspections of stations that also record precipitation .  station record updates . until 2005 , nws required that station records be updated at least once every 10 years . at that time , nws changed the requirement to once every 5 years . in reviewing files at the 8 weather forecast offices we visited , we found that two of the 8 offices had consistently met the requirement to update station records within 5 years . in contrast , at two of the other offices , the time between updates for four stations was over 10 years . at the remaining four offices , the time between updates for one or more stations was over 5 years but less than 10 years . for example , one office did not update a record dated february 2002 until january 2011 — almost 9 years after the previous update . when the weather forecast offices updated records , the types of changes they documented included those that can cause shifts in temperature data unrelated to any actual temperature change , including replacement or relocation of temperature - measuring equipment , changes in time of observation , and descriptions of obstructions . through our survey and visits to 8 weather forecast offices , weather forecast office officials identified a number of challenges to their ability to ensure that station records are updated and to carrying out other responsibilities for managing stations in the cooperative observer program , including those in the ushcn . in our survey , the most frequently cited challenge was that weather forecast offices rely on staff assigned to manage the stations to also assist with other office responsibilities . competing mission requirements at the offices was a closely related and often - cited challenge . for example , weather forecast offices operate 24 hours a day , and office officials explained that staff assigned to manage the stations may also be expected to work shifts , which limits the time they can visit the stations . some weather forecast offices we visited told us that turnover and reductions in the number of staff assigned to the cooperative observer program results in the loss of institutional knowledge needed to manage weather - monitoring stations .