state . state has guidance intended to help rsc staff identify fraudulent refugee applicants , and state has strengthened access controls for some refugee applicants . uscis has implemented a number of control activities to detect and prevent refugee applicant fraud . through biometric checks , uscis may identify that a usrap applicant has multiple identities . for example , according to all nine rsc directors , each rsc has a designated anti - fraud official or entity , consistent with gao's fraud risk framework . once in the united states a parolee , unlike a refugee , is not considered to have been admitted into the country , has not been conferred a lawful immigration status , and does not have the benefit of a pathway to u.s. citizenship . parole under cam may be authorized for a period of up to 2 years and parolees are to file their request for re - parole no later than 90 days before the expiration of their authorized parole . parolees may also apply for employment authorization but the extent to which they may be eligible for other public benefits is determined in accordance with u.s. law . parole has been the most common outcome of cam program applications , but a lower percentage of parolees have arrived in the united states than those granted refugee status through the program . from december 2014 , when the program began accepting aors , through march 2017 , uscis received aors for about 12,100 individuals . most of the aors submitted were for applicants from el salvador ( 86 percent ) . uscis had made final decisions on half ( 6,300 ) of these applicants , approving 70 percent for parole and granting 29 percent refugee status . according to uscis officials , more cam cases receive parole because the generalized violence that applicants experience does not rise to the level of persecution or is not on account of a protected characteristic required to support a refugee determination . however , the officials noted that the conditions in el salvador , guatemala , and honduras , and the fact that the children are living without at least one parent in their country of origin are generally sufficient to demonstrate the fear of harm required to support a parole determination . uscis officers determined that the remaining 1 percent of applicants did not qualify for refugee status or parole and denied the associated cases . officials at all nine rscs stated that they provide staff with training or information on applicant fraud trends . further , rsc officials in two rscs stated that they conduct their own research to detect potential applicant fraud . in addition , two of the four rscs we visited conduct two prescreening interviews for each applicant rather than one . according to rsc officials , conducting more than one interview serves as a fraud deterrent because it allows the rsc staff to check for consistency across interviews and identify false information . further , these rscs require , where possible , that different interpreters participate in each interview to decrease the likelihood that applicants collude with interpreters . uscis . within uscis , svpi and adjudicators are responsible for antifraud activities related to the adjudication of the refugee application .