wage insurance . the wage insurance program — known as the alternative taa ( ataa ) program — is a demonstration project designed for workers age 50 and older who forgo training , obtain reemployment within 26 weeks , but take a pay cut . provided the participant's annual earnings at his or her new job are $50,000 or less , the benefit reimburses 50 percent of the difference between the participant's pre - and postlayoff earnings up to a maximum of $10,000 over 2 years . the process of enrolling trade - affected workers in the taa program begins when a petition for taa assistance is filed with labor on behalf of a group of laid - off workers . petitions may be filed by entities including the employer experiencing the layoff , a group of at least three affected workers , a union , or the state or local workforce agency . the taa statute lays out certain basic requirements that all certified petitions must meet , including that a significant proportion of workers employed by a company be laid off or threatened with layoff . in addition to meeting these basic requirements , a petition must demonstrate that the layoff is related to international trade . the law requires labor to complete its investigation , and either certify or deny the petition , within 40 days after it has received it . when labor has certified a petition , it notifies the relevant state , which has responsibility for contacting the workers covered by the petition , informing them of the benefits available to them , and telling them when and where to apply for benefits . workers generally receive services through a consolidated service delivery structure called the one - stop system , where they can access a broad range of services beyond taa , including the workforce investment act ( wia ) dislocated worker program , the wagner - peyser employment service ( es ) program , and services funded by the wia national emergency grants . training for trade - affected workers may be funded by taa or by one of the wia funding sources . workers often meet one on one with a case manager who may assess worker's skills and help decide what services they need . because the taa program has limited funds that can be used for case management and program administration , these case management services are often performed by es or wia dislocated worker program staff . when this occurs , participants are often co - enrolled in wia or es as well as taa . about $750 million was appropriated for income support for trade - affected workers for fiscal year 2005 , while another $259 million was appropriated for training , job search and relocation allowances , and administrative costs . of the $259 million , $220 million is set aside for training , and labor allocates 75 percent of it to states according to a formula that takes into account each state's previous year allocations , accrued expenditures , and participant levels . labor holds the remaining 25 percent of training funds in reserve , to distribute to states throughout the year according to need .