( see fig . in september 1959 , the corps began work on the big bend dam , which is about 100 miles northwest of the fort randall dam on land belonging to both the crow creek sioux and lower brule sioux tribes . the big bend dam is 95 feet high and was completed in september 1966 . the reservoir behind the dam , known as lake sharpe , is 20 miles long . ( see fig . the crow creek sioux and lower brule sioux tribes reside on reservations located across the missouri river from one another in central south dakota . each reservation includes about 225,000 acres . the major economic activities for both the crow creek sioux and lower brule sioux tribes are cattle ranching and farming , and both tribes provide guided hunting for fowl and other game . each tribe also operates a casino and a hotel . both tribes are governed by a tribal council under their respective tribal constitutions , and each tribal council is led by a tribal chairman . the major employers on the reservations are the tribes , the casinos , the bureau of indian affairs , and the indian health service . the construction of the fort randall dam caused the flooding of more than 17,000 acres of crow creek and lower brule reservation land and the displacement of more than 100 tribal families . after these two tribes sustained major damage from this project , the construction of the big bend dam inundated over 20,000 additional acres of their reservations . see table 2 for summary of the tribes' initial settlement proposals and final asking prices for both dams . tribes at five other reservations affected by flood control projects along the missouri river incurred losses ranging from about 600 acres to over 150,000 acres . these tribes received some compensation , primarily during the 1950s , for the damages they sustained . however , beginning in the 1980s , some of these tribes began requesting additional compensation . the congress responded to their requests by authorizing the establishment of development trust funds . ( see table 3. ) the tribes at the fort berthold , standing rock , and cheyenne river reservations received compensation within the ranges we had suggested the congress consider in our reviews of the tribes' additional compensation claims . the ranges were based on the current value of the difference between each tribes' final asking price and the amount that the congress authorized . we were not asked to review the additional compensation claims for the crow creek sioux and lower brule sioux tribes in the 1990s or for the santee sioux and yankton sioux tribes in 2002 . the approach used by the crow creek sioux and lower brule sioux tribes' consultant differed from the approach we used in our prior reports . the consultant used a variety of settlement proposals , instead of consistently using the tribes' final asking prices , in calculating the difference between what the tribes asked for and what the congress authorized . as a result , the consultant's proposed compensation estimates are higher than if he had consistently used the tribes' final asking prices .