cost . in fiscal year 2003 , the costs of investigations that dod obtained through dss were $2,640 for an initial investigation for a top secret clearance , $1,591 for a periodic reinvestigation of a top secret clearance , and $328 for the most commonly used investigation for a secret clearance . the cost of getting and maintaining a top secret clearance for 10 years is approximately 13 times greater than the cost for a secret clearance . for example , an individual getting a top secret clearance for the first time and keeping the clearance for 10 years would cost dod a total of $4,231 in current year dollars ( $2,640 for the initial investigation and $1,591 for the reinvestigation after the first 5 years ) . in contrast , an individual receiving a secret clearance and maintaining it for 10 years would cost a total of $328 ( $328 for the initial clearance that is good for 10 years ) . ( 2 ) what factors impede dod's ability to eliminate the backlog and accurately determine its size ? ( 3 ) what are the potential adverse effects of those impediments to eliminating dod's backlog and accurately estimating the backlog's size ? in addition to answering these three questions , you asked us to determine the status of the congressionally authorized transfer of dss investigative functions and personnel to opm . to conduct our work , we reviewed dod and opm regulations , instructions , policy guidance , and available empirical data and procedural information on the personnel security clearance process . in addition , we obtained information during meetings with dod , opm , and other officials who are responsible for the oversight , investigative , and adjudicative functions of the personnel security clearance process . we also referred to prior gao , dod office of inspector general , and congressional reports . we conducted our work from february through december 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . additional information on our scope and methodology is presented in appendix ii . the office of the under secretary of defense for intelligence ( ousd ( i ) ) was created in 2002 with the passage of the bob stump national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2003 . among the responsibilities of ousd ( i ) are the coordination and implementation of dod policy for access to classified information . at the time of our earlier review on the clearance process , these responsibilities belonged to the office of the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications , and intelligence ( oasd ( c3i ) ) . classified information is categorized into three levels — top secret , secret , and confidential — to denote the degree of protection required for information according to the amount of damage that unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause to national defense or foreign relations . the degree of expected damage that unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause is “exceptionally grave damage” for top secret information , “serious damage” for secret information , and “damage” for confidential information . to retain access to classified information , individuals must periodically go through the security clearance process .