officials at two commands were not familiar with the requirement . as such , we were unable to assess whether dod is in compliance with this requirement . many contracting officers stated that the amount of work completed before definitization could not readily be determined because under a uca there is no established baseline against which to measure the percentage of work completed . policy officials at several locations we visited also stated that the far requirement would be difficult to implement . based on our findings , a dfars case was initiated in april 2007 to clarify defense acquisition regulations . contracting officers are not usually documenting , when applicable , whether profit or fee is adjusted for work performed by the contractor at a lower level of risk during the undefinitized period . all ucas are essentially cost - reimbursement contracts until definitized , as contractors are reimbursed for all incurred costs that are reasonable , allocable , and allowable during the undefinitized period . it does not mention the 40 percent of work completed . under far and dfars respectively , a waiver of the 180-day requirement can be granted for extreme circumstances or when the agency is supporting a contingency or peacekeeping operation . the definitization time frame can also be extended an additional 180 days when a qualifying proposal is received from the contractor . the contractor does not receive profit or fee during the undefinitized period , but can recoup it once the contract is definitized . under ucas , the government risks paying unnecessary costs . for example , in a september 2006 report on contracts in support of iraq reconstruction , we found that the timeliness of definitization can affect the government's costs . we reported that dod contracting officials were more likely to adhere to the defense contract audit agency's advice regarding the disposition of questioned and unsupported costs when negotiations were timely and occurred before contractors had incurred substantial costs under ucas . on the other hand , contracting officials were less likely to remove questioned costs from a contract proposal when the contractor had already incurred these costs during the undefinitized period . similarly , the dod ig found that untimely definitization of contracts transfers additional cost and performance risk from the contractors to the government . contractors should bear an equitable share of contract cost risk and receive compensation for bearing additional risk based on the degree of risk assumed . costs that have already been incurred on an unpriced action , such as a letter contract , have virtually no cost risk associated with them . as such , when negotiating profit with the contractor , the government may attribute a zero risk factor to the undefinitized period . dod faces a potentially large gap in its data and thus does not know the extent to which it is using ucas . the federal procurement data system is only able to identify ucas that are awarded via letter contracts . undefinitized task or delivery orders , as well as contract modifications , are not identified . dod also lacks high - level oversight of its uca activity since uca monitoring has been delegated to the local commands , with upward reporting no longer required .