entities . if implemented within usmepcom , this new electronic health record system could provide this electronic interface as well as other capabilities to improve usmepcom's ability to access data and share medical information . a usmepcom concept of operations paper discusses how usmepcom believes the use of an electronic health record system could reduce both its reliance on applicant self - disclosure and its paper - based process of recording applicant medical information . for example , with mhs genesis' planned interoperability and data exchange capabilities , usmepcom officials could reduce their reliance on applicant self - disclosure and improve the medical qualification decision - making process by interfacing with and accessing applicant electronic medical records that may exist to independently obtain and verify applicant medical history information . additionally , the ability to electronically exchange information would allow usmepcom to share the information more quickly with other accession stakeholders like service medical waiver review authorities . further , a transition to an electronic health record system would begin to reduce the use of the paper - based system — and its associated costs and challenges — for recording the medical information obtained or generated during the accession process . thus , integration of an electronic health record system into the accession community could enhance dod's ability to obtain and document complete , accurate , detailed medical information that is fully accessible , could be used to improve usmepcom officials' medical qualification decisions , and perhaps affect early attrition rates . recognizing the potential for mhs genesis to support the meps , in june 2016 the acting principal deputy under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness emphasized that the modernization of accession processes is a priority and requested that the mhs genesis program management office coordinate with the accession community to include the meps in the deployment schedule for the new system . in response to this request , in august 2016 the program management office issued a memorandum stating it fully intends to work with usmepcom to ensure meps locations are included in the implementation of mhs genesis . subsequently , officials from accession policy within the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness and usmepcom stated that they had initial coordination meetings in january and april 2017 with mhs genesis program management officials to discuss the inclusion of meps locations into the system deployment plans . according to usmepcom officials , the latest meeting produced an expectation that mhs genesis will meet its initial operating capability at one meps location in the fall of 2018 . however , according to a mhs genesis program management official , detailed plans for deploying mhs genesis to the meps are in the earliest stages of development and no deployment decisions or timelines have been established . thus , dod's schedule for deploying mhs genesis at meps locations and ensuring that the system supports its accession programs is uncertain . we have previously reported that projects such as mhs genesis can benefit from the effective use of project planning and management practices . these practices can significantly increase the likelihood of delivering promised capabilities on time and within budget .