investigations . in response to your request as chairman of the house judiciary in response to your request as chairman of the house judiciary committee for the 109th congress , we assessed whether fbi has committee for the 109th congress , we assessed whether fbi has effectively implemented appropriate information security controls on a effectively implemented appropriate information security controls on a critical internal network , deployed as part of the trilogy modernization critical internal network , deployed as part of the trilogy modernization effort , to protect the confidentiality , integrity and availability of its law effort , to protect the confidentiality , integrity and availability of its law enforcement and investigative information . such controls are essential for enforcement and investigative information . such controls are essential for ensuring that information technology resources and information are ensuring that information technology resources and information are adequately protected from inadvertent or deliberate misuse , fraudulent adequately protected from inadvertent or deliberate misuse , fraudulent use , disclosure , modification , or destruction . use , disclosure , modification , or destruction . this report summarizes shortcomings identified in information security this report summarizes shortcomings identified in information security controls on this critical internal network . it does not always contain controls on this critical internal network . it does not always contain specific examples of the weaknesses identified due to the sensitive nature specific examples of the weaknesses identified due to the sensitive nature of the information discussed . of the information discussed . information security is critical for any organization that depends on information systems and computer networks to carry out its mission or business . it is especially important for government agencies , where the public's trust is essential . the dramatic expansion in computer interconnectivity and the rapid increase in the use of the internet are changing the way our government , the nation , and much of the world communicate and conduct business . without proper safeguards , systems are vulnerable to individuals and groups with malicious intent who can intrude and use their access to obtain sensitive information , commit fraud , disrupt operations , or launch attacks against other computer systems and networks . these concerns are well founded for a number of reasons , including a dramatic increase in reports of security incidents , ease of obtaining and using hacking tools , a steady advance in the sophistication and effectiveness of attack technology , and dire warnings of new and more destructive attacks to come . computer - supported federal operations are similarly at risk . our previous reports , and those of agency inspectors general , describe persistent information security weaknesses that place a variety of federal operations at risk of disruption , fraud , or inappropriate disclosure of sensitive data . we have designated information security as a governmentwide high - risk area since 1997 — a designation that remains today . recognizing the importance of securing federal agencies' information systems , congress enacted the federal information security management act ( fisma ) in december 2002 to strengthen the security of information and systems within federal agencies .