ice is the largest investigative arm of dhs . ice is composed of four offices: ( 1 ) investigations , ( 2 ) intelligence , ( 3 ) detention and removal operations ( dro ) , and ( 4 ) the federal protective service . as of september 2005 , oi had more than 5,600 special agents ; about 94 percent of these are assigned to 26 major field offices , headed by special agents - in - charge ( sac ) , and oi's foreign attaché offices . these offices and their subordinate units were created using the immigration and customs staff and locations in existence at the time ice was formed . how does oi ensure that its resource use contributes to its ability to prevent the exploitation of systemic vulnerabilities in customs and immigration systems ? to identify oi's structure and the activities it uses to address its mission we met with oi officials and reviewed documents used to support organizational decisions . to determine how oi used its investigative resources to address its goals , we analyzed case management data that showed the types of investigations performed nationally between october 2003 and march 2005 — the most recent period for which comparable data were available . in addition , we interviewed the management staff of oi and the special agents - in - charge ( sac ) at 7 of the 26 ice oi field offices to learn how they set investigative priorities and allocate human resources to investigations . how did oi use its investigative resources in fiscal year 2004 and the first half of fiscal year 2005 ? we selected the special agent - in - charge offices based on their size ( the number of agents ) and location , seeking to include a variety of offices representing differing investigative focuses . because our sample was a nonprobability sample , the opinions of these special agents - in - charge cannot be projected beyond those interviewed . we also collected and analyzed data specific to the 7 offices we visited . we assessed the reliability of the investigative resource data — the hours spent on different types of investigations — by reviewing the internal controls of the case management system and through interviews with knowledgeable oi staff about these controls and the quality assurance procedures in place to ensure data reliability . we determined the investigative resource data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we determined how oi ensures that its resource use contributes to its ability to prevent the exploitation of systemic vulnerabilities in customs and immigration systems using information collected during interviews with oi officials , including the special - agents - in - charge and by examining documents used to support organizational decisions . we evaluated oi's current approach to resource allocation decision making by comparing this information with the standards for internal control in the federal government and to the risk management approach that we have advocated in our prior work . at headquarters ice , oi is divided into five divisions as shown in figure 1 .