lehman brothers . on june 29 , 2011 , lehman filed a disclosure statement that set out the plan for distribution of assets to the creditors of 23 lehman debtor entities . this plan was made after extensive negotiations with representatives of major creditor groups , including those that supported substantive consolidation and those that did not . this plan represents a compromise between the parties by providing for adjustments in payments to creditors . in november 2011 , creditors approved lehman's reorganization plan . the bankruptcy court confirmed the plan in december 2011 . the plan included numerous settlements between the holding company and other counterparties , including a series of bilateral settlements with foreign affiliates and creditors . as a result , creditors reduced the amount of claims asserted against lehman by more than $295 billion . according to lehman , distributions to creditors totaling $22.5 billion began on april 17 , 2012 . a second distribution is planned for september 2012 . the resolution of lehman's broker - dealer , lehman brothers inc. , continues through the sipc process . according to sipc officials , almost all of the 100,000 claims had been satisfied as of may 2012 . however , some of the remaining claims are among the largest and involve complex litigation over who meets the definition of “customer” under sipa . according to the sipa trustee , there are over 2,100 claims with a total value of nearly $42 billion that are still unresolved . one of the largest of these claims involves lehman's overseas affiliate — lehman brothers international , europe ( lbie ) — which is pursuing two types of claims against lehman brothers inc . the first is an “omnibus customer claim” on behalf of approximately 1,100 lbie clients against lehman brothers inc. , of which $6 billion in claims for securities and $2 billion in claims for cash have been allowed by the sipa trustee . a remaining $6.7 billion remains under dispute . the second is a “house claim” on its own behalf against lehman brothers inc. , of which $8.9 billion remains under dispute . the trustee said he does not recognize lbie as a “customer” of lehman brothers inc. because it does not meet the definition of “customer” under sipa . according to sipc officials , lehman brothers inc. never held reserves on behalf of lbie . these issues remain in litigation and may go to trial in 2013 . the sipa trustee for lehman brothers inc. has initiated litigation against other counterparties over payment distribution , which also remains ongoing . in the first case , the sipa trustee is in litigation with barclays involving issues surrounding its purchase of assets of lehman brothers inc. , immediately after lehman filed for bankruptcy . according to the sipa trustee's report , the dispute centers on competing interpretations of the asset purchase agreement ( defining the terms of the sale of certain lehman brothers inc. assets to barclays ) between lehman , barclays , and lehman brothers , inc. and involves contested claims to approximately $7 billion of “disputed assets.” this case is currently on appeal .