subjects . it projects foreign capabilities in particular warfare areas out 20 years in the future . other agencies , such as hhs and usda , rely on global disease surveillance to identify and characterize naturally occurring disease events that may impact human , animal , or plant health . although surveillance and detection activities constitute an entire separate pillar of the biodefense enterprise , these activities can also help federal agencies enhance threat awareness by providing information about emerging global disease events that might affect the united states . for example , within hhs , cdc's global disease detection program conducts global surveillance on emerging infectious disease events to rapidly detect and monitor the characteristics of the disease event to determine whether and what kind of threat it poses to the u.s. population . similarly , within usda , aphis conducts surveillance of foreign animal diseases and plant pests and pathogens to determine what threat they may pose to the u.s. agriculture industry . aphis officials said they have a number of relationships and sources they use to gather information on traditional and emerging animal diseases . these include the national center for medical intelligence within dia , dhs's national biosurveillance integration center , cdc , and the world organisation for animal health . usda's risk identification and risk assessment unit conducts open source monitoring globally to identify situations of greatest risk to the animal agriculture community . for plant surveillance , usda's pestlens is an offshore open - source monitoring and analysis function designed to identify emerging pests and diseases . the pestlens team stationed overseas evaluates these potential threats for their impact on trade and identifies threats to look for at ports . it conducts research to determine whether there are outbreaks of disease or pests in other countries . epidemiology terms virulence is the relative capacity of a pathogen to overcome body defenses . pathogenesis is the process by which an infection leads to disease . infectious dose is an estimate of the amount of a pathogen required to cause illness . zoonotic disease is an infectious disease that is transmissible from animals to humans . agencies use scientific research to help understand the characteristics of various threat agents , including their virulence , stability , and ability to be dispersed through various methods . agencies also perform or contract for scientific research on emerging pathogens to understand their means of transmission , host susceptibility , and effects of infection . research is conducted on agents that may be used intentionally as biological weapons or on disease - causing agents that may exist in nature and contribute to outbreaks or pandemics , such as influenza viruses . one example of dhs - conducted scientific research is nbacc's work to understand properties associated with agent acquisition , production , dissemination , stability , virulence and pathogenesis , and existing medical countermeasure efficacy . a dod example of scientific research is dtra's efforts to characterize biological agents ( virulence , dissemination , infectious dose , etc. ) for instance , dtra might fund research to determine whether current diagnostic tools would be adequate if the ebola virus's genetic sequence were to change .