waste rock covers . according to epa officials , the cost of consolidating and capping large volumes of waste rock materials can vary depending on the number of acres needing coverage , the type of cover required , and the topography of the area to be covered . for example , the forest service recently approved a cover , consisting of a clay layer , a synthetic membrane , and soil , that will be implemented as part of a non - time - critical removal action at one phosphate mine and is estimated to cost about $17 million to cover roughly 100 acres of a cross - valley fill . a synthetic cover recently required as part of the reclamation plan at a new mine is estimated to cost about $29 million to cover nearly 400 acres.term monitoring and maintenance can further increase the costs of these covers . according to a forest service official , long - based on our review , several other factors add to the uncertainty about the level of cleanup that will be required in the area , and the amount and allocation of cleanup costs . the selenium water quality standard is expected to change . according to epa officials , final remedial actions under cercla will be based , in part , on the state's water quality standard for selenium in rivers and streams . this standard is based on a national recommendation issued by epa , which is in the process of updating its recommendation to better protect fish and other aquatic organisms . after the new recommendation is issued , according to epa officials , idaho will likely adopt a new state standard , using the recommendation as a basis . if the new standard is more stringent than the current standard , the level of cleanup required may change as well , increasing the costs associated with cleanup . a total maximum daily load for selenium has not yet been established . because the streams in the blackfoot river watershed — the main watershed affected by selenium contamination in idaho — have been listed as impaired for selenium under section 303 ( d ) of the clean water act , the state is required to establish a tmdl for selenium for those waters . according to ideq and epa officials , the state has delayed developing the tmdl , in part because the ongoing cercla assessment process is yielding valuable information about the sources of selenium in the watershed and how these sources interact with one another — and this information will be critical to helping the state establish a tmdl for selenium . once a tmdl is established , it may inform pollution limits that are established for the mines that directly discharge selenium to the watershed . according to epa officials , a tmdl would also likely help provide a road map for handling the selenium contamination at the remaining mines where cercla actions have not yet been initiated . the government's share of future cleanup costs is not yet determined .