enforcement . several factors hinder the enforcement of cleanup requirements at federal facilities . doj has taken the position that epa may not sue another federal agency to enforce cleanup requirements . epa may not issue cleanup orders under cercla to other federal agencies without doj's concurrence . epa may issue cleanup orders to other federal agencies under rcra and the safe drinking water act , but not all rcra orders can provide for administrative penalties . iags also generally contain administrative penalty provisions . third parties , such as states and citizens groups , may sue to enforce iags and administrative orders under the “citizen suit” and other public participation provisions of cercla , rcra , and safe drinking water act , but such litigation can be time consuming . while epa oversees and evaluates dod's preliminary assessments of all dod sites suspected of having a hazardous release , the agency has little to no oversight of the cleanup of most of these sites because most are not on the npl . epa reviews dod sites to determine whether to propose placement on the npl . however , only 140 of the 985 current dod sites with hazardous waste appear on the npl . epa and dod have not finalized iags for the remaining 11 sites , which impedes epa's ability to enforce cleanup , such as approving detailed cleanup schedules and applying administrative penalties . epa only recently began using enforcement action at dod npl sites where an iag is not in place . state agencies , rather than epa , oversee the cleanup of hazardous waste at most dod sites . dod performs preliminary assessments of all federal dod sites on the federal agency hazardous waste compliance docket . epa regions review the assessments to determine whether releases pose a threat to human health and the environment and if so , whether hazardous substances are being released into the environment . dod's preliminary assessments are based on readily available and historical data of suspected releases on dod sites . dod reports the results of preliminary assessments to epa , which often requests additional information such as data on site geography , prior activities at the site , and the source and destination of the hazardous release . according to epa guidance , epa regions should complete their review of preliminary assessments within 18 months of when the site was listed on the federal docket ; however , epa officials from two regions told us that dod may take 2 to 3 years to complete a preliminary assessment because epa does not have an independent authority under cercla to enforce a time line for completion of the preliminary assessment . based on their review of the preliminary assessment , epa regional officials may determine that no further action is needed at the site or request that dod perform a more comprehensive site inspection by sampling groundwater and other media on site . following dod's investigation , epa regional officials may: determine that no further action is needed at the site ; defer the site to another regulatory authority , such as a state agency , for cleanup ; or begin the process to propose the site for placement on the npl .