ii. ) we agree that the secretary has the discretion to make such a recommendation at this time ; however , we question the prudence and practicality of making such a recommendation at this time , given the express statutory time frames for license application and the significant amount of work remaining to be done for nrc to accept a license application from doe . our conclusion is based on the relationship between a site recommendation and doe's readiness to submit an acceptable license application to nrc , as set out in doe's siting guidelines and the nuclear waste policy act . the preamble to doe's siting guidelines states that doe expects to use essentially the same data for a site recommendation and a license application . also , the nuclear waste policy act states that a presidential site recommendation is to be made if the president considers the site qualified for a license application and sets out a time frame that could be as short as 5 to 8 months from a presidential site recommendation to a license application . this includes the requirement that the secretary of energy submit a license application not later than 90 days following congressional approval of the site . thus , the statutory time frame is decidedly shorter than the 4-year estimate between site recommendation and license application that was recently proposed by doe's management contractor . doe also pointed out the difference between the decision at hand — determining whether a potential site is licensable — and the licensing by nrc of a repository facility at the site . the latter decision would come at the end of a 3- to 4-year licensing proceeding . in contrast , our report addresses the relationship between a site recommendation and the submission of the license application . doe said that our draft report incorrectly states that doe's siting guidelines require the secretary , in making a site recommendation , to determine if the site currently complies with nrc's licensing requirements rather than determining if the site is “likely” to meet nrc‘s radiation protection standards . we agree that the standard in doe's guidelines is “likely” and have added this language to the report . the report accurately states the relationship between a site recommendation and a license application under the nuclear waste policy act and the siting guidelines . in addition , doe stated that the nuclear waste policy act charges the secretary with establishing criteria for determining the suitability of a site for a repository and that the department's standards ( siting guidelines ) are the most important legally relevant guidance on the question of whether the department is ready to make a site recommendation . this also assumes that no new issues surface that would need to be addressed . doe said that our draft report emphasized the inventory of issues between doe and nrc but completely ignored the technical work that has been done over the past 2 decades and the technical groups who have said that doe's data are sufficient for a site recommendation . we have added information to the report recognizing the body of work that doe has completed to date and the views of other technical parties mentioned by doe .