each inspection was counted only once . figure 10 shows the type of dietary supplement inspections conducted from january 1 , 2008 , through december 31 , 2011 . complaint inspections are conducted to investigate consumer complaints about a firm . follow - up inspections are conducted to assess a firm's progress after an advisory or regulatory action such as a warning letter or recall . compliance inspections are “for - cause” inspections to investigate specific compliance issues . surveillance inspections are routine inspections that generally assess whether a firm is following dietary supplement good manufacturing practices , as applicable . an inspection may include product examinations , sampling and testing , as well as the inspection of the firm and facility involved with dietary supplements , according to fda officials . fda actions to respond to safety concerns related to dietary supplements include issuing warning letters to dietary supplement firms , working with firms on recalls , and refusing imports . incorporating data from our prior report , figure 11 shows the number of warning letters related to dietary supplements fda issued from january 1 , 2002 , through december 31 , 2011 . the relatively low number of letters issued in 2007 is in part due to the timing of the letters — if we calculated the number of letters issued by fiscal year , the number would be 43 . consumer complaints are not limited to adverse events . for example , consumers may report a complaint if one or more pills in a product are discolored . incorporating data from our prior report , figure 9 shows the number of dietary supplement inspections conducted by fda or its state partners and the proportion of these inspections where the investigator identified problems from january 1 , 2002 , through december 31 , 2011 . the information is then sent to cfsan via fax . second , consumers , health care practitioners , or others can report the health problem to the dietary supplement firm listed on the product label . the firm evaluates the problem and , if it determines it to be serious in accordance with the 2006 act , it is to complete a hard copy mandatory aer form and submit the form to fda by mail , along with a copy of the product label . if the firm determines the problem is not serious , it can complete and submit a voluntary aer form at its discretion . third , consumers , health care practitioners , or others can report the health problem to an fda consumer complaint coordinator . the coordinators are located in fda district offices and document and follow up on a variety of health and nonhealth - related complaints about fda - regulated products . coordinators enter health problems reported by consumers into a database from which the health problems are later uploaded into the caers database as voluntary aers , as shown in figure 1 . alternatively , consumers , health care practitioners , or others can call a poison center about a health problem . poison centers are independently operated and provide free medical advice from health care professionals who are trained in the toxicological management of poison exposures and can address toxic exposure situations and adverse events .