the nehi working group is at the center of this effort . we found that regular nehi working group meetings , augmented by informal discussions , have provided a venue for agencies to exchange information on a variety of topics associated with ehs risks , including their respective research needs and opportunities for collaborations . interagency collaboration has taken many forms , including joint sponsorship of ehs - related research and workshops , the detailing of staff to other nehi working group agencies , and various other general collaborations or memoranda of understanding . furthermore , the nehi working group has adopted a number of practices gao has previously identified as essential to helping enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies . for example , in 2005 nehi clearly defined its purpose and objectives and delineated roles and responsibilities for group members . furthermore , collaboration through multiagency grant announcements and jointly sponsored workshops has served as a mechanism to leverage limited resources to achieve increased knowledge about potential ehs risks . finally , all agency officials we spoke with expressed satisfaction with their agency's participation in the nehi working group , specifically , the coordination and collaboration on ehs risk research and other activities that have occurred as a result of their participation . many officials described nehi as unique among interagency efforts in terms of its effectiveness . given limited resources , the development of ongoing relationships between agencies with different missions , but compatible nanotechnology research goals , is particularly important . nih officials commented that their agency's collaboration with nist to develop standard reference materials for nanoparticles may not have occurred as readily had it not been for regular nehi meetings and workshops . in addition , nehi has effectively brought together research and regulatory agencies , which has enhanced planning and coordination . many officials noted that participation in nehi has frequently given regulators the opportunity to become aware of and involved with research projects at a very early point in their development , which has resulted in research that better suits the needs of regulatory agencies . many officials also cited the dedication of individual nehi working group representatives , who participate in the working group in addition to their regular agency duties , as critical to the group's overall effectiveness . a number of the members have served on the body for several years , providing stability and continuity that contributes to a collegial and productive working atmosphere . in addition , because nanotechnology is relatively new with many unknowns , these officials said the agencies are excited about advancing knowledge about nanomaterials and contributing to the informational needs of both regulatory and research agencies . furthermore , according to some officials , there is a shared sense among nehi representatives of the need to apply lessons learned from the development of past technologies , such as genetically modified organisms , to help ensure the safe development and application of nanotechnology .