( see app . ii for information on estimated fte and transit system information for each state safety oversight agency and related transit agency ) . another challenge facing the program is how tsa and its rail inspectors might affect oversight of transit security . as i mentioned earlier , tsa has regulatory authority over transportation security , and , according to tsa officials , has hired 100 rail inspectors , who are to monitor and enforce compliance with rail security directives tsa issued in may 2004 . however , of the officials at 24 oversight agencies with whom we spoke , officials at 20 agencies stated they did not have a clear picture of who was responsible for overseeing transit security issues . similarly , officials at 14 of 37 transit agencies were also unsure of lines of responsibility regarding transit security oversight . several state oversight agencies were particularly concerned that tsa's rail inspectors would be duplicating their role in overseeing transit security . fta oversees and administers the program . as the program administrator , fta is responsible for developing the rules and guidance that state oversight agencies are to use to perform their oversight of rail transit agencies . fta also is responsible for informing oversight and transit agencies of new program developments , facilitating and informing the transit and oversight agencies of training available through fta or other organizations , facilitating information sharing among program participants , and providing technical assistance . fta officials stated they emphasize that components of a risk - management approach to safety and security , such as hazard analysis and risk - mitigation procedures , are included in the program standard that each state oversight agency issues to the transit agencies they oversee . this is consistent with our position that agencies make risk - based decisions on where their assets can best be used , both in transportation security and safety . however , fta recognizes that some parts of the state safety oversight program are not risk - based , including requiring minimum standards for all transit agencies in the program , no matter their size or ridership . while fta officials stated that fta does not inspect transit agencies with regard to safety , it is responsible for ensuring that , through reviews of oversight agency reports and audits , state oversight agencies comply with the program requirements . for example , according to the fta rule , when a state proposes to designate an oversight agency , fta may review the proposal to ensure the designated agency has the authority to perform the required duties without any apparent conflicts . fta has recommended in two instances that a state choose a different agency because the oversight agency that the state proposed appeared to be too closely affiliated with the transit agency and did not appear to be independent . in addition , fta is responsible for reviewing the annual reports oversight agencies submit . fta officials ensure they include all the required information — such as descriptions of program resources , and causes of accidents and collisions ; they then compile this information for a program annual report , and look for industry - wide safety and security trends or problems .