( pub . 107-296 , title xiii ) assess workforce characteristics and future needs based on the agency's mission and strategic plan . align the agency's human resource policies and programs with the agency's mission , strategic goals , and performance outcome . develop and advocate a culture of continuous learning to attract and retain employees with superior abilities . identify best practices and benchmarking studies . apply methods for measuring intellectual capital and identify links of that capital to organizational performance and growth . advise and assist the head of the agency and other agency officials to ensure ( pub . 108-136 , title xiv ) that the agency's mission is achieved through the management of the agency's acquisition activities . monitor and evaluate the performance of the agency's acquisition activities and programs , and advise the agency head on the appropriate business strategy to achieve the mission of the agency . increase the use of full and open competition in the acquisition of property and services by establishing policies , procedures , and practices that ensure that the agency receives a sufficient number of sealed bids or competitive proposals from responsible sources at the lowest cost or best value . increase appropriate use of performance - based contracting and performance specifications . make acquisition decisions consistent with all applicable laws and establish clear lines of authority , accountability , and responsibility for acquisitions . manage the direction of acquisition policy and implement the agency - specific acquisition policies , regulations , and standards . develop and maintain an acquisition career management program to ensure an adequate professional workforce . as part of the strategic planning and performance evaluation process , assess the knowledge and skill requirements established for agency personnel and their adequacy for facilitating the achievement of the performance goals for acquisition management ; develop strategies and specific plans for hiring , training , and professional development to rectify any deficiencies in meeting such requirements ; and report to the agency head on the progress made in improving acquisition management capability . in addition to the contact named above , sarah veale , assistant director ; charlesetta bailey ; martene bryan ; k. scott derrick ; and karin fangman made major contributions to this report . others who made important contributions include carolyn samuels and jay smale . defense business transformation: achieving success requires a chief management officer to provide focus and sustained leadership . gao - 07-1072 . washington , d.c.: september 5 , 2007 . assesses the progress dod has made in setting up a management framework for overall business transformation efforts and the challenges dod faces in maintaining and ensuring success of those efforts , including the need for a cmo . homeland security: management and programmatic challenges facing the department of homeland security . gao - 07-452t . washington , d.c.: february 7 , 2007 . discusses the numerous management challenges at dhs , including the transformation of the department . suggests various solutions to enhance overall transformation efforts . high - risk series: an update . gao - 07-310 . washington , d.c.: january 2007 . reports on government programs and operations that are considered high risk . suggests solutions and continued oversight and action by congress .