( see app . i for additional information on how tribes have been recognized. ) in a 1977 report to the congress , the american indian policy review commission found that the criteria used by the department to assess a group's status were not very clear and concluded that a large part of its recognition policy depended on which official responded to the group's inquiries . until the 1960s , the limited number of requests by groups to be federally recognized permitted the department to assess a group's status on a case - by - case basis without formal guidelines . however , in response to an increase in the number of requests for federal recognition , the department determined that it needed a uniform approach to evaluate these requests . in 1978 , it established a regulatory process for recognizing tribes . in 1994 , the department revised the regulations to clarify what evidence was needed to support the requirements for recognition , although the basic criteria used to evaluate a petition were not changed.in addition , in 1997 bia updated guidelines on the process , and in february 2000 , bia issued a notice in the federal register clarifying internal processing procedures . in summary , a group enters the regulatory process and becomes a petitioner by submitting a letter of intent requesting recognition . a petitioner then must provide documentation that addresses seven criteria that , in general , demonstrates continuous existence as a political and social community that is descended from a historic tribe . the technical staff within bia's branch of acknowledgement and research ( bar ) reviews the submitted documentation , provides technical review and assistance , and determines , with the petitioner's concurrence , when the petition is ready for active consideration . once the petition enters active consideration , the bar staff reviews the documented petition and makes recommendations on a proposed finding either for or against recognition . staff recommendations are subject to review by the department's office of the solicitor and senior officials within bia , culminating with the approval of the assistant secretary - indian affairs . after a proposed finding is approved by the assistant secretary , it is published in the federal register and a period of further comment , document submission , and response is allowed . the bar staff reviews comments , documentation , and responses and makes recommendations on a final determination that are subject to the same levels of review as a proposed finding . the process culminates in a final determination by the assistant secretary that , depending on the nature of further evidence submitted , may or may not be the same as the proposed finding . requests for reconsideration may be filed with the interior board of indian appeals within 90 days after the final determination . this review process can result in affirmation of the assistant secretary's decision or direction to the assistant secretary to issue a reconsidered determination . bia has received 250 petitions for recognition under this process . however , many of these petitions consist only of letters of intent to petition or are petitions for which only partial documentation has been submitted .