sentencing commission for review and comment . aousc concurred with our recommendation and provided written comments , which are printed in full in appendix ii . these agencies also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . in its comment letter , aousc stated it agreed with our recommendation that it should enhance its reporting mechanisms to better distinguish certain travel that is funded by the judiciary from that funded by other government agencies . it stated that the judiciary has already adopted the change we recommended and is planning to add a new functionality in the judges' non - case - related travel reporting tool . aousc also stated that it was pleased that gao has found that the judiciary has followed applicable policies and procedures with regard to the travel studied in this report . we are sending copies of this report to the judicial conference of the united states , the directors of the administrative office of the u.s. courts and federal judicial center , staff director of the u.s . sentencing commission , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 8777 or maurerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made significant contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . we found these data were sufficiently reliable for our reporting purposes . to determine the extent to which conferences conformed to judiciary policy , we reviewed judiciary policies and relevant laws and statutes , and interviewed judiciary officials . we also selected a sample of eight conferences costing over $100,000 conducted in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , including a random sample of four circuit judicial conferences , and four other kinds of conferences based on a non - generalizable sample considering factors such as cost per person . for each sample conference , we interviewed judiciary officials and reviewed supporting information , which included cost comparisons , budget information , documentation of the rationale for the conference site selection , lists of cost - saving actions , and documentation for internal controls required in judiciary guidance for conference oversight and approval by senior judiciary officials . to determine the extent to which conference organizers considered various judiciary cost and management practices , we analyzed written responses from organizers of each conference about how they considered 40 different cost and management factors suggested in the guidance , and whether they had the documentation required by judiciary policy . our observations among the eight conferences sampled are not generalizable to all conferences conducted by the judiciary , but do provide insights into how conference planners followed policy . we conducted this performance audit from february 2015 to december 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .