freight trucks . we used truck ton - mile estimates based on dot's freight analysis framework ( faf ) . according to dot officials , the 2007 ton - mile estimate derived from the faf are the most comprehensive representation of domestic truck freight activity available . dot has another series of ton - mile estimates produced by the bureau of transportation statistics ( bts ) ; however , according to dot officials the bts series does not capture as much domestic truck freight activity as the faf estimate . we determined that the faf data were more appropriate for the purpose of presenting our cost and revenue data on a per - ton - mile basis because the cost and revenues data we used were for the broadest definition of truck freight traffic . one difficulty in using the faf estimates is that 2007 is the only recent year for which dot has applied the current faf methodology . dot in previous years applied a differentmethodology to estimate ton - miles based on 2002 data . however , given that the methodology for estimating these figures changed significantly between 2002 and 2007 , dot cautions that the estimates from the 2 years should not be combined in the same time series . mile estimates for all of the years that we needed , we multiplied the bts figure for each year by the ratio of the faf estimate to the bts esti mate for 2007 . given the unavoidable imprecision of this approach , we report error bounds of plus and minus 5 percent for all of our per - ton - mile results . these ton - mile data are shown in table 7 . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) provided one - time funding to promote job preservation and creation and infrastructure investments , among other things . since a portion of these funds were targeted for transportation infrastructure projects , generally , they may benefit both passenger and freight users . for example , where freight and passenger trains share tracks , the high - speed intercity passenger rail program may also enhance capacity for freight rail lines . in this appendix , we report funds identified for infrastructure projects and do not attempt to identify funding to freight or nonfreight users of the infrastructure . we also report recovery act funds identified for the epa's clean diesel program which helps reduce emissions for freight vehicles across all modes and for army corps of engineers waterway projects that we identified as pertaining to freight transportation . in addition , the build america bonds program , created by the recovery act , allowed state and local governments to obtain financing at lower borrowing costs for new capital projects such as the development and construction of transportation infrastructure by having the department of the treasury make a direct payment to the state or local governmental issuer in an amount equal to 35 percent of the interest payment on the bonds . we summarize this information in table 12 .