in 1956 , docket no . the original petition for docket no . 181 included broad language seeking damages for unlawful trespass on reservation lands and for compensation or other benefits from the use of the tribes' land and other property . the tribes' original petition did not specifically mention the grand coulee dam . 181 was divided into four separate claims . the tribes' fisheries claim became part of docket no . in november 1976 , over 25 years after the original filing of docket no . 181 , the indian claims commission allowed the colville tribes to file an amended petition seeking just and equitable compensation for the water power values of certain riverbed and upstream lands that had been taken by the united states as part of the grand coulee dam development . this amended water power value claim was designated as docket no . 181-d , and it was settled in 1994 by public law 103-436 . the spokane tribe filed one claim with the indian claims commission , docket no . 331 , on august 10 , 1951 , just days before the august 13 , 1951 , deadline . the claim sought additional compensation for land ceded to the united states by an agreement of march 18 , 1887 . furthermore , the spokane tribe asserted a general accounting claim . these two claims were separated into docket no . 331 for the land claim and docket no . 331-a for the accounting claim . both claims were jointly settled in 1967 for $6.7 million . that is , the spokane tribe settled all of its claims before the indian claims commission almost 10 years before the colville tribes were allowed to amend their claim to include a water power values claim . in doing so , the spokane tribe missed its opportunity to make a legal claim with the indian claims commission for its water power values as well as its fisheries . at that time , the spokane tribe , as well as the colville tribes , were pursuing other avenues for compensation of water power values . the bonneville power administration was formed in 1937 to market electric power produced by the bonneville dam.bonneville's marketing responsibilities have expanded since then to include power from 31 federally owned hydroelectric projects , including the grand coulee dam . under the pacific northwest electric power planning and conservation act of 1980 ( northwest power act ) , bonneville is responsible for providing the pacific northwest with an adequate , efficient , economical , and reliable power supply.bonneville currently provides about 45 percent of all electric power consumed in idaho , montana , oregon , and washington and owns about 75 percent of the region's transmission lines . a settlement requiring bonneville to pay the spokane tribe would add to its costs of operation , and it therefore would probably pass these costs to bonneville's customers in the form of higher rates for power . bonneville is a self - financing agency , which means that it must cover its costs through the revenue generated by selling power and transmission services .