see app . ii for a detailed description of the nonimmigrant classifications we used. ) between 2000 and 2004 , ssa issued approximately 1 million ssns to these noncitizens , and as shown in figure 3 , the number of these ssns substantially increased after 2001 . by using their work authorized ssn , these workers could engage in employment covered by social security , but not authorized by their visa ( which is considered illegal employment ) . if these workers accumulate enough work credits by overstaying their visas and meet age and other entitlement requirements , they would qualify for benefits based on the work authorized designation of their ssn . ssa's office of the inspector general estimated that out of the approximately 795,000 temporary visa holders that had received an ssn regardless of their visa type during fiscal year 2000 alone , some 32,000 had either continued working after their immigration status expired or may have allowed someone else to use their ssn to work after they left the united states . ssa officials acknowledged that it was possible for these temporary workers to obtain benefits by using their ssn to engage in employment not authorized under their visa . however , they said that the likelihood of this occurring was low , because such individuals would probably not stay in the country long enough to accrue sufficient work credits or meet lawful presence requirements . as demonstrated by the office of the inspector general report , however , temporary visa holders do , in many instances , continue working after their visas expire . also , if temporary visa holders accrue sufficient work credits and meet other eligibility requirements , they may be able receive benefits without meeting the lawful presence requirement under certain conditions . for example , such temporary visa holders could receive benefits if they apply for benefits outside of the united states if they are citizens of certain countries that have agreements with the united states permitting such payments . should such instances occur , ssa would be limited in its ability to detect them because it does not have the mechanisms to distinguish between individuals' authorized and unauthorized employment . section 211 has imposed new restrictions on the payment of social security benefits to noncitizens who work without authorization , but , not surprisingly , few have been denied benefits thus far . under the law , noncitizens may continue to have earnings from unauthorized employment credited toward their benefits entitlement if they received their ssn in 2003 or earlier , or if their nonwork ssn was assigned after 2003 and they later obtain work authorization . over time , however , this provision of the law will likely exert a greater impact on benefits paid based on unauthorized work . although section 211 will not prevent all such benefit payments , as in the instance regarding certain temporary visa holders , the new law is making a small but potentially growing difference . it will be important for ssa to continue to monitor the law's impact and , to the extent practicable , identify the remaining situations permitting benefit payments based on unauthorized work if they prove significant and measurable .