such financial deterioration can occur quickly . while companies no longer meeting the financial test are to obtain other financial assurance , they may not be able to obtain or afford to purchase it . in addition , in may 2012 , we found that , according to the bureau of land management and the environmental protection agency , corporate guarantees are potentially risky because they are not covered by a specific financial asset such as a bond . boem's use of the financial strength test and corporate guarantees in lieu of bonds raises the risk that the federal government may have to pay for offshore decommissioning if lessees do not . the third way boem's procedures pose financial risks to the federal government is that boem's financial strength test relies on measures that may not provide an accurate indication of a lessee's ability to pay for decommissioning . as described above , boem uses net worth ( from a lessee's audited financial statements ) as a key measure in its financial strength test . however , according to representatives from credit rating agencies we spoke to , net worth provides limited value to assess a company's financial strength and ability to pay future liabilities . specifically , these representatives said that net worth is “backward looking” and can be skewed by the volatile nature of commodity prices , among other factors . credit rating agencies use financial measures that emphasize the evaluation of cash flow , such as debt - to - earnings and debt - to - funds from operations to evaluate whether a company will be able to pay its liabilities . without the use of similar measures in its financial assessments , boem may not have reasonable assurance that the lessees it waives from the requirement to provide supplemental bonds have the financial abilities to fulfill decommissioning obligations , which may increase the financial risk to the government . according to boem officials , boem recognizes the financial risks associated with its current financial assurance procedures and plans to revise its procedures to reduce risk . specifically , boem officials told us that boem's planned revisions would eliminate the use of financial strength tests to completely waive lessees from the requirement to provide supplemental bonding . bsee is responsible for estimating costs associated with decommissioning liabilities . illustrations of these structures are shown in figure 1 . management of offshore oil and gas resources is primarily governed by the outer continental shelf lands act , which sets forth procedures for leasing , exploration , and development and production of those resources . the act calls for the preparation of an oil and gas leasing program designed to meet the nation's energy needs while also taking into account a range of principles and considerations specified by the act .