ii for the details of the formula ) . once a tranche experiences a total loss , the next tranche immediately senior to it begins to bear any additional losses . the following hypothetical securitization structure illustrates the simplified supervisory formula approach for a securitization backed by a pool of residential mortgages that would be risk - weighted at 50 percent . for such a securitization , the typical capital charge of the underlying mortgage pool is 4 percent ( 50 percent risk weight multiplied by 8 percent minimum risk - based capital ratio ) . assuming that 5 percent of the mortgages in the pool are delinquent and have a risk weight of 100 percent ( for an 8 percent capital charge ) , the weighted average capital charge of the mortgage pool would be 4.2 percent . the risk weights for each of the tranches can be calculated using the formula outlined in the final rule and described in appendix ii . the risk - weight results for a pool that does not involve resecuritizations are shown in table 2 . if 10 percent of the underlying mortgage pool is delinquent , the weighted average capital charge would be 4.4 percent , and the tranche risk weights for the lower ( more risky ) tranches would increase , reflecting the increased likelihood of losses on these tranches . in both scenarios , the most senior tranches would have risk weights of 20 percent . risk weights for other securitization exposures , such as real estate mortgage investment conduits , can also be calculated using the simplified supervisory formula approach . similarly , the credit risk transfer transactions the enterprises have engaged in with various investors would be treated as securitization exposures for banks that hold these notes . in most cases , these notes would have risk weights at or near 1,250 percent due to the holders of the notes being in or near the first - loss position . previously , under the basel i - based rules that most banks were subject to through 2014 , some private - label securitization exposures were assigned general risk weights while others were given risk weights based on credit ratings . for example , privately issued mbs backed by mortgages that would qualify for the 50 percent risk weight would receive a 50 percent risk weight , subject to certain conditions . mortgage securitization exposures — including direct credit substitutes , recourse , and residual interests — that were externally rated were assigned risk weights between 20 percent ( for long - term credit ratings of aaa or aa ) and 200 percent ( for bb ratings , which indicate higher risk ) . the gross - up approach in the basel iii - based rule is the same as an approach that was available under the previous rules . to calculate risk - weighted assets under the gross - up approach , a banking organization determines three inputs along with the exposure amount: the pro rata share , the enhanced amount , and the applicable risk weight .