becquerels . materials decays over time at various rates . the term “half - life” is used to indicate the period during which the radioactivity decreases by half as a result of decay . usually , radioactive material with high radioactivity is placed in a sealed container to prevent leakage of the material itself . because of the varied characteristics of the radioactive material — physical structure ( metal , ceramic , or powder ) , activity level , half - life , and type of radiation emitted , some materials pose a greater risk to people , property , and the environment than others . according to iaea , the level of protection provided to users of the radioactive material should be commensurate with the safety and security risks that it presents if improperly used . for example , radioactive materials used for certain diagnostic purposes have low levels of activity and do not present a significant safety or security risk . however , powerful sealed sources , such as those used in radiotherapy ( cancer treatment ) that use cobalt - 60 , cesium - 137 , or iridium - 192 , could pose a greater threat to the public and the environment and would also pose a potentially more significant security risk , particularly if acquired to produce a dirty bomb . the small size , portability , and potential value of sealed sources make them vulnerable to misuse , improper disposal , and theft . according to iaea , illicit trafficking in or smuggling of nuclear material , including sealed sources , has increased worldwide in recent years: iaea reported 272 cases of illicit trafficking in these sources from 1993 to the end of 2002 . ( see app . iv for more information about illicit trafficking incidents. ) while no dirty bombs have been detonated , in the mid - 1990s chechen separatists placed a canister containing cesium - 137 in a moscow park . although the device was not detonated and no radioactive material was dispersed , the incident demonstrated that terrorists have the capability and willingness to use sealed sources as weapons of terror . u.s. and international experts have noted that some accidents involving sealed sources can provide a measure of understanding of what the possible impacts of a dirty bomb might be . in 1987 , an accident involving a cesium - 137 sealed source in brazil killed four people , injured many more , and caused about $36 million in damages to the local economy . this accident had such an enormous psychological impact on the local population that the atomic symbol was added to the region's flag as a lasting reminder of the accident's consequences . appendix v contains more information about worldwide accidents involving sealed sources . the precise number of sealed sources that is in use worldwide is unknown because many countries do not systematically account for them .