how much will it cost ? how much can dod afford to spend ? to what degree can a strategy be crafted for ensuring control over these future costs ? if the v - 22 is only partially suitable , to what degree can another existing aircraft or some mixture of existing aircraft ( including v - 22s ) or a new aircraft perform all or some of its roles more cost effectively ? some consideration should be given to evaluating the roles such aircraft play in today's theaters of war and whether their performance warrants their cost . failure to re - examine the v - 22 program at this point risks the expenditure of billions of dollars on an approach that may be less effective than alternatives . furthermore , if the suitability challenges facing the program are not adequately addressed , the future cost of the program could rise significantly requiring funds that might otherwise be made available to satisfy other needs . this is why we recommended in our may 11 report that the secretary of defense ( 1 ) re - examine the v - 22 by requiring a new alternatives analysis and ( 2 ) require the marine corps to develop a prioritized strategy to improve system suitability , reduce operational costs , and align future budget requests . dod concurred with our second recommendation , but not the first . in non - concurring with our recommendation for a new v - 22 alternatives analysis , dod stated that it supports validating required mv - 22 quantities and the proper mix of aircraft , but not by means of a new v - 22 alternatives analysis . rather , dod stated that planning for all elements of marines corps aviation ( including required quantities , location , and employment of medium - lift assets ) and total force affordability are reviewed and updated annually in the marine aviation plan . we maintain our recommendation for a new alternatives analysis as a means of providing a comparison of a fuller range of alternatives , including their costs , operational suitability , and operational effectiveness under varying scenarios and threat levels . furthermore , development of a v - 22 alternatives analysis could assure congressional decision - makers that a reasoned business case exists that supports the planned acquisition of an additional 282 v - 22s and an expenditure of almost $25 billion in procurement funds in fiscal years 2010 and beyond . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact michael j. sullivan at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .