few foreign schools meet this requirement . in the absence of obtaining isirs , foreign school officials must rely on and obtain from students a special eight - page version of the student aid report ( sar ) , which is also generated by education and contains information similar to that found in the isir . education typically provides students with only an abbreviated two - page sar , which summarizes information students submit on the fafsa , but does not contain all of the information foreign school officials need to determine whether a student is eligible for a loan . students must specifically request the special eight - page version from education . rather than documenting and determining student eligibility based on the eight - page sar , we found that certain foreign school officials were improperly basing their student eligibility determinations on the two - page sar . in reviewing files to determine if schools were properly determining and documenting students' eligibility for ffelp loans , we found that the 2 schools with electronic access to education's information systems had copies of isirs for every student file we reviewed . each of these schools had certified in excess of $30 million in ffelp loans and together certified about 30 percent of the total ffelp loan volume for fiscal year 2001 . however , 5 of the 6 schools without access to education's information systems , which collectively certified over $3 million in ffelp loans for fiscal year 2001 , did not have copies of isirs or eight - page sars on file indicating that schools may have approved loans without obtaining the information necessary for determining student eligibility . some school officials , in fact , told us that they verified students' eligibility for loans based of the two - page sar and were unaware that without the eight - page sar or isir , students' eligibility for loans could not be properly verified and documented . the inability of foreign school officials to electronically access education's information systems also creates the potential for delays in schools confirming and reporting student enrollment . such counseling can help borrowers avoid defaulting on their loans , which can , in turn , help prevent waste from occurring in ffelp . two of the schools we visited , which are also the schools with electronic access to education's information systems , had staff available to provide loan counseling and school officials reported doing so both prior to students' arrival on campus and after students' registration on campus . other school officials , who had certified loan volumes ranging from $100,000 to about $1 million , stated that loan counseling was not provided as required by regulations . education's current eligibility certification process does not include conducting on - site visits to verify the existence of foreign schools . as we reported in november 2002 , due in part to this weakness , education granted approval to a fictitious foreign school that our undercover investigators created and which enabled our investigators to obtain approval for ffelp loans for fictitious students .