we believe this action is responsive to these recommendations . dod disagreed with our recommendation that the secretary of the army direct the army's chief management officer to exercise oversight of army inventory management improvements to align improvement efforts with overall business transformation and to reduce support costs . at the time of this review , the army was undergoing secondary inventory supply transfer actions as a part of a larger 2005 base realignment and closure ( brac ) recommendation . in our survey of 216 items , we identified 38 items that were a part of this supply transfer to the defense logistics agency ( dla ) . most item managers overseeing these previously army - managed items stated that they no longer retained the data to complete our survey ; therefore , these dla - transferred items are reflected in the “other” category of our sample results in tables 8 and 9 . because we followed a probability procedure based on random selections , our sample of unique items is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn . because each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results in 95 percent confidence intervals . these are intervals that would contain the actual population values for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn . as a result , we are 95 percent confident that each of the confidence intervals in this report will include the true values in the study population . in addition to sampling errors , the practical difficulties of conducting any questionnaire may introduce errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . a purchase request can be terminated or modified if requirements change . these requirements collectively constitute the requirements objective , which we refer to as the army's current requirements in this report . an assessment of the army's requirements or requirements determination process falls outside the scope of our review . in accounting for its inventory , the army uses the stratification process to allocate , or apply , inventory to each requirement category . on - hand inventory in serviceable condition is applied first , followed by on - hand inventory in unserviceable condition . on - order inventory is applied when on - hand inventory is unavailable to be applied to requirements . we refer to situations in which on - hand and on - order inventory are insufficient to satisfy current requirements as inventory deficits . our analysis of army secondary inventory data for the 4-year period we examined showed that about $3.6 billion ( 22 percent ) of the average annual total inventory value of $16.3 billion was not needed to meet current requirements . during this time period , the value of on - hand inventory exceeding current requirements increased , whereas the value of on - order inventory that exceeded requirements decreased . during this same time period , the value of army inventory deficits decreased but remained substantial — an average value of $3.5 billion over the 4-year period .