the organization where the employee worked . we split this category blm employees in the key occupations who were also identified by blm as performing oil - and gas - related work . other blm employees in the key occupations . boem employees in key occupations for post - 2011 . bsee employees in key occupations for post - 2011 . boemre / mms employees in key occupations through 2011 . note that since we are using time - varying covariates , this category changed starting in 2012 for any employee who was employed during the redefinition of sub - agency organizations and consequent reorganization . we did not address such an impact in our report . we did state , however , that since blm can pay a natural resource specialist 35 percent more than boem can , this difference may place boem at a disadvantage in its recruitment efforts and its ability to retain staff if its natural resource specialists leave to take a comparable position at blm . interior stated that the data demonstrated that the greatest need for blm to acquire natural resource specialists was within the north dakota region and that boem does not maintain offices in that region . however , blm also offers the special salary rate for natural resource specialists in other states where boem does maintain offices . in addition , federal employees could relocate from one state to another state in order to take a new job . interior partially agreed with our second recommendation , to have the assistant secretary for policy , management and budget annually evaluate the bureaus' training programs , including training needs , training effectiveness and potential opportunities for the bureaus to share training resources . interior said that the office of policy , management and budget would ensure that the three bureaus are coordinating their training needs and that its office of strategic employee and organizational development can validate the bureaus' engagement in this activity and provide support in fulfilling these recommendations . while these steps may be useful , as stated in the report , interior has not evaluated the bureaus' training needs or the training's effectiveness as required by federal law and regulations , and the bureaus have not fully evaluated their training efforts as directed by interior policy . we continue to believe that the office of policy , management and budget is required by law and regulation to evaluate the bureaus' training programs . without evaluating the bureaus' training programs , interior cannot ensure that the training provided is sufficient to support the required oversight duties . interior also submitted several points of clarification and comments regarding related findings: interior stated that our report assumed that boem and bsee should be acquiring technical training from blm , which , according to interior , does not accurately reflect the analysis conducted to determine the training needs for offshore development or recognize the training coordination that does occur . relatedly , interior stated that we did not acknowledge the vastly different skill sets needed to inspect or permit equipment needed for onshore versus offshore facilities . however , our draft report did not state or assume that blm would be training these bureaus , and we did not recommend such an action .