tva . we also collected information from north carolina and tennessee state agencies , non - profit groups , and others . reduced visibility is caused by small particles in the air . we agree . to analyze trends in visibility and ozone , we interviewed officials from , and reviewed studies and other documents prepared by , the department of the interior's national park service , the department of agriculture's forest service , epa , and tva , as well as recent scientific literature . we also interviewed representatives of , and reviewed studies and other documents prepared by , state officials in north carolina and tennessee and the southern appalachian mountains initiative — a voluntary partnership of federal and state agencies , industry , academia , environmental groups , and interested public participants . to analyze trends in respiratory illnesses , we reviewed recent scientific literature and contacted the centers for disease control and prevention , a unit within the department of health and human services , and epa health researchers to ascertain the availability of data on health outcomes associated with exposure to air pollution . we focused our analysis on mortality data because they were available for the nation as a whole and for the counties in north carolina and tennessee — the two states that border the park . we also focused on death from all causes and on death from pneumonia / influenza and chronic lung disease , two sets of illnesses that many studies associate with exposure to air pollution . we obtained national data from the department's national center for health statistics and state and county data from the north carolina and tennessee health agencies . to describe trends in areas near the park , we divided counties in each state into regions used by the state agencies responsible for air quality monitoring and selected the region in each state that borders the park . to analyze the data for deaths from all causes and from selected respiratory illnesses , we used the same statistical procedures and significance tests that the national center for health statistics uses to develop national death rates . to calculate death rates for comparison between the two states and the nation we used the 1940 standard population , the current practice of the national center for health statistics . for the comparison between county clusters and the states , we used the 2000 standard population , the current practice of the north carolina state center for health statistics . although we did not independently verify the data obtained from the federal agencies and other sources , we used the same emissions and mortality data that federal and state agencies and other analysts generally use . we performed our work from october 2000 through may 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .