ius . dod has not yet established an alternative valuation methodology for ius . dod has stated that identification and valuation of ius is one of the major challenges to asset valuation . valuation alternatives currently being proposed by fasab , assuming they are adopted as accounting standards , hold the potential to allow dod to develop an acceptable initial valuation for its pp&e . however , dod acknowledges that it must still continue to remedy its systems and processes to properly capture and account for the historical costs of newly acquired assets and develop sufficient documentation to enable an audit to be performed . if it is not able to timely implement valuation methodologies for existing assets and remediate identified deficiencies in its pp&e systems , there is an increased risk that dod may not be able to properly value its assets and be audit ready by the end of fiscal year 2017 . asset valuation — though a significant challenge for dod — is required for financial reporting . but beyond financial reporting , there are advantages to tracking and maintaining the records of the historical cost of assets . for example , federal accounting standards indicate that recording and tracking assets — and recognizing the cost of those assets through depreciation expense over their estimated useful lives — helps managers assess the performance of an entity . additionally , reliable , useful , and timely financial and performance information provides dod financial managers , congress , and other decision makers the information they need to make difficult resource allocation decisions and to help ensure that dod is operating effectively and efficiently . dod is responsible for over 70 percent of the federal government's reported pp&e , but dod cannot accurately account for its pp&e assets . significant financial and related business management control deficiencies adversely affect dod's ability to manage and perform its mission . dod's inability to perform basic financial and accountability functions is highlighted by its inability to prepare auditable financial statements — one measure of good financial management . congress has required dod to take steps to be ready for full financial audit by september 30 , 2017 , and has mandated that dod report on its status and progress through the semiannual fiar plan status report . although dod's status reports have shown that several categories of pp&e are ready for audit , its reporting does not provide clear visibility for congress and other decision makers regarding the extent to which dod has addressed underlying deficiencies in internal controls . further , the status reports identify certain control deficiencies , or dealbreakers , that are so severe they could prevent the services from demonstrating audit readiness or succeeding in audits . however , the reports do not provide adequate visibility over actions taken and progress made toward correcting the dealbreakers . without sufficient information about the status of improvements in internal control , including information about dealbreakers , dod , congressional committees , and other decision makers do not have a complete status of audit readiness or improvements that still need to be made .