gao - 10-12 . washington , d.c.: october 30 , 2009 . the port state is the country where the port is located . port state control is the process by which a nation exercises its authority over foreign - flagged vessels operating in waters subject to the port state's jurisdiction . port state control is generally intended to ensure that vessels comply with various international and domestic requirements for ensuring safety of the port , environment , and personnel . thus , when a foreign - flagged cruise ship enters u.s. waters or a u.s. port , the u.s. port state control program , administered by the u.s. coast guard , becomes an additional means of maritime security enforcement . according to an official of the cruise lines international association , of the cruise lines included in our site visits , only one had a vessel registered in the united states . hence , although they carry large numbers of u.s. passengers , the vast majority of cruise line - operated vessels generally come under u.s. authority only when they enter waters over which the united states has jurisdiction . this report responds to the following questions: to what extent does the u.s. coast guard assess risk related to cruise ships and their facilities in accordance with dhs's guidance , and what are the identified risks ? to what extent have maritime security stakeholders taken actions to mitigate the potential risks to cruise ships and their facilities and to implement applicable federal laws , regulations , and guidance , and what additional actions , if any , could enhance cruise ship security ? to determine the extent to which the u.s. coast guard assesses the risks related to cruise ships in accordance with dhs's guidance , and determine the identified risks associated with cruise ships and their facilities , we reviewed relevant federal guidance on the use of risk management , including the national infrastructure protection plan . we also reviewed the coast guard's primary risk assessment tool , the maritime security risk assessment model and coast guard documents describing the methodology and use of the risk assessment model . we analyzed the risk assessment model process and compared it to criteria with the risk assessment component of the national infrastructure protection plan . we also analyzed the compiled nationwide results of the risk assessment model to determine the relative risks facing cruise ships and their facilities , as of july 2009 . in addition , we interviewed coast guard headquarters personnel responsible for conducting comprehensive security reviews of critical maritime infrastructure with the risk assessment model , coast guard district personnel , and coast guard sector personnel responsible for the implementation of the risk assessment model at the local level to discuss the relative risks in their areas of responsibility . we interviewed coast guard , navy , and private sector intelligence personnel actively engaged in determining possible threats to cruise ships and their facilities .