claimant requirements . while npfc has a form which claimants may use to submit their claim , there is no required format for submitting a claim to npfc . however , opa through its implementing regulations , requires that the claim be ( 1 ) submitted in writing , ( 2 ) for a sum certain amount of compensation for each category of uncompensated damages or removal , and ( 3 ) signed by the claimant . the claimant bears the burden of providing all evidence , information , and documentation deemed necessary by npfc to support the claim . while the claim is pending against the fund , if the claimant receives any compensation for the claimed amounts , the claimant is required to immediately amend the claim submitted to npfc . among other duties , the u.s. coast guard's npfc administers the fund by disbursing funds to federal , state , local , or tribal agencies for their removal activities under the oil pollution act of 1990 , as amended ( opa ) . when an oil spill occurs , relevant federal agencies are notified by the national response center including the u.s. coast guard and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . the coast guard has responsibility and serves as the federal on - scene coordinator for spills occurring in the coastal zones , while epa has responsibility for spills that occur on land . npfc's case management division is responsible for providing access to the emergency fund when a spill occurs and for working with the federal on - scene coordinator and agencies to ensure accurate cost documentation to support cost recovery . npfc's case management division operates through a matrix organization comprised of four regional case teams . each regional case team consists of a manager and multiple case officers . when a spill occurs , npfc assigns responsibility to the regional case team representing the geographic area in which the spill occurs . npfc uses a three - level system to help determine the complexity of an oil spill case and its required documentation for cost reimbursement . level i ( routine ) represents about 85 percent of all oil spill incidents , in which total removal costs to the government are not expected to exceed $50,000 , removal activities are localized , and removal activities can be completed within 2 weeks . for a level i incident , agencies submit documentation to the federal on - scene coordinator at the completion of removal activities . level ii ( moderately complex ) represents about 10 to 15 percent of all oil spill incidents , in which total removal costs to the government are not expected to exceed $200,000 . level ii removal activities take place in multiple locations , require the involvement of several external resources ( i.e. , state agencies and other government units ) , and removal activities take longer than 2 weeks to complete . level iii ( significantly complex ) represents less than 5 percent of all oil spill incidents with total removal costs greater than $200,000 . level iii removal activities take place in multiple locations , require the involvement of numerous contractors , and similar to level ii , the assistance of several external resources is needed .