we conducted interviews with officials at dsca and the military services . we also met with the foreign procurement group , a group composed of fms customer countries , to ask them about their experiences with the fms program and reviewed the group's 2008 briefing for the program . we conducted this performance audit from may 2008 to april 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . countries are to secure all defense articles purchased through the fms program . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we also obtained data from two major ports , one airport and one seaport . these ports are 2 of the top 10 u.s. ports in terms of the dollar value of fms shipments they process . we used these data to determine if fms agreements were being lodged at multiple ports and to determine if exports were occurring against fms agreements for which exports were no longer authorized . we reviewed copies of licenses and shipment logs to identify when actual shipments were made against fms agreements that were no longer authorized to have shipments . our analysis of these data allowed us to determine whether gaps in controls exist , but did not allow us to assess the state of controls at all ports . in addition , we interviewed officials and obtained documentation at the state department , the defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) , the air force security assistance center , the united states army security assistance command , the navy international programs office , the naval inventory control point , the defense logistics agency , cbp headquarters and port personnel at two ports , and u.s. security assistance officers stationed in one nato and one non - nato country . appendix i includes additional details about our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from may 2008 through april 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the arms export control act authorizes the sale of defense articles and services to eligible foreign customers under the fms program . under the program , the purchased items must be used and secured properly by the customer and cannot be sold to third parties . also , the fms program must be administered at no cost to the u.s. government . to recover administration costs , dod applies a surcharge to each fms agreement that is a percentage of the value of each sale . multiple organizations have a role in the fms program , including dsca and the military services , state , and cbp . dod's responsibilities , which are described in the security assistance management manual , largely focus on the overall administration of the program and fms agreements . dsca carries out key functions , such as managing the fms administrative surcharge account and supervising end use monitoring of fms items , and the military services carry out the day - to - day implementation of fms agreements .