2 and app . ii for additional data ) . according to the agencies' data , the two agencies that complied with the requirements spent between 0.35 percent and 0.38 percent of their extramural r&d budgets on their sttr programs , and the three agencies that did not comply spent between 0.30 percent and 0.32 percent . 1 and app . i for additional data ) . according to the agencies' data , the 8 agencies that met or exceeded the requirements spent between 2.6 percent and 4.0 percent of their extramural r&d budgets on the program , and the remaining 3 agencies spent between 2.3 percent and 2.5 percent . in comparison , agency data indicated that 10 of the 11 agencies met or exceeded spending requirements in fiscal year 2011 , and that 3 of the 11 agencies complied with spending requirements each fiscal year from 2006 through 2011 , as we found in september 2013 . our analysis of the data agencies submitted to sba indicates that two of the five agencies participating in the sttr program met or exceeded their fiscal year 2012 spending requirements , while the remaining three agencies did not meet the requirements ( see fig . in comparison , the data that agencies submitted to sba indicated that two of the five agencies , hhs and nasa , complied with spending requirements in fiscal year 2011 , and one of the agencies — hhs — complied with spending requirements each fiscal year from 2006 to 2011 , as we found in september 2013 . program managers at the agencies that did not comply with spending requirements for fiscal year 2012 identified reasons that the agencies did not comply: ( 1 ) some agencies reserved funds to spend in a subsequent fiscal year without spending the minimum required amount in fiscal year 2012 ; ( 2 ) the spending requirement increased part of the way through the year , after agencies made spending plans ; ( 3 ) agencies did not submit data on all of their spending ; and ( 4 ) the amount agencies spent on extramural r&d was higher than estimated at the beginning of the fiscal year . some of these circumstances also applied to agencies that complied with spending requirements in fiscal year 2012 . two of the agencies that did not comply with spending requirements — dod and usda — reserved funds to spend in a subsequent fiscal year without spending the minimum required amount in fiscal year 2012 . the small business act requires participating agencies to “expend” the minimum percentages of their extramural r&d budgets with small businesses annually . additionally , sba officials said they expect agencies to spend at least the minimum required percentages on the programs each year . however , program officials at dod and usda told us that they believe their agencies comply with spending requirements if the agencies spend the total amount reserved or budgeted for the program , regardless of the year the funding is spent . we found that these two agencies did not implement the annual program spending requirements as written in the small business act , in part because sba's sbir and sttr policy directives inaccurately summarize the law .