objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . our preliminary results indicate that , in the absence of ramp , fps currently is not assessing risk at the over 9,000 federal facilities under the custody and control of gsa in a manner consistent with federal standards such as nipp's risk management framework , as fps originally planned . according to this framework , to be considered credible a risk assessment must specifically address the three components of risk: threat , vulnerability , and consequence . as a result , fps has accumulated a backlog of federal facilities that have not been assessed for several years . according to fps data , more than 5,000 facilities were to be assessed in fiscal years 2010 through 2012 . however , we were not able to determine the extent of the fsa backlog because we found fps's fsa data to be unreliable . specifically , our analysis of fps's december 2011 assessment data showed nearly 800 ( 9 percent ) of the approximately 9,000 federal facilities did not have a date for when the last fsa was completed . we have reported that timely and comprehensive risk assessments play a critical role in protecting federal facilities by helping decision makers identify and evaluate potential threats so that countermeasures can be implemented to help prevent or mitigate the facilities' vulnerabilities . although fps is not currently assessing risk at federal facilities , fps officials stated that the agency is taking steps to ensure federal facilities are safe . according to fps officials , its inspectors ( also referred to as law enforcement security officers ) monitor the security posture of federal facilities by responding to incidents , testing countermeasures , and conducting guard post inspections . in addition , since september 2011 , fps's inspectors have collected information — such as location , purpose , agency contacts , and current countermeasures ( eg , perimeter security , access controls , and closed - circuit television systems ) at over 1,400 facilities — which will be used as a starting point to complete fps's fiscal year 2012 assessments . however , fps officials acknowledged that this approach is not consistent with nipp's risk management framework . moreover , several fps inspectors told us that they received minimal training or guidance on how to collect this information , and expressed concern that the facility information collected could become outdated by the time it is used to complete an fsa . we reported in february 2012 that multiple federal agencies have been expending additional resources to conduct their own risk assessments , in part because they have not been satisfied with fps's past assessments . these assessments are taking place even though , according to fps's chief financial officer , fps received $236 million in basic security fees from federal agencies to conduct fsas and other security services in fiscal year 2011 . for example , officials we spoke with at the internal revenue service , federal emergency management agency , environmental protection agency and the u.s. army corps of engineers stated that they conduct their own risk assessments . gsa is also expending additional resources to assess risk .