gao - 11-297 . washington , d.c.: june 9 , 2011 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . flood insurance: public policy goals provide a framework for reform . gao - 11-429t . washington , d.c.: march 11 , 2011 . mitigation offers significant advantages . as i have noted , mitigated properties are less likely to be at a high risk for flood damage , making it easier for nfip to charge them full - risk rates that cover actual losses . allowing nfip to deny coverage to owners of repetitive loss properties who refused to undertake mitigation efforts could further reduce costs to the program and ultimately to taxpayers . one disadvantage of increased mitigation efforts is that they can impose up - front costs on homeowners and communities required to undertake them and could raise taxpayers' costs if the federal government elected to provide additional mitigation assistance . those costs could increase still further if property owners who were dropped from the program for refusing to mitigate later - received federal postdisaster assistance . these trade - offs are not insignificant , although certain actions could be taken to reduce them . for example , federal assistance such as low - cost loans , grants , or tax credits could be provided to help property owners pay for the up - front costs of mitigation efforts . any reform efforts could explore ways to improve mitigation efforts to help ensure maximum effectiveness . for example , fema has three separate flood mitigation programs . having multiple programs may not be the most cost - efficient and effective way to promote mitigation and may unnecessarily complicate mitigation efforts . increasing participation in nfip , and thus the size of the risk pool , would help ensure that losses from flood damage did not become the responsibility of the taxpayer . participation rates have been estimated to be as low as 50 percent in sfhas , where property owners with loans from federally insured and regulated lenders are required to purchase flood insurance , and participation in lower - risk areas is significantly lower . for example , participation rates outside of sfhas have been found to be as low as 1 percent , leaving significant room to increase participation . expanding participation in nfip would have a number of advantages . as a growing number of participants shared the risks of flooding , premium rates could be lower than they would be with fewer participants . currently , nfip must take all applicants for flood insurance , unlike private insurers , and thus is limited in its ability to manage its risk exposure . to the extent that properties added to the program were in geographic areas where participation had historically been low and in low - and medium - risk areas , the increased diversity could lower rates as the overall risk to the program decreased .