the guide and the manual supplement the order . the guide provides more detailed information on the eight applicable foia exemptions to help staff decide whether exemption ( s ) may apply , which exemption ( s ) may apply , or both . the manual provides specific instructions for managing ouo information , such as mandatory procedures and processes for properly identifying and marking this information . for example , the employee marking a document is required to place on the front page of the document an ouo stamp that has a space for the employee to identify which foia exemption is believed to apply ; the employee's name and organization ; the date ; and , if applicable , any guidance the employee may have used in making this determination . according to one senior doe official , requiring the employee to cite a reason why a document is designated as ouo is one of the purposes of the stamp , and one means by which doe's office of classification encourages practices consistent with the order , guide , and manual throughout doe . figure 1 shows the doe ouo stamp . the current dod regulations are unclear regarding which dod office controls the fouo program . although responsibility for the fouo program was shifted from the director for administration and management to the office of the assistant secretary of defense , command , control , communications , and intelligence ( now the under secretary of defense , intelligence ) in october 1998 , this shift is not reflected in current regulations . guidance for dod's fouo program continues to be included in regulations issued by both offices . as a result , there is currently a lack of clarity regarding which dod office has primary responsibility for the fouo program . according to a dod official , this lack of clarity causes personnel who have fouo questions to contact the wrong office . the direction provided in standards for internal control in the federal government states that an agency's organizational structure should clearly define key areas of authority and responsibility . a dod official said that they began coordination of a revised information security regulation covering the fouo program at the end of january 2006 . the new regulation will reflect the change in responsibilities and place greater emphasis on the management of the fouo program . dod currently has two regulations , issued by each of the offices described above , containing similar guidance that addresses how unclassified but sensitive information should be identified , marked , handled , and stored . once information in a document has been identified as fouo , it is to be marked for official use only . however , unlike doe , dod has no departmentwide requirement to indicate which foia exemption may apply to the information , except when it has been determined to be releasable to a federal governmental entity outside of dod . we found , however , that one of the army's subordinate commands does train its personnel to put an exemption on any documents that are marked as fouo , but does not have this step as a requirement in any policy .