( see fig . 2 ) most overpayment debt is collected by ssa through offsets , or the withholding of future di benefits for which a beneficiary is still eligible . ssa attributes 77 percent of the approximately $839 million of debt collected in fiscal year 2010 to withholding of di benefits . the amount withheld from benefits to recoup previous overpayments may be negotiated with the debtor and based on a monthly amount the debtor can afford . the remainder of overpayment debt is collected in a variety of ways , including payments by the debtor and return of uncashed di benefit checks ; withholding of other ssa benefits , such as supplemental security income ( ssi ) ; or through external collection including federal salary offset , administrative offset ( other than against ssa benefits ) , tax refund offset , and administrative wage garnishment . ssa estimates that only about 11 percent of collections is through external means . of the 60 cases , 5 were referred for external collection at the time of our review , for a total owed of $79,950 , but just $2,478 had been recovered through these methods . ssa does not require supervisory review of repayment plans prior to approval , including those in which repayment periods exceed the recommended 36 months . the agency reported that in fiscal year 2010 , the median time to collect a di overpayment debt in full was 48 months . however , in our review of 60 cases , we found that ssa agreed to some initial repayment plans which will take many decades . we analyzed the initial payment plans established for individuals in these cases and found 42 of the 60 had a payment plan in place , with a median repayment time for all 42 of approximately 34 months . while ssa's poms require that staff should seek full repayment within 36 months , ssa officials reported that no supervisory approval is needed to exceed the 36 months . of the 42 cases with a payment plan , 19 had initial plans requiring more than 36 months for payment in full and 7 of these required 20 years or more . as a result , the overpayment debt on the agency's books , and reported to the department of the treasury for the federal government's consolidated financial statements , is understated to some unknown extent . this roar system limitation stems from a program modification used to address the change of the century ( y2k ) computer issue , and which extended the debt recovery date in roar from “1999” to “2049” . repayment time frames for the 42 cases ranged from less than 1 year to nearly 223 years for a case with a 60-year - old debtor who was paying $10 a month on $26,715 owed . ( see fig . ssa officials told us they are often unable to increase monthly payment amounts and thus shorten repayment time frames because of a debtor's limited income . for instance , in a case we reviewed with an initial repayment plan of 148 years for $44,465 in overpayments owed to ssa , ssa records show the individual earned less than $100 in 2010 .