international traffic . the stated purpose of the draft regulations , which is similar to the current regulations , is to provide security against the international spread of disease while avoiding unnecessary interference with international traffic . although the term international traffic appears to refer to international travel and trade , neither the proposed nor the current regulations define the term . furthermore , the draft regulations do not include detailed criteria for determining what constitutes interference with international trade and travel . a who official indicated that it was preferable not to include detailed criteria and to allow this issue to be decided on a case - by - case basis because of the very broad range of situations that could ultimately cause such interference . this issue could receive a good deal of attention in the revision process as member states try to balance medical and economic concerns . according to who officials , in past epidemics , concerns about economic loss and restrictions on trade and travel caused some countries not to report outbreaks within their borders and to refuse international assistance . furthermore , for certain outbreaks — for example , those involving cholera in peru in 1991 and plague in india in 1994 — some experts reported that the international response may have exceeded the level of threat and led to unwarranted trade and travel losses in those countries . the process for revising the international health regulations was intensified by a who world health assembly resolution passed in may 2003 , during the sars outbreak , urging members to give high priority to the revision process and to provide the resources and cooperation to facilitate this work . the resolution also requested that the who director - general consider informal sources of information to respond to outbreaks such as sars ; collaborate with national authorities in assessing the severity of infectious disease threats and the adequacy of control measures ; and , when necessary , send a who team to conduct on - the - spot studies in places experiencing infectious disease outbreaks . although the resolution did not impose legally binding obligations on members , according to who officials and some observers it did lay the political groundwork for improved international cooperation on infectious disease control . in january 2004 , who distributed to its member states an interim draft of the revisions proposed by the who secretariat . composed of 55 articles and 10 technical annexes , the draft will be discussed in a series of regional consultations throughout 2004 . see app . iii for a discussion of methodologies and varied assumptions used to obtain these estimates. ) for example , the far eastern economic review estimates sars's economic costs in asia at around $11 billion , with the largest losses in china , hong kong , and singapore . the asian development bank also shows the largest losses in these three economies , although they estimate the total cost at around $18 billion . as the asian development bank reported , using its cost estimate , the cost per person infected with sars was roughly $2 million .