electricity provider . prepa is a public power utility owned by the commonwealth of puerto rico and a monopoly supplier of electricity in the commonwealth . since utilities in all affected areas were acquiring materials to restore electricity service , demand for these materials increased and available supplies were generally low ; in some instances materials were only available as they were manufactured . few , if any , materials were stockpiled locally on puerto rico . in addition , some of the equipment used in puerto rico was not standard in the continental united states and required ordering of specialized materials , resulting in delays in the restoration process . the u.s. virgin islands also faced supply issues , which became worse once grid recovery work in puerto rico began . financial condition of local utilities and poor condition of existing infrastructure . electric utilities in both puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands were insolvent , which led to a lack of maintenance and presented its own challenges for restoring the grids after the storms . specifically , prepa was approximately $9 billion in debt before the 2017 hurricane season , with annual costs that exceeded its revenues . puerto rico's electric power infrastructure was in poor condition before the 2017 hurricane season largely because of prepa's underinvestment and poor maintenance practices . for example , prepa canceled its vegetation management program because of its financial situation ; this contributed to the destruction of transmission and distribution lines when the hurricane arrived , according to fema officials . similarly , in the u.s. virgin islands , financial challenges contributed to the extent of the damage to grid infrastructure . specifically , viwapa officials told us that viwapa's financial challenges prevented certain infrastructure improvements and a large proportion of the electricity poles were at or above their weight capacity , increasing the likelihood and extent of wind damage during the hurricanes . according to viwapa officials , viwapa was aware that there were too many lines and heavy transformers on old poles , but was not in a position to address this concern prior to the hurricanes . extensive and unprecedented role of federal agencies . fema did not anticipate or plan for the extensive role that it and usace played in grid restoration in puerto rico . according to fema's after action report for the 2017 hurricane season , fema's planning assumptions for a hurricane , earthquake , or tsunami striking puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands underestimated the actual requirements . as discussed above , prior to hurricane maria in puerto rico , usace had never worked on a large - scale power restoration as part of a domestic disaster response and did not have expertise in this area , according to usace officials . this affected grid restoration efforts . for example , usace did not have a grid restoration contract in place to immediately initiate grid repair efforts , according to usace officials . rather , usace issued an order off of a pre - existing contract that it had under its public works and engineering support function to bring electric utility lineworkers to puerto rico .