this concludes my testimony . i would be pleased to answer any questions . if you or your staff has any questions concerning this testimony , please contact triana mcneil at ( 202 ) 512-6806 ( mcneilt@gao.gov ) . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . optimize agency performance . moreover , opm was given a key role in fulfilling the human capital - related goal of the most recent president's management agenda , in which the administration noted its intention to partner with congress on “overhauling the statutory and regulatory rules that have , over time , created an incomprehensible and unmanageable civil service system.” opm , along with omb and dod was tasked with the goal of aligning and strategically managing the workforce to efficiently and effectively achieve the federal government's mission . to carry out these government - wide , strategic responsibilities , the following capabilities , whether possessed by opm or some other entity , will be essential for ensuring cost - effective leadership , management , and oversight of the federal workforce . in our march 2019 report , we noted that such trends as technological advances , an increased reliance on nonfederal partners , and changing demographics and shifting attitudes toward work , are affecting how federal work is done , and consequently the skills and competencies that workers need to accomplish agency missions . moreover , recent publications by the administration and others have raised concerns about whether the government's employment policies and practices are still relevant and desirable to the current and future workforce . as far back as 1989 , we reported that opm had not provided the leadership necessary to sustain attention to identifying and resolving critical human resource problems affecting government operations and preparing for the future . although opm has made progress in this area and provides a variety of services , its progress has been inconsistent and issues still remain . for example , in 2018 , opm issued its federal workforce priorities report , which identifies changes in the external environment that will likely affect federal human capital management , including the evolving role of workers , changes in technology , employee health , and shifting generational demographics . opm has also hosted a series of symposia that provide human capital specialists insight on addressing workforce challenges of the future . we also offered to brief omb . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in march 2017 , the president issued an executive order requiring comprehensive reorganization plans for executive branch agencies ( see fig . in april 2017 , omb provided guidance to federal agencies for developing their respective reform plans . the government - wide reform plan was to have been based on the agency reform plans , omb - coordinated crosscutting proposals , and public input . according to omb's m - 17-22 guidance , omb , in coordination with the president's management council , was to establish a way to track the progress of the reforms .