jpdo began operating in early 2004 . jpdo has developed a framework for planning and coordination with its partner agencies and nonfederal stakeholders that is consistent with the requirements of vision 100 and with several practices that our work has shown can facilitate federal interagency collaboration and enterprise architecture development . this framework includes an integrated plan , an organizational structure , and an enterprise architecture . vision 100 calls for the development of an integrated plan for ngats and annual updates on the progress of that plan . ( 1 ) what is the status of jpdo's efforts to plan for ngats ? ( 2 ) what key challenges does jpdo face in moving forward with its planning efforts ? ( 3 ) what key challenges does faa face in transitioning from the current atc system and in implementing ngats ? my statement is based on our analysis of documents provided by jpdo and its partner agencies ; the perspectives of agency officials and stakeholders with whom we have spoken ; the results of a panel of experts that we convened ; and our review of relevant literature , including jpdo's december 2004 integrated plan and march 2006 progress report . the statement also draws on our prior work on faa's program for modernizing the national airspace system , which we have listed as a high - risk program since 1995 . to assess jpdo's framework for facilitating coordination among its partner agencies , obtaining the participation of nonfederal stakeholders , and conducting technical planning for ngats , we compared jpdo's practices with those that we have found to be effective in facilitating federal interagency collaboration and enterprise architecture development . we also reviewed the national research council's 2005 report on jpdo , which provided a technical assessment of the research , development , and technology components of jpdo's integrated plan . later this year , we expect to issue a report on our assessment of the status of jpdo's efforts to plan for the development of ngats . we are performing our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the following summarizes our findings to date: jpdo has developed a framework for planning and coordination with its partner agencies and nonfederal stakeholders that is consistent with the requirements of vision 100 and with several practices that our previous work has shown can facilitate federal interagency collaboration and enterprise architecture development . vision 100 established jpdo as a planning and coordinating body and outlined elements for creating ngats and managing the related work . these elements , which make up jpdo's framework , include an integrated plan that provides a vision for ngats , an organizational structure and processes for leveraging the resources and expertise of federal and nonfederal stakeholders , and an enterprise architecture that defines the specific requirements for ngats . jpdo faces leadership , leveraging , and commitment challenges as it moves forward with planning for ngats . currently , two leadership positions critical to jpdo's success are vacant: jpdo has not had a permanent director for over 6 months , and since the secretary of transportation resigned , the senior policy committee has been without a permanent chairperson .