growth . that is , growth rates of sblf participants remained noticeably higher than those of our peer group . this growth could indicate a beneficial effect of sblf funding on lending , or it could be due to other factors , including differences between sblf participants and our peer group for which we were not able to adjust . when categorizing institutions by the level of change in their business lending , sblf participants were more heavily concentrated in the higher growth categories compared with moreover , the median the peer and comparison groups ( see fig . 6 ) .sblf participant had a 31 percent increase in total business lending , compared with a 2 percent increase for the comparison group and a 6 percent increase for the peer group . further , sblf participants had a higher median growth rate of total business lending than both our peer group and treasury's comparison group in all six geographical regions ( see fig . moreover , the peer group had higher rates of growth than the comparison group in five of the six regions . sblf participants also had a higher median growth rate of total business lending across all five asset size categories ( see fig . again , the peer group's growth rate was slightly closer to that of sblf participants than the comparison group was for all five asset groups , yet it remained well below it . moreover , sblf participants in the larger asset categories had lower growth rates in total business lending . however , the peer and comparison groups had no noticeable trend across different asset size groups . in addition , the peer and comparison groups were closest to sblf participants among institutions with assets over $1 billion . treasury officials said that in determining the comparison group to use in their analysis , they analyzed distributional differences in asset size and geography between the groups , as well as some indicators of financial health . they judged that the differences in the variables they analyzed were modest and believed that adjusting for these differences — that is , making the comparison group more representative of sblf participants — would only provide a limited benefit while making the analysis less transparent and more difficult for others to replicate . they were also concerned that using what they considered to be a more judgmental approach , such as selecting a peer group , would require certain arbitrary decisions which might raise concerns about the validity of their selection criteria . as a result , treasury determined that the differences found in their analyses did not warrant an approach that would adjust for these factors . in addition , although treasury officials told us they considered but decided against using a comparison group that would have been adjusted to more closely mirror sblf participants ; they did not explain this decision in the methodology section of the use of funds report . in prior work on another treasury program , we said that treasury should enhance its communications relating to financial assistance so that they are transparent to the congress and the public .