only justice had issued some guidance to the fbi . as a result , most u.s. leas lacked clearly defined roles and responsibilities for implementing their efforts to assist foreign nations to identify , disrupt , and prosecute terrorists . we found problems because of this lack of guidance on roles and responsibilities . for example: although justice told us in february 2007 that the fbi was designated the lead federal lea on investigating terrorism - related crimes abroad , this view was not shared by the other leas or even the fbi itself . leas , including dhs's ice , justice's fbi , and state's ds all told us there was no lead lea charged with using the combined capabilities of federal leas to assist foreign nations identify , disrupt , and prosecute terrorists . in one country we visited , the lack of clear roles and responsibilities between two u.s. leas may have compromised several joint operations intended to identify and disrupt potential terrorist activities , according to the u.s. and foreign nation leas . ice was responsible for tracking special interest aliens , while the fbi was responsible for identifying terrorists trying to enter the united states . because it was unclear whether some of these special interest aliens were migrants or potential terrorists — and ice and fbi were not given clear guidance to determine which lea had the lead role — foreign nation and agency officials noted instances where joint u.s. - foreign nation investigations or operations were poorly coordinated . as a result , ice and fbi , unknowingly working with different foreign nation leas , moved in on the same subject . according to the foreign nation law enforcement and fbi officials , such actions may have compromised several of their investigations . at the four embassies we visited , we found state had not provided guidance on how to use lea assets to assist foreign nations to identify , disrupt , and prosecute terrorists . we found that these three efforts were limited by a variety of factors . we found that the fbi has both responded to specific terrorist attacks by operationally assisting foreign nation leas to identify and prosecute terrorists involved in those attacks , as well as tried to proactively assist foreign nations to identify , disrupt , and prosecute terrorists . in one country we visited , the fbi provided limited but vital operational assistance to locate terrorist suspects and provided key evidence for their successful prosecution . in another country we visited , the fbi was working proactively with ice and with foreign nation counterparts to track suspicious migrants and identify and disrupt potential terrorists before they entered the united states . however , as we will discuss below , we found that the impact of the fbi's efforts to combat terrorism has been limited in some posts overseas . dhs's csi effort targets for inspection at foreign seaports high - risk cargo shipments before they leave for the united states . it was created after the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks and requires u.s. law enforcement personnel to be physically colocated with foreign nation leas to identify and disrupt terrorist threats to america .