ginnie mae has several different products . ginnie mae's original mbs program , ginnie mae i , requires that all pools contain similar types of mortgages ( eg , single family ) with similar maturities and the same interest rates . the ginnie mae ii mbs program , which was introduced in 1983 , permits pools to contain loans with more heterogeneous loans . the fee varies depending on the product and is six basis points for securities backed by single - family loans , which represent the majority of ginnie mae mbs . issuers also pay a commitment fee that gives them the authority to pool mortgages into ginnie mae mbs . issuers of ginnie mae securities may also collect a fee to cover the cost of servicing the underlying mortgages ( generally 44 basis points for ginnie mae i products and 19 to 69 basis points for the ginnie mae ii ) . ginnie mae does not receive appropriations or borrow money to finance its credit operations . the agency's revenues exceed its expenses , which reduces the federal budget deficit . appendix i provides additional details on our scope and methodology . mortgage lenders keep the loans they originate in the primary market or sell them in the secondary , or resale , markets . in turn , purchasers of mortgage loans in the secondary markets either hold the loans in their own portfolios or , most often , pool together a group of loans to back mbs that are sold to investors or held in the originator's portfolio . secondary loan markets benefit lenders , borrowers , and investors in a number of ways . first , they allow lenders to manage their liquidity needs , reduce interest rate risk , and generate funds for additional lending . second , they increase the amount of credit available to borrowers and help lower interest rates by fostering competition among lenders . finally , they allow investors to further diversify their risks and to sell their interests on active secondary markets to other willing investors . ginnie mae was created in 1968 through an amendment to the national housing act . organizationally , ginnie mae operates as a unit of hud , and its administrative , staffing , and budgetary decisions are coordinated with hud's . ginnie mae defines its mission as expanding affordable housing in america by linking capital markets to the nation's housing markets , largely by serving as the dominant secondary market vehicle for government - backed loan programs . our report objectives were to evaluate ( 1 ) the state of ginnie mae's market share and guarantee volume , ( 2 ) the potential implications of changes in ginnie mae's market share and guarantee volume , and ( 3 ) challenges ginnie mae faces in fulfilling its mission and the steps that have been or could be taken to address these challenges . to assess the state of ginnie mae's market share and guarantee volume , we obtained data on issued and outstanding mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) from the agency's integrated pool management system and portfolio analysis display system , which obtains its source data from ginnie mae's mortgage - backed securities information system .