the agencies used to collaborate . additionally , we interviewed agency officials on their knowledge of any past or future collaborative effort . to determine what opportunities exist to enhance collaboration between hud , dot , and fta , we reviewed our prior work on key practices that can help enhance and sustain collaboration and address barriers to more effective collaboration . we also obtained the views of agency officials , local housing and transit providers , transportation organizations , and nonprofit housing organizations with experience in developing , implementing , or analyzing these issues . finally , we compared the agencies' collaboration efforts with key practices that can help federal agencies enhance and sustain their collaborative efforts . we conducted this performance audit from august 2008 to september 2009 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . what is known about how transit - oriented developments affect the availability of affordable housing ? how have local , state , and federal agencies worked to ensure that affordable housing , including housing subsidized through hud programs , is available in transit - oriented developments ? destinations draw residents from surrounding neighborhoods . these centers serve as commuter hubs for the larger region and are served by multiple transit options , often including rail and high - frequency regional bus or bus rapid transit , as well as local - serving bus . suburban centers contain a mix of residential , employment , retail , and entertainment uses , usually at intensities similar to that found in urban centers but lower than that in regional centers . suburban centers can serve as both origins and destinations for commuters . in addition , these developments may have fewer parking spaces compared to more traditional developments because residents have easy access to transit , and thus less need for an automobile . transit - oriented developments can range in both size and scope , with some being in suburban neighborhoods with streetcars or bus rapid transit systems and community - related services while others are located in major urban locations with light , heavy , or commuter rail . transportation experts believe that transit - oriented developments can increase accessibility to employment , educational , cultural , and other opportunities by promoting transportation options to households , thereby increasing transit ridership and reducing road congestion . figure 1 provides a graphic representation of a transit - oriented development , and appendix ii provides a description of various types of such developments . planning and development of a transit - oriented development and affordable housing are driven largely by state and local governments , transit agencies , and private developers . for example , state and local government agencies provide many of the necessary infrastructures of transit - oriented developments , including transit stations , connections to other transportation modes , sidewalks , utilities , and other public amenities . local governments also create the zoning environment , which may , for example , allow developers to build a mix of uses at higher densities .