these are key leadership positions . the assistant secretary provides direction on all issues related to indian affairs , while das - m , as mentioned above , provides essential administrative functions for bie and its schools . in previous reports , we found that frequent changes in leadership may complicate efforts to improve student achievement , and that lack of leadership negatively affects an organization's ability to function effectively and to sustain focus on key initiatives . preliminary results from our work also suggest that lack of consistent leadership within das - m and bie hinders collaboration between the two offices . ( see fig . 1 ) bie and its predecessor , the office of indian education programs , have been through a number of restructuring efforts . prior to 1999 bia's regional offices were responsible for most administrative functions for indian schools . in 1999 , the national academy of public administration issued a report , commissioned by the assistant secretary of indian affairs , which identified management challenges within bia . the report concluded that bia's management structure was not adequate to operate an effective and efficient agency . the report recommended centralization of some administrative functions . according to bie officials , for a brief period from 2002 to 2003 , bie was responsible for its own administrative functions . however , in 2004 , in response to the napa study , its administrative functions were centralized under the das - m. more recently , in 2011 , indian affairs commissioned another study — known as the bronner report — to evaluate the administrative support structure for bie and bia . the report , issued in march 2012 , found that organizations within indian affairs , including das - m , bia , and bie , do not coordinate effectively and communication among them is poor . the study recommended that indian affairs adopt a more balanced organizational approach to include , among other things , shared responsibility , new policies and procedures , and better communication , with increased decentralization . the process of developing a plan to address these recommendations , but they have not yet finalized a proposal for reorganization . bronner group , final report: examination , evaluation , and recommendations for support functions ( march 2012 ) . instance , is critical to ensure that all supplies and textbooks are delivered before the start of the school year . however , the procurement process used by bie - operated schools can cause delays in textbook delivery . likewise , delays in contracting have occasionally affected bie's ability to provide timely services for students with disabilities . communication is especially difficult because of indian affairs' fragmented administrative structure . for example , school officials we spoke with said that their correspondences are often lost and that there appears to be little coordination between indian affairs offices . for instance , the bronner report found that the responsibility for facilities management is scattered between three divisions within das - m. first , the property management division in the office of the chief financial officer ( ocfo ) is responsible for maintaining the real property inventory . second , the acquisition office in the ocfo manages the leasing of buildings for the bia and bie .