extent of network compliance . two of the five networks we visited fully complied with all of vha's new standardization requirements , and the remaining three only partially complied . ( table 3 lists the requirements for standardization and each network's compliance with the requirements. ) specifically , compliance with these requirements was as follows: while each of the five networks had established a commodity standardization committee and the four required subcommittees , at three of the networks the committee and its subcommittees were not meeting on a regular basis , as required . officials at these networks stated that the committee had only been meeting sporadically because clinical or logistics program staff from the vamcs within the networks — who are required to be represented on the committee and its subcommittees — were not available to attend the meetings . officials at two networks told us that clinical staff serve on this committee as a collateral duty and often lack the time to participate in committee meetings . similarly , officials at another network told us that vamc logistics staff were not always available to participate in committee meetings in light of additional responsibilities they had to take on . regular network commodity standardization committee meetings , which include appropriate representation of clinical and nonclinical staff , are key to identifying and pursuing opportunities for standardization . one of the five networks did not review the activities of the vamc clinical product review committee . network officials told us that they were not receiving committee minutes from the vamcs but that they would begin requesting these minutes in the future , which would allow the network to review the committees' activities . review of the vamcs' clinical product review committees' activities is important to ensure that the committees are functioning effectively and to help identify standardization opportunities , which can lead to financial savings . officials at one of the two networks that was partially complying with this requirement told us that instead of reviewing the activities of the vamcs' clinical product review committee , network officials extract data on the vamcs' purchases to identify items that are frequently used or costly — in an effort to standardize them across the network . officials at the other network that was partially complying told us that they review the activities of the vamcs' clinical product review committee only once annually , as part of a network external review of vamcs' logistics programs . because these networks did not regularly review the activities of the vamc committees , they may not have been aware of new supply and rme purchases the vamcs are considering . if other vamcs within the networks are considering similar purchases , the networks may be able to consolidate these purchases across multiple vamcs and thereby achieve financial savings . at one network , the commodity standardization committee had not performed any standardization activities because clinical staff from the vamcs within the network were not available to attend the committee meetings and identify medical supplies and rme for standardization . at another network that achieved partial compliance , the commodity standardization committee and its subcommittees had not met regularly because vamc logistics staff were not available to attend committee meetings .