( see app . ii for more detail on how states develop nursing home payment rates. ) to further encourage homes to operate efficiently , the 15 of the 19 states that pay home - specific rates place ceilings , or limits , on the costs that are reflected in their nursing home payment rates.27 , 28 these ceilings encourage homes to control spending as they will not be reimbursed for costs that exceed these ceilings . since the majority of homes have demonstrated that they can provide care at costs below the ceiling , states may regard costs above the ceiling as excessive . in addition to imposing ceilings , many states use other mechanisms to limit the costs that they recognize when determining homes' per diem rates . while in some cases these mechanisms may also encourage efficiency , in other cases they may result in fewer homes receiving their full costs than what the ceiling levels indicate . for example , regardless of increasing nursing home costs , colorado limits the annual increase in administrative costs it recognizes to 6 percent , while south dakota allows no more than an 8 percent annual increase in overall payment rates . in addition , although rhode island and north dakota rebase their per diem rates regularly , they do not rebase cost - center ceilings as frequently . for example , rhode island inflates cost - center ceilings annually instead of rebasing them , and north dakota rebases ceilings every 3 years on average , inflating them during the interim years . ( see app . ii for descriptions of additional limits states place on nursing home payments. ) the ceiling is typically based on a percentage of the median costs , or a certain percentile of costs , for all homes in the state or within a category of homes . individual homes' rates are typically determined by the lower of their own costs or the ceiling . in the four states that generally pay a flat rate to all homes or to all homes in a group , the flat rate also promotes efficiency since homes with costs below the rate are able to retain the difference . have similar labor markets and associated wage costs or homes of comparable size ( i.e. , homes with a large or small number of beds ) that should operate at similar levels of efficiency . for example , since costs per day may vary by geographic location — such as urban versus rural areas — establishing peer groups by location allows states to set higher ceilings for homes in the more costly areas . peer groups may be unnecessary in states with ceilings that are set well above the median costs and where most homes have costs below the ceilings or in states where wages vary little across areas . despite the various ways states encourage nursing home efficiency , industry representatives and industry - sponsored studies nonetheless raise concerns that medicaid payments do not cover the full costs of all nursing homes .