the borrower pays all interest costs . consolidation loans — borrowers may combine multiple federal student loans into a single loan . the difference between the reestimated subsidy cost for fdlp and ffelp varied significantly and depended on the type of loan and the year that the loan was disbursed . for example , reestimated subsidy costs per $100 disbursed for fdlp subsidized stafford loans disbursed in fiscal year 2003 were $11.66 lower than for ffelp subsidized stafford loans , while the difference for the same loans disbursed in 2000 was $1.35 per $100 disbursed . the primary reason for the difference in subsidy cost estimates between ffelp and fdlp were differences in the structure of the programs rather than the characteristics of the borrowers . the interest rate is fixed based on the weighted average of the interest rates in effect on the loans being consolidated . under either loan program borrowers are able to repay loans earlier than required , with no penalty . the programs have several repayment options available to borrowers . for stafford and plus loans , the standard repayment in both loan programs is a fixed amount per month for up to 10 years . borrowers have other repayment options that allow them to extend repayment for up to 30 years , gradually increase the monthly payment , or base monthly payments on their adjusted gross income . the criteria for some of the alternative repayment options are different in ffelp and fdlp . for consolidation loans , the repayment terms depend on the loan amount . moreover , borrowers that graduate , leave school , or become a less than half - time student are given a 6-month grace period before they must begin to repay their stafford or consolidation loans . cost estimates for the loan programs are sensitive to such changes because borrower interest rates in both ffelp and fdlp and the lender yield in the ffelp , are variable rates . as a result , differences between projected and actual interest rates can have a significant impact on estimates of cash flows in both loan programs . omb's interest rate projections made prior to 2001 , as well as those by other government agencies and the private sector , were considerably higher than actual interest rates for 2001 and beyond . for example , as shown in table 4 , actual interest rates from 2001 to 2003 were substantially lower than omb's forecasts of interest rates used in the budget for fiscal year 1999 and fluctuated slightly from year to year . to the degree that such fluctuations were unanticipated , they contributed to volatility in subsidy cost reestimates from year to year . for ffelp , lower than expected interest rates have resulted in lower than expected sap to lenders , which , in turn , resulted in lower reestimated subsidy cost estimates . as interest rates decreased , the difference , or spread , between the 3-month commercial paper ( cp ) and the 91-day treasury bill narrowed . for example , as can be seen in figure 5 , the average rates on the 91-day t - bill and the 3-month cp were 5.82 and 6.33 , respectively , in 2000 , a difference of 0.51 .