( see app . we also received written comments from six of the seven states discussed in the report — california , connecticut , maryland , michigan , texas , and wisconsin . in general , state comments focused on the differences in the expenditure data in the draft report compared with their own current expenditure figures . because our analysis provides a snapshot of expenditures at several different points in time , the data we present vary from current year data or data that subsequently may have been reconciled or corrected . we expressed expenditure data in constant dollars in the report body to capture real growth in spending over time , but also provided these data in current year dollars in an appendix so that states would recognize the expenditures they reported to hhs . two states , california and connecticut , expressed concern with the way we characterized their budget decisions for using tanf funds . california officials believed that our discussion of the fiscal incentive payments that certain counties received for reducing tanf caseloads implied that these funds were for the purpose of increasing the counties' child care expenditures . we clearly state why counties were given these funds and that the counties have discretion about how the funds will be spent . thus , the california counties that received these funds could decide to spend them on child care or any other activities consistent with tanf's goals and allowable under the law . officials in connecticut raised concerns about two issues . they thought that our statement that connecticut was not planning to use tanf funds for a large expansion of child care implied that connecticut had not increased its child care funding . we think the report clearly states just the opposite . table 2 shows that connecticut has significantly increased its child care expenditures in the time periods on which we gathered data . the report also states that connecticut was one of only two states that we reviewed that spent more of their own funds than federal funds on these increases . officials also wanted to make sure that we understood that they do not have unspent tanf funds . we agree , and believe that the report clearly states , that the $41 million connecticut had in unspent tanf funds at one point in time was spent to reimburse the state for previous state expenditures on tanf - related purposes . our reason for discussing this in the report was to illustrate the competing choices states face in spending tanf funds and that they do not always choose to spend them on child care . as agreed to with your staff , unless you publicly release its contents earlier , we will make no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date .