( see app . ii for examples of how nmdp uses these systems to achieve compliance with respect to selected activities. ) in 2001 , nmdp required 24 donor and transplant centers to take corrective actions because they did not meet its standards . the incentive system encourages compliance by linking donor center reimbursement to performance . ( 2 ) to what extent is the registry utilized to search for and obtain transplants ? ( 3 ) are the donor centers and other organizations in the nmdp network complying with its standards and procedures ? to answer these questions , we analyzed nmdp data on racial and ethnic representation on the registry from 1998 through 2001 and , to provide a broader context for examining these changes , also analyzed data on racial and ethnic representation in relation to the patients who searched the registry from 1988 through 2001 . in addition , we analyzed data provided by the international bone marrow transplant registry ( ibmtr ) on transplants from related donors from 1997 through 2000 , which enabled us to estimate the demand for unrelated donor transplants in the united states and relate this estimate to registry utilization by patients searching for donors during this period ; analyzed nmdp data on matches , canceled searches , and transplants obtained for patients needing donors during this period ; reviewed nmdp's standards for participating in the registry ; and reviewed evidence of compliance with the standards and procedures by the organizations that participate . we also interviewed officials of nmdp ; hrsa ; the department of the navy ; the american red cross ; and selected donor , stem cell collection , and transplant centers . we did not independently verify the accuracy of the data provided by nmdp . we conducted our work from june 2001 through june 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . most of the diseases treated by stem cell transplantation involve abnormalities of the blood , metabolic , or immune systems . these diseases include several forms of cancer as well as certain nonmalignant diseases . they strike all races , although one racial group or another may have a higher incidence rate for a particular disease . not all patients with diseases that may be cured by stem cell transplants necessarily pursue them . depending on a number of donor and patient characteristics , from about 10 to 50 percent of patients are alive 5 years after transplants . the patients who do not survive may succumb either to their diseases or to the consequences of transplantation . because of these low survival rates , some patients and physicians may be reluctant to select this stressful treatment under most or all circumstances . for most of the diseases involved , other therapies are available that may be less invasive , carry lower risk , or be the medically preferred initial treatment . nevertheless , some of these diseases are best treated by stem cell transplantation , either initially or after other treatments have failed . prior to stem cell transplantation , the patient's bone marrow and , consequently , immune system are destroyed with radiation or chemotherapy . the patient's bloodstream is then infused with healthy stem cells from a donor .