for example , u.s . marshals service need to be located near federal courthouses to accomplish their missions . the bureau of prisons is located in rural areas to decrease land costs and increase security . the immigration and naturalization service is stationed in both urban and rural areas along the borders of the united states . the federal bureau of investigation and the drug enforcement administration are law enforcement agencies , and their missions and operational requirements determine the location of facilities . the ig also pointed out that the federal bureau of investigation's data center is located in a rural part of west virginia . the department of transportation policy on rda was the most complete of the agencies we reviewed in that transportation has procedures that require a discussion of the considerations given to rural areas and requires an explanation if a rural location is not selected . however , the transportation ig said the department does not provide any guidance on decision criteria or factors to be considered , such as cost - benefit analysis , access to public transportation , or effects of relocation on the workforce . of 33 site location decisions made from october 1997 through february 2002 , the transportation ig found that 24 had no documentation in the files to indicate compliance with rda . according to the veterans affairs ig , the department had no written policy or procedures regarding rda . the ig said priority is given to locating new veterans health administration medical care facilities in locations convenient to veteran patients and to collocating veterans benefits administration regional offices on veterans affairs medical center grounds . telework could be used to allow federal workers who live in rural areas to work in or near their homes , at least on a part - time basis . for over a decade , telework , also called telecommuting or flexiplace , has gained popularity because it offers the potential to benefit employers , including the federal government , by reducing traffic congestion and pollution , improving the recruitment and retention of employees , increasing productivity , and reducing the need for office space . employees can benefit from reduced commuting time ; lower costs for transportation , parking , food , and clothing ; and a better balance of work and family demands , which could improve morale and quality of life . other benefits might include removing barriers for those with disabilities who want to be part of the work force and helping agencies maintain continuity of operations in emergency operations . congress has enacted legislation that has promoted the use of telework in several ways , including authorizing gsa telework centers , requiring each agency to consider using alternate workplace arrangements when considering whether to acquire space for use by employees , requiring each agency to establish a policy under which eligible employees may participate in telecommuting to the maximum extent possible , and encouraging the deployment of high - speed internet access in rural areas . congress has provided both gsa and opm with lead roles and shared responsibilities for advancing telework in the federal government . under the telework centers program , gsa supports 15 centers located in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area .