to the highest levels . ease of implementation: this option would be more of a “civilianized” model which may be difficult to implement in the current military structure . who reports to the secretary of defense ? what is the command and control structure ? who heads its various entities ? who establishes mhs policy for the office of the secretary of defense , the services , and joint entities ? what are the roles of senior leaders ? budgetary authority: who controls the defense health program appropriation ? control of personnel: who manages and supervises the military treatment facilities and multi - service medical markets ? who controls the mhs mission and administrative support personnel among the office of the secretary of defense , the military departments , and / or joint entities ? to review dod's shared services concept , we reviewed the information presented in dod's report and interviewed dod officials concerning their analysis of this concept . we compared this information to our prior work on business case analyses in the context of management consolidations,and leveraged our prior work on efforts by dod and other federal agencies to establish shared services to provide context for dod's current efforts . dod's cost savings estimate , we interviewed officials concerning their estimating methods and reviewed supporting documentation , noting where we identified shortcomings in the task force's approach . we were unable to rely on dod's cost savings estimates because the estimates and their supporting data were insufficient in the key data elements needed to completely and accurately develop them as discussed in the findings section of this report . gao - 07-536 and gao - 12-224 . to determine the extent to which dod's assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of its potential governance options is well - supported and data - driven , we obtained and analyzed task force documents including meeting minutes , briefing slides , and voting templates . we then used this analysis to determine the criteria and process used to formulate the strengths and weaknesses of the options . we then assembled a list of the 78 strengths and weaknesses cited in the task force report and used a semi - structured interview process to collect information from task force officials regarding the process and inputs used to formulate each assessment . we then conducted a content analysis of the information provided by the officials to identify and categorize the inputs that the officials cited as contributing to the assessments of strengths and weaknesses . the categorization of the information was conducted by one analyst and confirmed by a second analyst to ensure the analysis was adequately supported by the evidence . in addition , we interviewed officials from one multi - service market and a health administration expert to obtain their opinions on the process used by dod to formulate the strengths and weaknesses . for each of our objectives , we limited our review to the potential overall governance structures that the task force presented in its report .