however , challenges remain . fbi officials told us that the name check component of the fbi's system would not immediately be interoperable with state's new system but that they are actively working with state to seek solutions to this problem . nonetheless , fbi and state have not determined how the information will be transmitted in the meantime . we were not able to assess the new system since it was not yet functioning at the time of our review . state did not comment on the status of the 14 cases we provided to the fbi for review . however , a consular affairs official told us that in fall 2003 , there were about 700 visas mantis cases sent from beijing that did not reach the fbi for the security check . the official did not know how the cases got lost but told us that it took consular affairs about a month to identify this problem and provide the fbi with the cases . as a result , several hundred visa applications were delayed for another month . our analysis of a sample of visas mantis cases from april to june 2003 show that some applicants faced lengthy waits . while the state department and the fbi report improvements in visas mantis processing times , our analysis of data from the posts we visited in september 2003 and our contact with post officials in january 2004 show that there are still some instances of lengthy waits . state's and fbi's implementation of the visas mantis process still has gaps that are causing wait times for visas . state's new information management system could improve the visas mantis process . nevertheless , it is unclear whether the new system will address all the current issues with the process . to help improve the process and reduce the length of time it takes for a science student or scholar to obtain a visa , we are recommending that the secretary of state , in coordination with the director of the fbi and the secretary of homeland security , develop and implement a plan to improve the visas mantis process . in developing this plan , the secretary should consider actions to establish milestones to reduce the current number of pending visas mantis develop performance goals and measurements for processing visas mantis provide additional information through training or other means to consular posts that clarifies guidance on the overall operation of the visas mantis program , when mantis clearances are required , what information consular posts should submit to enable the clearance process to proceed as efficiently as possible , and how long the process takes ; and work to achieve interoperable systems and expedite transmittal of data between agencies . in commenting on our draft report , state said it had taken some actions to improve the visas mantis process and it would study our recommendation to make further improvements . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the committee may have . for future contacts regarding this testimony , please call jess ford or john brummet at ( 202 ) 512-4128 .