copyright office . materials are also acquired through gift , purchase , other government agencies ( state , local , and federal ) , cataloging in publication ( a pre - publication arrangement with publishers ) , and exchange with libraries in the united states and abroad . items not selected for the collections or other internal purposes are used in the library's national and international exchange programs . through these exchanges the library acquires material that would not be available otherwise . the remaining items not selected for collections or exchange programs are made available to other federal agencies and are then available for donation to educational institutions , public bodies , and nonprofit tax - exempt organizations in the united states . the library collaborates with external communities nationally and internationally through , among other things , activities relating to preservation , research , and education . for example , the library collects , preserves , and makes accessible first - hand accounts of u.s. veterans so that future generations may hear directly from veterans . additionally , in collaboration with the united nations educational scientific and cultural organization , as well as partner libraries and cultural institutions from around the world , the library established the world digital library . this effort makes available on the internet , free of charge , and in multilingual format significant primary materials from many countries and cultures . further , the library maintains congress.gov , which is the official website for u.s. federal legislative information . positioned within the legislative branch , the library is led by the librarian of congress , who is nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate . as previously mentioned , the security tests for four systems — library of congress office automation system , eco , symin ii , and momentum — reported that privacy impact assessments had been developed as appropriate ; however , when asked for copies of these assessments , library officials responsible for these systems stated that privacy impact assessments had not been performed . according to the ciso , poa&m items have been opened for privacy impact assessments to be performed on these systems . security testing for the osep physical security network stated that the system did not have a privacy impact assessment and this has been an open poa&m item since september 2013 . security testing for the application hosting environment determined that the system did not have a privacy impact assessment . in describing the risk associated with this weakness , the test report stated that , although there may be systems hosted on the application hosting environment that collect , process , or store pii , these systems have their own privacy impact assessments . however , as previously noted , eco , which is hosted on the application hosting environment , did not have a privacy impact assessment . the testing report also recommended that the library conduct a privacy impact assessment to verify that the application hosting environment does not collect , process , or store pii independent of the systems that it hosts .