dod concurred with our recommendations . for this report , we were asked to examine dcoe's budget formulation process and the availability of its funding and performance information to congress . in particular , we addressed the following objectives: 1 . a second member described his vision of dcoe being an overarching body that “coordinates , inspects , and oversees the tremendous amount of good work being done across the nation.” members also voiced concern about the amount of time needed to establish dcoe and achieve results . in four congressional subcommittee testimonies , dcoe's first director and the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs characterized dcoe as dod's “open front door for all concerns related to ph and tbi.” these statements suggest a divergent understanding of dcoe's role and bolster the importance of clear communication on dcoe's mission , funding , and activities . describe and evaluate dcoe's budget formulation within the broader dod - wide budget process for ph and tbi and the information used to make budget decisions . evaluate the information available to congress on dcoe's funding and activities . the dcoe network also includes five component centers that provide an established body of knowledge and experience related to ph and tbi . the component centers are the defense and veterans brain injury center ( dvbic ) , deployment health clinical center ( dhcc ) , center for the study of traumatic stress ( csts ) , center for deployment psychology ( cdp ) , and the national center for telehealth and technology ( t2 ) . over time , ph and tbi funding evolved from dhp amounts directed specifically for ph and tbi to funding support being incorporated into the broader dhp appropriation . in fiscal year 2007 , congress appropriated approximately $600 million specifically for tbi and post - traumatic stress disorder treatment . in fiscal year 2008 , congress specifically appropriated $75 million for ph and tbi activities . in fiscal year 2009 , funding for ph and tbi was not appropriated a specific amount , rather funding was drawn from dhp's general operation and maintenance funds — dod had discretion over the amount and distribution of funds internally allotted . beginning in fiscal year 2010 , ph and tbi funding was included in the base budget request for the dhp , which established a longer - term funding stream for ph and tbi . as shown in figure 2 , in fiscal year 2010 a total of $638 million in dhp operations and maintenance funding was allotted for ph and tbi across the military services , tma financial operations division ( tma fod ) , and dcoe . the army received the largest portion of funds , about $279 million or 44 percent , while dcoe received approximately $168 million or 26 percent . of all ph and tbi funding allotted , $96 million or 15 percent was suballoted to component centers within the dcoe network . budget formulation for dod occurs as part of the planning , programming , budgeting and execution process , which projects near - term defense spending .