prototype . should be very close to form , ﬁ t and function . probably includes the integration of many new components and realistic supporting elements / subsystems if needed to demonstrate full functionality of the subsystem . high - ﬁ delity lab demonstration or limited / restricted ﬂ ight demonstration for a relevant environment . integration of technology is well deﬁ ned . prototype near or at planned operational system . represents a major step up from trl 6 , requiring the demonstration of an actual system prototype in a realistic environment , such as in an aircraft , vehicle or space . examples include testing the prototype in a test bed aircraft . prototype . should be form , ﬁ t and function integrated with other key supporting elements / subsystems to demonstrate full functionality of subsystem . flight demonstration in representative realistic environment such as ﬂ ying test bed or demonstrator aircraft . technology is well substantiated with test data . technology has been proven to work in its ﬁ nal form and under expected conditions . in almost all cases , this trl represents the end of true system development . a discussion of each challenge follows . our past work on systems acquisition has shown that beginning an acquisition program before requirements and available resources are matched can result in a product that fails to perform as expected , costs more , or takes longer to develop . we have found that these problems are largely rooted in the failure to match customer's needs with the developer's resources — technical knowledge , timing , and funding — when starting product development . in other words , commitments were made to deliver capability without knowing whether the technologies needed could really work as intended . time and costs were consistently underestimated , and problems that surfaced early cascaded throughout development and magniﬁ ed the risks facing the program . our best practices work has shown that a technology readiness level ( trl ) of 6 — demonstrating a technology as a fully integrated prototype in a relevant environment — is the level of maturity needed to minimize risks for space systems entering product development . nasa's acquisition policy states that a trl of 6 is desirable prior to integrating a new technology . technology maturity is a fundamental element of a sound business case , and the absence is a marker for subsequent problems , especially in design . similarly , our work has shown that the use of heritage technology — proven components that are being modiﬁ ed to meet new requirements — can also cause problems when the items are not sufﬁ ciently matured to meet form , ﬁ t , and function standards by the preliminary design review ( pdr ) . nasa states in its systems engineering handbook that particular attention must be given to heritage systems because they are often used in architectures and environments different from those in which they were designed to operate . although nasa distinguishes critical technologies from heritage technologies , our best practices work has found critical technologies to be those that are required for the project to successfully meet customer requirements , regardless of whether or not they are based on existing or heritage technology .