an mda executive official chairs the team . two more meetings ( one at each level ) are planned , along with numerous meetings of support working groups . the army will operate it and provide feedback on its performance . once any of these assets are available for operational use , mda believes that the services should accept some responsibility for funding their operation and sustainment costs . officials in mda's transition office told us that management responsibility for assets in this group may eventually be handed over to a military service . should the army , or any other military service that has received a developmental asset , need additional units of an element or larger quantities of some components — for example , should the army need more terminal high altitude area defense fire units or missiles — the officials suggested that the military service should be responsible for acquiring them . in addition , mda would expect the services to budget funds for any common support equipment required for the elements that mda is acquiring . combatant commanders conduct and assess bmds exercises . mda and user community address logistics and maintenance support . military services support operational test and evaluation . combatant commanders and military services identify desired operational capabilities for future increments . finally , the secretary's 2002 direction effectively allowed mda to defer application of many of the requirements that are generally applied to the development of major systems under dod's traditional acquisition system regulations . for example , the requirements for acquisition program baselines and independent cost estimates , generally applicable by statute to major defense acquisition programs and implemented by the dod regulations , will not be applied until a bmds element or component is transferred to a military service concurrent with milestone c. milestone c , the point at which a decision is made to begin initial production , is the point at which the service is to assume management and funding responsibility for an element or component of the bmds . once elements or components are transferred , the secretary directed mda to continue to fund modifications to fielded systems and to manage development activities for new missile defense capabilities . the secretary also gave mda approval authority over any engineering changes that the military services might want to make to transferred bmds elements . this process , known as configuration control , is meant to ensure that changes do not degrade the interoperability of the bmds . mda has recommended and dod approved the transfer of one missile defense element to a military service since 2002 . dod transferred the patriot advanced capability – 3 program to the army in 2003 . mda continues to exercise configuration control and provide funding for the development of patriot advanced capability - 3 missile defense - related upgrades . in december 2002 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics established criteria for deciding when to transfer acquisition responsibility from mda to the military services .