dod concurred with all of our recommendations . for this second report , we ( 1 ) determined the status of dod's efforts to develop and implement a risk management approach to ensure the availability of dib assets to support mission - essential tasks ; and ( 2 ) identified challenges dod faces in its approach to risk management in the dib sector . to examine the status of dod's efforts to develop and implement a risk management approach , we reviewed the dib sector - specific and sector assurance plans and other studies ; and discussed with dod officials the requirements for a risk management plan for the dib and the status of dod's implementation of the approach . we also reviewed and discussed information on dcma's efforts to identify , assess , and remediate critical dib assets ; the criteria dcma established and used to identify important dib assets and critical dib assets ; the asset prioritization model and the factors used to rank order the critical assets ; the standardized mission assurance assessment process for critical dib assets ; and the remediation planning guidance for the dcip generally , including the guidance being developed for the dib . we also examined standards developed for vulnerability assessments to be done at contractor facilities and met with the national guard bureau and one of the state national guard teams that conducts dib sector vulnerability assessments . to examine the challenges faced by dod in developing and implementing its approach , we compared the policies for identifying mission - essential tasks and related defense critical assets with dcma's approach to identifying a critical dib asset list ; and examined the development and use of dcma's asset prioritization model , including requirements for models to undergo external technical review and methods used to obtain contractor - specific data as needed input into the model . we reviewed and discussed with each of the services their dcip efforts related to the dib , including their responses to dcma regarding its requests for the services to update the important and critical dib asset lists . also , we discussed with several dod intelligence agency officials the threats to the dib and the availability of specific threat information to dcma . we discussed with dcma officials the challenges that they have encountered as they have begun working with private sector contractors ; and efforts to encourage private - sector dib contractors to participate in the program . we also spoke with a non - probability sample of dib contractor officials and asked them generally about their willingness to participate in the program . we discussed with dod officials and these contractor officials the availability of data on foreign contractors . asd ( hd&asa ) is developing guidance to provide a standardized process for determining , planning , and implementing remediation actions for dod personnel involved in remediating risks and supporting overall dod mission assurance . table 1 provides a summary of the current number of important and critical dib assets identified and the number of contractors assessed . dcma has also developed an asset prioritization model for determining a criticality score and ranking critical assets , from highest to lowest risk .