interviews with experts . we selected open data and good governance experts based on recommendations made by other experts , frequent citations in others' work , and recent contributions to the field . we also selected experts that represent a variety of sectors and backgrounds ( such as government , academia , and nonprofit organizations ) . we obtained the views of the following individuals and organizations: andrew stott , former united kingdom director for transparency and center for open data enterprise , code for america , dr. anneke zuiderwijk - van eijk , delft university of technology , general services administration ( gsa ) , global initiative for fiscal transparency , governance laboratory of new york university , ibm center for the business of government , johns hopkins university center for government excellence , project on government oversight , results for america , u.s. public interest research group , what works cities , and world bank . we first had open - ended conversations with experts to obtain their views on what key practices exist for transparently reporting open government data . after developing an initial list of key practices , we then conducted a second round of interviews with experts to finalize the list . we shared a draft of the key practices with the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and gsa . illustrative examples . to obtain illustrative examples showing how those key practices can be implemented , we selected open data practitioners from six selected state and local governments: kansas city , missouri ; los angeles , california ; montgomery county , maryland ; new york city , new york ; and ohio . we selected these practitioners because they were identified in our literature search and by the experts we spoke with as having well - regarded open data websites . we also selected practitioners that have websites with both a general open data portal and visualizations showing budget or spending data . we also selected practitioners that represent different locations and levels of government , including cities , counties , and states . we reviewed these practitioners' open data websites and related documentation , and interviewed cognizant state and local government officials . to assess the extent to which usaspending.gov is consistent with the key practices and selected standards for federal websites , we reviewed the website , reviewed agency documents , observed treasury's participation in a hackathon , and interviewed omb staff and treasury officials . specifically , we analyzed the usaspending.gov website to determine how it aligned with the key practices and the extent to which data elements were searchable as required by the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( ffata ) . we also assessed usaspending.gov against criteria for federal websites and open data programs , including omb m - 17-06 , policies for federal agency public websites and digital services , and omb m - 13-13 , open data policy — managing information as an asset .