conf . 107-772 ) that accompanied the bob stump national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2003 ( pub . 107-314 § 1009 , 116 stat . 2458 , 2635 ) , we undertook a review of the department of defense's ( dod ) use of authority to write off certain aged suspense account transactions and check payment differences . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) what amount dod wrote off using the legislative authority , ( 2 ) whether dod had effective procedures and controls to provide reasonable assurance that amounts were written off in accordance with the legislation , ( 3 ) how the write - offs affected treasury and dod financial reports , and ( 4 ) what aged dod suspense account balances and check payment differences remain after the write - offs have been accomplished . in conducting this work , we identified prior audit reports and other background information to determine the events that led dod to request write - off authority . we visited dod comptroller offices , visited dfas centers in arlington , indianapolis , cleveland , and denver , and contacted officials in dfas columbus and kansas city to perform the following: interviewed comptroller and dfas officials to obtain a general understanding of dod's use of suspense accounts and the department's request for write - off authority . gathered , analyzed , and compared information on how write - off amounts were identified and processed . compared dod's policies and practices for the write - offs ( including those policies and practices in effect at the relevant dfas centers ) to the specific provisions contained in the legislation and with any treasury requirements . identified dod's primary controls over the suspense account write - offs — a series of reviews performed by dod / dfas management and dfas internal review — and tested the effectiveness of these controls by reviewing all certification statements resulting from the control procedures , comparing amounts reviewed to amounts written off , inquiring about and reviewing examples of rejected write - off amounts , and reviewing all of the support available for selected individual write - off amounts . compared all check payment difference write - offs to treasury reports to ensure the amounts were in compliance with the legislative requirements . to determine the impact of the suspense account and check payment write - offs on dod's budgetary and financial reports , we determined which specific dod / treasury accounts were affected by the write - off entries . we asked dod and treasury officials how the write - off entries affected dod budgetary accounts and the federal deficit . we also reviewed financial reports , journal vouchers , and other documents provided by dod and treasury . to identify the current outstanding suspense account balances and check payment differences , we reviewed amounts disclosed in dod's fiscal year 2004 financial statements and obtained relevant performance metrics as of september 30 , 2004 , and december 31 , 2004 . we identified any remaining aged suspense account or check differences being monitored by dod management . to determine whether dod reconciles its records to treasury , we requested proof of dod's most current suspense account reconciliations and check difference reports .