( recommendation 3 ) . the deputy administrator of multifamily housing programs provided usda's concurrence in an e - mail dated april 11 , 2018 . in its comment letter , hud stated that our recommendation to include an additional agency in housing and health demonstrations is consistent with direction provided by the senate committee on appropriations in fiscal year 2016 . the committee directed hud to partner with other federal agencies to pursue a service coordination demonstration in non - metropolitan areas . hud noted that the committee advised it not to delay existing demonstration efforts while a non - metropolitan component was being designed . hud also stated that it convened an expert panel to better understand challenges to service coordination for low - income older adults in rural areas , and summarized the findings in a report . hud said further action on the panel report was contingent on funding availability and direction from appropriations committees . hud stated that , in regard to our recommendation that additional federal agencies might benefit from data - linkage projects similar to its project with the national center for health statistics , it would be pleased to offer assistance , guidance , and insights to other agencies . our recommendation is that hud work with hhs and usda's rural development to define common outcomes and identify opportunities to include usda in future collaborative efforts on older adult housing and health services . this would include data sharing , service demonstrations , research , and other collaborations . the homeowner remains responsible for paying insurance and property taxes . the rural housing service has one homeownership program that specifically serves households aged 62 and older . the section 504 rural home repair and rehabilitation grant program finances the removal of health and safety hazards or remodels dwellings to make them accessible for disabled household members . according to usda officials , grants often are made in conjunction with section 504 loans that have a 1 percent interest rate . hud has rental assistance programs that do not target , but serve a significant number of older households . according to hud officials , hud's primary rental assistance programs , including the housing choice voucher , public housing , and project - based section 8 programs , serve nearly 1.5 million such households . in addition , fha's section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) and section 221 ( d ) ( 4 ) multifamily rental housing for moderate - income families provide mortgage insurance to finance multifamily properties , some of which may be designated for the elderly . the home investment partnerships program provides formula grants to states and localities that communities use to fund a range of activities including building , purchasing , and rehabilitating affordable housing for rent or homeownership or providing direct rental assistance to low - income households . hud public housing designated for older households local public housing agencies can apply to hud for approval to designate public housing developments ( or portions of developments , such as buildings or floors ) for occupancy only by elderly families , by disabled families , or both . hud refers to this as “designated public housing” .