gao - 06-101sp . washington , d.c.: november 30 , 2005 commercial aviation: bankruptcy and pension problems are symptoms of underlying structural issues . ( see fig . 4 for the number and types of project goals identified by airport directors. ) finally , in our 2005 report , we recommended dot evaluate the scasdp grants after more were completed to identify promising approaches and evaluate the effectiveness of the program . dot officials told us that they asked the dot ig to conduct such a study , which the ig began in march 2007 . dot expects to have preliminary observations available by the middle of may . results from this work may help identify potential improvements and “lessons learned. to achieve their goals , grantees have used many strategies , including subsidies and revenue guarantees to the airlines , marketing , hiring personnel and consultants , and establishing travel banks in which a community guarantees to buy a certain number of tickets . ( see fig . in addition , other strategies that grantees have used are subsidizing the start - up of an airline , taking over ground station operations for an airline , and subsidizing a bus to transport passengers from their airport to a hub airport . incorporating marketing as part of the project was the most common strategy used by airports . some airline officials said that marketing efforts are important for the success of the projects . airline officials also told us that projects that provide direct benefits to an airline , such as revenue guarantees and financial subsidies , have the greatest chance of success . according to these officials , such projects allow the airline to test the real market for air service in a community without enduring the typical financial losses that occur when new air service is introduced . they further noted that , in the current aviation economic environment , carriers cannot afford to sustain losses while they build up passenger demand in a market . the outcomes of the grants may be affected by broader industry factors that are independent of the grant itself , such as a decision on the part of an airline to reduce the number of flights at a hub . since the inception of the program , there has been a steady decline in the number of applications . in 2002 ( the first year scasdp was funded ) dot received 179 applications for grants ; and by 2006 the number of applications had declined to 75 . grant applications for 2007 are not due until april 27 , 2007 . according to a dot official , almost all applications arrive on the last day , so the number of 2007 applications cannot be estimated at this time .