these efforts should complement each other . a lack of integration could result in duplication of effort or run the risk of working at cross - purposes . for example , the integration of the results - oriented accountability for grants cap goal with ongoing data act implementation and efforts to advance evidence - based approaches to federal grant funding and administration presents a complex governance challenge . in conclusion , designing and implementing grants management policies that strike an appropriate balance between ensuring accountability for the proper use of federal funds without increasing the complexity and cost of grants administration for agencies and grantees is a longstanding governance challenge . as the initiatives above demonstrate , meeting this challenge and successfully implementing grants management reforms will require intragovernmental coordination at the federal level , intergovernmental collaboration with state and local governments and other partners , and ongoing integration to ensure that grants management reforms and related data act and evidence - based policy implementation efforts are complementary and do not exist in separate silos . we look forward to continuing our ongoing work to review implementation of the cap goals , the data act , and the infusion of evidence - based policy in federal grant programs . we also look forward to working with this and other committees as we assist congress in identifying additional opportunities to advance grants management reform through reviews of individual grant programs and crosscutting analysis of grant implementation and grants management reform efforts . chairman palmer , ranking member raskin , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared remarks . i look forward to answering any questions you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or sagerm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony were brenda rabinowitz and tom james , assistant directors , alexandra edwards , julie miller , andrew j. stephens , and walter vance . the nation's fiscal health: action is needed to address the federal government's fiscal future . gao - 18-299sp . washington , d.c.: june 21 , 2018 . improper payments: actions and guidance could help address issues and inconsistencies in estimation processes . gao - 18-377 . washington , d.c.: may 31 , 2018 . 2018 annual report: additional opportunities to reduce fragmentation , overlap , and duplication and achieve other financial benefits . gao - 18-371sp . washington , d.c.: apr . timely submission of single audits . as we have previously reported , one key way that federal agencies oversee nonfederal grantees is through an audit of their expenditures of federal awards , referred to as a single audit . the single audit is an audit of the award recipient's expenditure of federal awards and of its financial statements . a single audit can identify deficiencies in the award recipient's compliance with the provisions of laws , regulations , contracts , or grant agreements and in its financial management and internal control systems . correcting such deficiencies can help reasonably assure the effective use of federal funds and reduce federal improper payments .