we do not agree . two of the main issues in our report are that the costs of the american river component of the project nearly tripled due to design changes , and that the corps began construction of the american river levee improvements without analyzing the likelihood of these cost increases or reporting the potential cost increases to congress . the fact that congress provided funding for the project does not absolve the corps of its responsibility to communicate project cost increases in a timely manner . the army implied that congress was informed of potential cost increases for the common features project during the yearly appropriations process . this is not the case on the basis of our review of all of the corps' submissions for the annual appropriations process from 1997 through 2001 . as our report states , it was not until february 2002 , more than 4 years after it had significantly modified the design of the american river levee improvements , that the corps informed congress for the first time of the significant cost increases for the american river component of the project . the army stated that the levee improvements were not originally designed to withstand the destructive effect of seepage and that this design was not an error . rather , an unknown condition ( i.e. , the potential for destructive seepage under the levees ) resulted in design changes and increased costs . our report does not criticize the corps for not anticipating the need for a levee improvement design that would stop seepage under the levees . we acknowledge that the flood of january 1997 caused the corps to change the design of its levee improvements . however , as our report notes , the corps did not develop new cost estimates after making these design changes and did not communicate the resulting significant cost increases to congress in a timely manner . we do not consider the separable elements of the common features project as separate projects . this report makes clear that there is one common features project comprised of an american river component and a natomas basin component . we agree with the army that , in 1996 , the corps was not aware of any significant areas of cost uncertainty for the proposed american river levee improvements . however , as the army recognizes , the flood of january 1997 showed that the corps' design for the levee improvements should be significantly modified . after making these design changes , though , the corps did not estimate the potential for cost increases due to tripling the depth of some cut - off walls or closing the gaps in cut - off walls at bridges and other areas . these design changes eventually added $76 million to the cost of the project . the army stated that the corps believes that its review process results in decision documents that form the basis for sound recommendations . however , in two recent cases , we found that the process did not serve its intended purpose . as this report documents , the corps' review process was ineffective in detecting and correcting the mistakes in the benefit analyses we identified .