on the other hand , some training courses that were planned have not yet been developed . the following discusses epa activities as they relate to each of our four recommendations . first , regarding our recommendation that workgroups consider environmental justice while drafting and finalizing regulations , epa had emphasized in its august 2006 letter that making the office of environmental justice an ex officio member of the agency's regulatory steering committee would not only allow it to be aware of all important epa regulatory actions from their inception through rule development and final agency review , but more importantly , would allow it to participate on workgroups that are developing actions with potential environmental justice implications and / or recommend that workgroups consider environmental justice issues . to date , however , the office of environmental justice has not participated directly in any of the 103 air rules that have been proposed or finalized since epa's august 2006 letter . according to epa officials , the office of environmental justice did participate in one workgroup of the office of solid waste and emergency response , and provided comments on the final agency review for the toxic release inventory reporting burden reduction rule . epa officials also emphasized that its tiering form would be revised to include a question on environmental justice . as noted earlier , this key form is completed by workgroup chairs to alert senior managers to the potential issues related to compliance with statutes , executive orders , and other matters . however , two years after we cited the omission of environmental justice from the tiering form , epa explained that its inclusion has been delayed because it is only one of several issues being considered for inclusion in the tiering process . second , regarding our recommendation to ( 1 ) improve training and ( 2 ) include environmental justice coordinators from epa's program offices in workgroups when appropriate , our latest information on epa's progress shows mixed results . on the one hand , epa continues to provide an environmental justice training course that began in 2002 , and has included environmental justice in recent courses to help rule writers understand how environmental justice ties into the rulemaking process . specifically , the office of policy , economics , and innovation has not completed the planned development of training on ways to consider environmental justice during the regulation development process . in addition , while the epa said in its august 2006 letter that office of air and radiation had developed environmental justice training tailored to that office , air officials told us last week that in fact they were unable to develop the training due to staff turnover and other reasons . regarding our recommendation to involve the program offices' environmental justice coordinators in rulemaking workgroups when appropriate , epa's august 2006 letter had said that the coordinators' involvement would be facilitated through the office of environmental justice's participation on the regulatory steering committee .