the decision was ultimately litigated . in other cases , however , respondents reported that such meetings successfully addressed objectors' concerns , sometimes resulting in objectors withdrawing their objections . however , we also determined that different regions follow different approaches in addressing objectors' concerns . for example , an official in the pacific southwest region told us that officials generally meet with the objectors associated with valid objections ( those that are not set aside for procedural reasons ) , with the goal of informally resolving the objections and having them subsequently withdrawn by the objectors . in contrast , an official in the northern region told us that while the region seeks to resolve objections informally , unlike the pacific southwest region , it does not seek to have objectors subsequently withdraw their objections , and none have done so . the groups generally agreed that the data provided by the agency were complete and accurate . in addition , during these interviews , we asked the groups for their perspectives on the administrative process for challenging decisions , including the objection process authorized under the healthy forests restoration act . the interviewees' comments and perspectives are incorporated in this report . we conducted our work from october 2008 through february 2010 , in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work . we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product . figure 2 shows , for each of the forest service's nine regions , the number of fuel reduction decisions and the total associated acreage . as shown , the southern region ( region 8 ) had the largest number of decisions and the largest acreage , while the alaska region ( region 10 ) had the fewest decisions and the smallest acreage . figure 3 shows , for each of the forest service's regions , information on appeals , objections , and litigation of fuel reduction decisions , including the total number of appeals , objections , and litigation and the percentage of decisions appealed , objected to , and litigated . the southern region ( region 8 ) had the highest combined total of decisions subject to appeal and objection ; however , decisions in the northern region ( region 1 ) were challenged at the highest rate , considering both appeals and objections . figure 4 shows , for each forest service region , the outcomes of appeals filed on fuel reduction decisions within the region . while six of the eight regions reporting appeal activity allowed the majority of appealed decisions to proceed without changes , the southwestern region ( region 3 ) had no appealed decisions that were allowed to proceed without changes and the highest rate of reversed decisions . figure 5 shows , for each forest service region , the outcomes of litigation filed on fuel reduction decisions within the region . six of the nine regions experienced litigation during the period covered by our survey .