gao - 09-12 . national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) and conducting other analyses to ensure that wyos accurately report this information . however , fema officials stated that the agency cannot take action that completely addresses our recommendations until the wyos reliably report to naic and that it might take several years before all companies consistently report such information . the agency also has been considering how to best introduce the wyos' actual flood - related expenses into payment formulas over the next several years , when fema expects to have more reliable financial information and less variation in reported expense ratios . target assistance for remaining subsidies . assistance or a subsidy could be based on the financial need of the property owners , which could help ensure that only those policyholders needing the subsidy would have access to it and retain their coverage , with the rest paying full - risk rates . targeting subsidies based on need — through a means test , for example — is an approach other federal programs use . however , nfip does not currently collect the policyholder data required to assess need and determine eligibility and it could be difficult for fema to develop and administer such an assistance program in the midst of ongoing management challenges . moreover , unlike other agencies that provide — and are allocated funds for — traditional subsidies , nfip does not receive an appropriation to pay for shortfalls in collected premiums caused by its subsidized rates . one approach to maintain subsidies but improve nfip's financial stability would be to rate all policies at the full - risk rate and appropriate subsidies for eligible policyholders . expand mitigation efforts such as elevation , relocation , and demolition of properties . this would include making mitigation mandatory to ensure that more homes were better protected . mitigation efforts could be used to help reduce or eliminate the long - term risk of flood damage ; especially if fema targeted the properties that were most costly to the program , such as those with repetitive losses . however , mitigation is expensive for nfip , taxpayers , and communities . in our october 2008 study of nfip's rate - setting , we found that the losses generated by nfip have created substantial financial exposure for the federal government and u.s. taxpayers — due in part to the program's rate - setting process . we also found that fema's rate - setting methods , even for full - risk rates , do not result in rates that accurately reflect flood risks . for example , fema's rate - setting process does not fully take into account ongoing and planned development , long - term trends in erosion , or the effects of global climate change . furthermore , fema sets rates on a nationwide basis , combining and averaging many topographic factors that are relevant to flood risks , and does not specifically account for these factors when setting rates for individual properties .