3 codes . this precision in coding could facilitate the use of more specific data to analyze service utilization , outcomes , and cost . reg . in addition to the standard code sets hhs adopted for reporting medical procedures , hhs adopted additional code sets to standardize the reporting of diagnoses and other health - related services , such as medical devices , supplies and equipment , home health care services , prescription drugs , and dental services ( see app . icd - 9-cm vol . 3 , the standard code set named for use in reporting inpatient hospital procedures , is maintained in the public domain by cms . cms revises icd - 9-cm vol . 3 through the icd - 9-cm coordination and maintenance committee meetings . members of the health care industry attend these biannual public meetings at their discretion and typically include representatives from the aha , ahima , and ama , among others . discussions at these meetings include proposed coding changes , such as the addition of codes to reflect new and distinct medical procedures — including those resulting from technological advancements — that may not be accurately represented by existing codes . cms makes final decisions on whether a new medical procedure warrants a new code based on evidence and recommendations presented by stakeholders at the committee meetings . according to cms representatives , it takes 6 to 18 months to consider new procedural coding requests , designate new codes to represent the new procedures , and implement the new codes . cms implements newly approved inpatient service codes every october 1 . in addition to contributing to cms's maintenance of icd - 9-cm vol . 3 , other organizations such as 3m health information systems , aha , ahima , and ama publish and market coding textbooks , handbooks , workbooks , and software that are used by members of the health care industry . for example , aha maintains a free information clearinghouse for members of the health care industry with questions about coding . it also coordinates with cms , nchs , and ahima to write the official guidelines on the use of icd - 9-cm vol . according to aha estimates , the administrative costs for aha to provide clearinghouse and guidance activities are about $1 million per year . aha also publishes textbooks , handbooks , and workbooks that are used in coding curriculums and the coding clinic for icd - 9-cm , a quarterly , subscription - based publication that serves as the primary manual of icd - 9-cm vol . 3 guidelines . aha projects that , for 2001 , these publications will incur about $1.7 million in costs and generate almost $2 million in revenue . cpt , the code set used to report physician services and other medical services including outpatient hospital procedures , is privately maintained . ama , which copyrights cpt , maintains the code set through its cpt editorial panel , which is made up predominantly of ama - appointed physicians . the panel also includes such members as physicians nominated by cms , the blue cross blue shield association , aha , and the health insurance association of america .