app . 202 ( 1995 ) , the court held that when federal regulations define joint and spine impairment severity in terms of limits on range of motion , va claims adjudicators must consider whether range of motion is further limited by factors such as pain and fatigue during “flare - ups” or following repetitive use of the impaired joint or spine . previous to this decision , va had not explicitly considered whether such additional limitations existed because va contended that its rating schedule incorporated such considerations . because adjudicators often must use judgment when deciding disability compensation claims , variations in decision making are an inherent possibility . while some claims are relatively straightforward , many require judgment , particularly when the adjudicator must evaluate ( 1 ) the credibility of different sources of evidence ; ( 2 ) how much weight to assign different sources of evidence ; or ( 3 ) disabilities , such as mental disorders , for which the disability standards are not entirely objective and require the use of professional judgment . without measuring the effect of judgment on decisions , va cannot provide reasonable assurance that consistency is acceptable . at the same time , it would be unreasonable to expect that no decision - making variations would occur . consider , for example , a disability claim that has two conflicting medical opinions , one provided by a medical specialist who reviewed the claim file but did not examine the veteran , and a second opinion provided by a medical generalist who reviewed the file and examined the veteran . one adjudicator could assign more weight to the specialist's opinion , while another could assign more weight to the opinion of the generalist who examined the veteran . depending on which medical opinion is given more weight , one adjudicator could grant the claim and the other could deny it . yet a third adjudicator might conclude that the competing evidence provided an approximate balance between the evidence for and the evidence against the veteran's claim , which would require that the adjudicator apply va's “benefit - of - the - doubt” rule and decide in favor of the veteran . an example involving mental disorders also demonstrates how adjudicators sometimes must make judgments about the degree of severity of a disability . the disability criteria in va's rating schedule provide a formula for rating the severity of a veteran's occupational and social impairment due to a variety of mental disorders . this formula is a nonquantitative , behaviorally oriented framework for guiding adjudicators in choosing which of the degrees of severity shown in table 1 best describes the claimant's occupational and social impairment . similarly , va does not have objective criteria for rating the degree to which certain spinal impairments limit a claimant's motion .