wilderness act of 1964 . the wilderness act of 1964 provides for federal lands to be designated as “wilderness areas,” which means that such lands are to be administered in such a manner that will leave them unimpaired for future use and enjoyment and to provide for their protection and the preservation of their wilderness character , among other goals . if border patrol proposes to patrol or install surveillance equipment on federal land that has been designated as wilderness , the agency must comply with the requirements and restrictions of the wilderness act of 1964 , other laws establishing a particular wilderness area , and the relevant federal land management agency's regulations governing wilderness areas . section 4 of the act prohibits the construction of temporary roads or structures , as well as the use of motor vehicles , motorized equipment , and other forms of mechanical transport in wilderness areas , unless such construction or use is necessary to meet the minimum requirements for administration of the area , including for emergencies involving health and safety . generally , the land management agencies have regulations that address the emergency and administrative use of motorized equipment and installations in the wilderness areas they manage . for example , under fish and wildlife service regulations , the agency may authorize border patrol to use a wilderness area and prescribe conditions under which motorized equipment , structures , and installations may be used to protect the wilderness , including emergencies involving damage to property and violations of laws . endangered species act of 1973 . the purpose of the endangered species act is to conserve threatened and endangered species and the ecosystems upon which they depend . under section 7 of the act , if border patrol or the land management agencies determine that an activity b order patrol intends to authorize , fund , or carry out may affect an animal or plant species listed as threatened or endangered , it may initiate eithe informal or a formal consultation with the fish and wildlife service — which we refer to as a section 7 consultation — to ensure that its actions do not jeopardize the continued existence of such species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of its critical habitat . the agencies are to initiate informal consultation if they determine that an activity may affect — but is not likely to adversely affect — a listed species or critical habitat . to help implement key federal land management laws , border patrol and the land management agencies have developed several mechanisms to coordinate their responsibilities , including a national - level memorandum of understanding and local agreements . the national - level memorandum of understanding was signed in 2006 by the secretaries of homeland security , the interior , and agriculture and is intended to provide consistent principles to guide the agencies' activities on federal lands along the u.s. borders . such activities may include information sharing ; placing and installing surveillance equipment , such as towers and underground sensors ; using roads ; providing border patrol with natural and cultural resource training ; mitigating environmental impacts ; and pursuing suspected undocumented aliens off road in wilderness areas .