we discussed this testimony with state officials , who agreed with our findings . the forecasts show the surge beginning to abate in fiscal year 2012 . in addition to the missionwide forecast , state has developed demand forecasts for individual consulates . as shown in figure 2 , state's forecasts anticipate that mexico city will have the highest levels of demand , with applications growing to over 580,000 in fiscal year 2010 . while mexico city is projected to have the highest overall demand , state anticipates that the steepest increases in demand will occur at border posts . this follows a pattern similar to the previous border crossing card surge , where the border consulates assumed a greater share of the total mission workload during the surge , with this share then diminishing again at the surge's end . estimating future niv demand is inherently uncertain , and state acknowledges that several factors could affect the accuracy of its april 2008 niv demand forecasts . first , the forecasts are based heavily upon change navigators' 2005 consular affairs futures study ( cafs ) , which generated niv demand forecasts for various high - volume and high - growth missions around the globe , including mexico . thus , the extent to which the underlying cafs numbers prove to be accurate affects state's revised forecasts . while the cafs includes a general analysis of how various demographic , economic , and political factors impact niv demand across countries , it does not explain how it arrived at its specific forecasts for mexico . based upon our review of the forecasts , it appears that the cafs authors relied primarily upon historical workload data from the previous border crossing card surge , but we could not assess how , if at all , other considerations were factored into the forecasts . second , methodological issues associated with state's april 2008 niv forecasts may affect their accuracy in projecting demand . for example , state relied heavily on actual demand data from fiscal year 2007 to revise the cafs forecasts , in order to try to better account for growth in demand from first - time visa applicants . in doing so , state assumed demand for fiscal year 2007 was representative of the underlying long - term growth in niv demand . however , this is not necessarily the case , as state officials acknowledge demand may have been artificially high in fiscal year 2007 as posts worked off backlogs that had accumulated from previous years . state officials also noted that they chose to be conservative and assume all border crossing card holders would renew their cards when they expire . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . foreign nationals who wish to visit the united states , including business travelers and tourists , must generally obtain a nonimmigrant visa . the majority of travelers visiting the united states from mexico receive an niv border crossing card , which is valid for 10 years .