sar training on using this system . according to office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) officials , the primary class , acquisition reporting for major defense acquisition programs and major automated information systems , is usually offered in january and october . during the 4-day class , participants receive step - by - step instruction on report preparation using the system's web application . the training materials include basic sar o&s cost reporting information . this perspective was reflected in comments from some program officials . for example , officials at one program office told us that , due to a constantly changing acquisition program , their time was largely spent on estimating acquisition costs . our scope and methodology is discussed further in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from february 2011 to february 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . requirements for submitting sars to congress , including the timing of these reports and the types of information to be included , are established in statute . ยง 2432 , the secretary of defense shall submit to congress at the end of each fiscal - year quarter a report on current major defense acquisition programs . each sar for the first quarter of a fiscal year ( also known as the comprehensive annual sar ) shall be designed to provide to the committee on armed services of the senate and the committee on armed services of the house of representatives the information these committees need to perform their oversight functions . the comprehensive annual sar shall be submitted within 60 days after the date on which the president's budget is sent to congress for the following fiscal year . the statute also requires that the annual sar include a full life - cycle cost analysis for each major defense acquisition program and each designated major subprogram included in the report that is in the system development and demonstration stage or has completed that stage . further , the secretary of defense must ensure that this requirement is implemented in a uniform manner , to the extent practicable , throughout dod . the term full life - cycle cost , with respect to a major weapon system , means all costs of development , procurement , military construction , and operations and support , without regard to funding source or management control . if the major weapon system has an antecedent system , a full life - cycle cost analysis for that system must also be reported . the sar reporting requirement ceases after 90 percent of the items are delivered or 90 percent of planned expenditures under the program are made . this stage of acquisition is now called engineering and manufacturing development . dod has issued various guidance documents that implement the statutory sar requirements . dod has issued various guidance documents that implement the statutory sar requirements .