attorneys were not consistent in their application of the guidance . furthermore , the claims data that doj relied upon were obtained from the hhs - oig , and hcfa and an independent claims review consultant were involved with extracting and analyzing the pneumonia claims . in addition , aha representatives stated that doj is engaging in other projects that have national implications but have not been recognized as national initiatives . doj officials explained that they may have multidistrict initiatives underway involving subjects under investigation in multiple jurisdictions , but that these projects do not meet doj's definition of a national initiative . doj has instituted written guidelines specifically addressing the proper coordination of multidistrict investigations , and , like all civil health care fraud matters , multidistrict initiatives must be conducted in accordance with the guidance . each working group has taken the lead in developing the legal and factual basis for its initiative . their development of detailed claims data and other relevant materials , such as model contact letters , has helped to promote consistency among the districts in their implementation of the initiatives . in our visits to several u.s. attorneys' offices , we found that attorneys were conducting their investigations in accordance with the guidance . they coordinated their activities with the working group to ensure consistency , but took into account the unique factors surrounding each hospital's circumstances . this flexibility is in keeping with the principles outlined in the guidance . we found that doj's periodic evaluations of the u.s. attorneys' offices now incorporate a more substantive examination of compliance with the guidance . the review process , which was instituted in february 1999 , initially contained only one interview question relating to the guidance , but doj has since expanded its evaluation procedure as it relates to the guidance . by april 2000 the review included a number of questions devoted to the guidance in both the previsit questionnaires and the interviews conducted during on - site visits . respondents must now describe in detail the activities and procedures each office has in place to ensure that the attorneys are informed of the guidance and that the office is in compliance . of the 16 full evaluations that took place between april 2000 when the evaluation process was expanded and the end of the calendar year , none resulted in a determination that an office was out of compliance with the guidance . through our discussions with doj officials and our review of relevant materials , we were able to verify that the evaluations provide an effective mechanism for identifying and documenting areas of concern and potential vulnerability , such as the need for additional information on the guidance for attorneys . no such findings were made during reviews of u.s. attorneys' offices currently participating in a national initiative . u.s. attorneys' offices must respond to weaknesses identified in the review , and the executive office for u.s . attorneys subsequently verifies that , if needed , corrective action is taken . our review showed that , when weaknesses were identified , this process was followed and implementation of corrective actions was monitored .