hhs agreed with this recommendation . cdc faced challenges in determining whether mosquito control efforts are associated with the reduction of mosquito - borne disease . for example , mosquito control entity officials told us that the entities' mosquito control efforts are not directly linked to disease reduction . other challenges to analyzing the relationships between mosquito control methods and disease reduction include the dependence of transmission on factors such as weather , human susceptibility , and immunity . cdc's capacity to develop a national strategy for mosquito control depends on its knowledge of mosquito control entities and their capabilities . we found that cdc relied on external sources to compile a list of mosquito control entities . cdc staff told us this list is likely to capture the larger , well - funded entities but may miss some smaller ones . further , mosquito control capabilities in the united states vary by geographic area . a mosquito control official we interviewed agreed that variability in mosquito control entity capacities is significant . this variability makes it more challenging for cdc to determine the status of mosquito control efforts in different regions of the united states and to identify regions that may need technical guidance or assistance . in conclusion , federal agencies can provide important information that can help users compare diagnostic tests and assist mosquito control efforts implemented at the state and local levels . information on performance characteristics presented in each diagnostic test product label was not consolidated across available tests , were not consistently reported for diagnostic tests , and the identity of the comparator test was not listed on some labels , making it difficult for users to make informed decisions about which test to use or recommend to patients . the information that cdc included in its maps did not include sufficient details about its estimates of potential distribution of mosquitoes that can carry the zika virus , which made it difficult for mosquito control experts and the public to correctly interpret and use such data . cdc developed the first two authorized diagnostic tests for the zika virus and offers these tests to public health laboratories but not to some manufacturers . such manufacturers additionally encountered difficulty acquiring authorized tests from other manufacturers . without a clear and transparent process for distributing cdc - developed diagnostic tests to manufacturers , the agency may not be able to develop the capacity of the commercial sector to be able to meet the needs during an outbreak . chairman murphy , ranking member degette , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact timothy m. persons , ph.d. , chief scientist , at ( 202 ) 512-6412 or personst@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement include sushil sharma , ph.d , dr.ph , ( assistant director ) , ashley grant , ph.d , mph , hayden huang , ph.d. , amber sinclair , ph.d. , and penny pickett , ph.d .