deviation process . some of the reactors that came online after nrc had defined the deterministic approach still could not meet the requirements . in such cases , nrc allowed operators to seek deviations from their licensing requirements if they could demonstrate an acceptable alternate approach to fire safety . in part because of variations among plant designs and different interpretations of fire safety regulations between industry and nrc , the agency continued to issue updated guidance related to the deterministic regulations , according to nrc and industry documents . however , in 2004 , nrc reported that the processing of exemption and deviation requests had placed a “significant” burden on the resources of the agency and the nuclear industry . nrc also acknowledged that industry representatives and some members of the public described the deterministic requirements as an “unnecessary regulatory burden.” as of april 2012 , nrc had granted more than 900 exemptions and deviations from the deterministic fire safety approach , according to nrc documents and officials . in response to charges that the processes for granting exemptions and deviations under the deterministic approach were burdensome , nrc issued a regulation in 2004 permitting plants to voluntarily transition to risk - informed fire protection requirements . under this approach , a plant operator adopts performance goals , objectives , and criteria for fire safety that are defined by the fire protection standard issued by nfpa . the operator can use probabilistic risk assessments ( pra ) and fire models , among other tools , to meet the performance criteria . a pra is a systematic assessment of what can go wrong , its likelihood , and its potential consequences to determine quantitative estimates of a particular risk , such as a fire safety risk . fire models are mathematical predictions of fire growth , environmental conditions , and potential effects on structures or systems . figure 2 illustrates how a plant demonstrates fire safety compliance under the risk - informed approach . nuclear power plant operators can choose to make a transition from using the deterministic approach to the risk - informed approach . in doing so , they can conduct a pra that is subsequently reviewed by teams of experts from other plant operators and consulting firms that are not involved in developing the pra under review . after the pra is reviewed , the transitioning plant requests that nrc amend the plant's operating license . nrc staff review the amendment request and , if necessary , request additional information from plant operators and conduct audits of transition documents to ensure that the plant has conducted the necessary tasks . if nrc approves the license amendment request , it will issue a final report evaluating the safety of the plant , after which the transition is considered complete . according to nrc documents and officials , the agency expects the approval process for each plant to take about 2 years after the plant submits its request for a license amendment . nrc's change to a risk - informed approach to fire safety is part of a larger nrc effort to move toward accepting or adopting a risk - informed approach to nuclear safety in general . examples are as follows .