round 1 . cms awarded contracts to 329 contract suppliers — 208 of which were designated by cms as small suppliers — to furnish dme items and services in 10 product categories in 10 competitive bidding areas . according to cms , the round 1 competitive bidding areas were selected , in part , because they may have had prior instances of unnecessary dme utilization . contracts were intended to be effective for a 3-year period , july 1 , 2008 , through june 30 , 2011 ; however , round 1 was stopped on july 15 , 2008 , through the enactment of the medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( mippa ) . among other provisions , mippa terminated the contracts already awarded by cms to suppliers in round 1 and required cms to repeat the competition for round 1 — referred to as the cbp round 1 rebid . round 1 rebid . cms awarded contracts to 356 contract suppliers — 219 of which were small suppliers — to furnish dme items and services in nine product categories in nine competitive bidding areas . contracts were effective january 1 , 2011 , and expired after 3 years on december 31 , 2013 , except for the contracts for the mail - order diabetes testing supplies product category , which expired on december 31 , 2012 . round 1 recompete . cms awarded contracts to 282 contract suppliers — 163 of which were small suppliers — to furnish dme items and services in six product categories and nine competitive bidding areas . 1-800-medicare inquiries . cms directs beneficiaries to call its 1- 800-medicare beneficiary help line for assistance with cbp - related questions . customer service representatives are trained to assist cbp beneficiaries and use several scripts to respond to questions and assist beneficiaries in locating contract suppliers . if a beneficiary's inquiry cannot be addressed by the customer service representatives , the inquiry is forwarded to an advanced - level customer service representative , who researches and responds to the beneficiary's inquiry . palmetto gba and cms regional offices . palmetto gba provides cbp - related information and updates through its website and works with cms regional office staff to monitor cbp activities and provide educational outreach . competitive acquisition ombudsman . the competitive acquisition ombudsman was created to respond to cbp - related complaints and inquiries made by suppliers and individuals , and works with cms officials and contractors and palmetto gba to resolve them . cms has implemented several activities to monitor whether beneficiary access or satisfaction have been affected by the implementation of cbp and to ensure that contract suppliers are meeting their contract obligations . inquiries and complaints to 1-800-medicare . cms tracks all cbp - related inquiries to 1-800-medicare . all calls are first classified as inquiries , and cms defines as a cbp complaint only those inquiries that cannot be resolved by any 1-800-medicare customer service representative and are elevated to another entity , such as palmetto gba , cms's regional offices , or the competitive acquisition ombudsman for resolution . secret shopping calls .