it also shows the numbers of helicopters at each location . it takes several years to fully train a helicopter pilot . pilots spend about a year and half in their general introductory and specialized helicopter training . for air force hh - 60 pilots , this initial qualification training occurs at kirtland air force base . following that , the pilots continue their training at their assigned operational squadrons . table 1 shows that , as of may 2018 , hh - 60g training aircraft averaged about 10,500 flight hours , while the primary mission and back up aircraft averaged about 6,600 flight hours . the air force's two developmental and testing aircraft had an average of 5,500 flight hours . according to air force officials , this is because developmental and testing aircraft are flown to test specific aircraft elements and not on regular missions . as flight hours increase more maintenance is required and maintenance challenges increase , according to air force officials . according to air force officials , the combat rescue helicopter fielding schedule , which was included in the contract for the new helicopters , was designed to ensure that helicopters with the highest flying hours are generally replaced first . the officials told us that this is why the active component units , which have higher flying - hour averages , would begin receiving their new combat rescue helicopters in fiscal year 2020 . based on the current combat rescue helicopter fielding schedule , the air force reserve is scheduled to receive its new helicopters beginning in fiscal year 2026 . the air national guard is scheduled to receive refurbished operational loss replacement helicopters in fiscal year 2019 and the new combat rescue helicopters beginning in fiscal year 2027 . the last combat rescue helicopters are scheduled to be fielded to all three components in fiscal year 2029 . figure 5 shows the timeline for the transition to the new combat rescue helicopters . on average , the active component helicopters had about 2,000 more flight hours per helicopter than the reserve component helicopters , in may 2018 , as shown in figure 6 . specifically , the active component helicopters had on average 7,700 flight - hours , while the reserve component helicopters averaged 5,800 flight hours . the active component helicopters in figure 6 include the kirtland training helicopters , which averaged about 10,600 flight hours per helicopter . according to air force officials , due in part to the high number of flight hours per aircraft , kirtland is one of the first squadrons scheduled to receive the new combat rescue helicopters . specifically , kirtland is scheduled to begin receiving its new helicopters in fiscal year 2020 . among the reserve component , the air national guard helicopters have an average of about 6,200 flight hours while the air force reserve helicopters have an average of about 5,500 flight - hours per aircraft . however , the combat rescue helicopter fielding schedule shows that the air national guard squadrons are last to receive the new combat rescue helicopters .