park . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . part 46 . ” ) and flexibility to customer needs . the company that sent materials to us was seeking our bogus irb's approval to add one of the company's clinics as a new test site for ongoing human trials involving invasive surgery . our bogus irb could have authorized human subjects testing to begin at this new test site — even though it was a fictitious irb , with no medical research expertise whatsoever . moreover , because this transaction involved a company conducting private ( i.e. , not federally funded ) research , and did not involve any fda - regulated products , our bogus irb could have approved the research to begin without needing to register with any federal agency . we also received inquiries from five other real companies , which expressed interest in our bogus irb's services . however , none of these five companies submitted any materials for us to review . all irbs that review federally funded human subjects research are required to be registered with hhs . after we registered our bogus irb with hhs , hhs provided us with a registration number and listed our bogus irb in its online directory of registered irbs that review federally funded research . our only communication with hhs as part of registering our irb was through an online registration form , with no human interaction . the irb registration process is meant to collect data that hhs uses during the subsequent assurance approval process . as such , hhs is not required to verify the information it receives during the irb registration process . however , our investigation of the assurance process , as described below , shows the importance of irb registration data as they relate to hhs's evaluation of assurance applications . moreover , if our bogus irb had been an actual irb that did not intend to review federally funded human subjects research , it would not have been required to submit any registration information . irbs that intend to review privately funded human subjects research are not currently required to register with hhs or any other federal agency , although recently implemented regulations will change this as of july 2009 . we found that the process for obtaining hhs approval for an assurance lacks effective controls . as mentioned above , we formed a fictitious medical device company with phony company officials and a mailbox for its business location — where human subjects research would supposedly be conducted . we then submitted an application to hhs for its approval of an assurance on behalf of our fictitious medical device company . as part of the application , we named our bogus irb as the irb responsible for reviewing the research covered by the assurance .