checkpoint screening . the checkpoint screening process , as set forth in tsa's procedures , is intended to deter and prevent passengers from carrying any unauthorized or prohibited items into the airport's sterile area and onboard an aircraft . upon entering the airport terminal security checkpoint , passengers provide travel document checkers their boarding passes for review . based on the printed boarding pass result , travel document checkers are to direct passengers to designated areas for standard , enhanced , or expedited screening . standard screening is generally applied to all passengers with boarding passes that are not marked for enhanced or expedited screening . this screening typically includes passing through either a walk - through metal detector or advanced imaging technology ( the latter of which identifies objects or anomalies concealed on the person ) and using x - ray equipment to screen the passenger's accessible property . in the event that any of these screening devices identify a potential item of concern , additional security measures are to result as part of the alarm resolution process . these measures may include pat downs , explosives trace detection searches ( which involve a device to detect explosive particles ) , and colorimetric testing to identify the concentration of certain chemical elements . enhanced screening is generally required for passengers tsa identifies as high risk , such as passengers that have been matched to federal government lists of known or suspected terrorists . enhanced screening involves the same procedures applied during a typical standard screening experience , as well as a pat down and an explosives trace detection search or physical search of the interior of the passenger's accessible property , electronics , and footwear . expedited screening is allowed for passengers tsa believes to be low risk . one group of passengers who routinely receive expedited screening are those enrolled in tsa's pre✓® — a program through which individuals vetted and approved by tsa are eligible for this level of screening . at airports with dedicated tsa pre✓® lanes , expedited screening includes walk - through metal detector screening and x - ray screening of the passenger's accessible property , and travelers do not have to remove their belts , shoes , or light outerwear , or remove items such as laptops from carry - on baggage . checked baggage screening . tsa procedures for checked baggage screening establish a process intended to deter , detect , and prevent the transport of any unauthorized explosive , incendiary , or weapon aboard an aircraft . checked baggage screening generally entails the use of explosives detection systems — which use x - rays and other technology to automatically measure the physical characteristics of objects in baggage and trigger an alarm when objects that exhibit the physical characteristics of explosives are detected . inspection's tests are intended to identify vulnerabilities related to any aspect of tsa's checkpoint and checked baggage screening systems , to include the procedures for screening , the tsos who implement these procedures , and the technology for screening ( eg , x - ray machines and advanced imaging technology ) .