international trade center . redefining export promotion: the need for a strategic response . united nations and world trade organization , 2002. international trade center executive forum . export strategy and the role of the national trade promotion organization . itc position paper for the consultative cycle 2006 innovations in export strategy , mexico city , mexico , april 2006 . i for a listing of these studies. ) although we do not endorse any specific changes to u.s. export promotion programs implied by the studies , we provide this information to assist in congressional oversight of u.s. export promotion programs and for a policy discussion about u.s. export promotion activities . gao has begun a new body of work in this area based on renewed congressional interest . u.s. export promotion activities are coordinated by the tpcc . to address a longstanding congressional concern over a lack of effective coordination , gao has reviewed the tpcc several times since its inception . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . ( see app . in 2006 , we testified that the tpcc had made progress over time in improving coordination , including interagency training and joint outreach . however , in both 2006 and 2009 , we found the tpcc continued to face challenges in other areas of its coordination responsibilities . for example , in march 2009 , we testified that the national export strategy continues to lack an overall review of agencies' allocation of resources relative to government - wide export promotion priorities . similarly , we testified in 2006 that , despite its mandate to propose a unified federal trade promotion budget , the tpcc continued to have little influence over agencies' allocation of resources for trade promotion . our observations about the importance of clearly coordinated responsibilities among export promotion agencies are consistent with findings in several expert studies that examined foreign export promotion practices . for example , the international trade center reported that most successful exporting countries have established a central or national export promotion agency that coordinates implementation of the national export strategy , leads in creation of a support network , and acts as a first stop for the business community . in a review of 104 countries , the world bank study found that a single and strong export promotion agency is preferred to the sometimes observed proliferation of agencies within countries . well - coordinated activities among a larger partnership of support agencies are emphasized in studies by the australian trade authority ( austrade ) and the boston consulting group . austrade , for example , stated that effectively coordinating export service providers is important for potential and new - to - export firms , since some – especially small and medium - sized enterprises – have encountered difficulties in identifying or accessing appropriate services for their needs . examples of targeted or tailored foreign promotion efforts that the studies cited include: the united kingdom's export explorer and passport to export success programs that were targeted to new exporters .