pub . 110-114 , ยง 2043 ( b ) , 121 stat . the problem and make recommendations on whether the project is worth pursuing and how the problem should be addressed . corps guidance states that typical feasibility studies should be completed in 18 to 36 months . according to corps documents , the district office conducts the study and the needed environmental studies and documents the results in a feasibility report that includes a total project cost estimate based on the recommended plan . the chief of engineers reviews the report and decides whether to sign a final decision document , known as the chief's report , recommending the project for construction . the chief of engineers transmits the chief's report and the supporting documentation to congress through the assistant secretary of the army for civil works and the office of management and budget . congress may authorize the project's construction in a wrda or other legislation . when congress approves a project for construction , it typically authorizes a total cost for the project based on estimates prepared by the corps . most construction projects are authorized during the preconstruction engineering and design phase . the purpose of this phase is to complete any additional planning studies and all of the detailed , technical studies and designs needed to begin construction of the project . once the construction project has been authorized and preconstruction engineering and design has been funded through completion of the plans and specifications for the first construction contract , the corps seeks funds to construct the project through the annual budget formulation process . as part of the budget process , the army , with input and data from corps headquarters , division , and district offices , develops a budget request for the agency . beginning in fiscal year 2006 , the corps introduced what it refers to as performance - based budgeting as a way to focus funding requests on those projects with the highest anticipated return on investment , rather than a wider set of projects that meet budget policies as it sought to do in the past . under its current budget formulation process , the corps uses performance metrics to evaluate projects' estimated future outcomes and gives priority to those it determines have the highest expected returns for the national economy and the environment , as well as those that reduce risk to human life . budget justification materials are provided to the house and senate appropriations committee for consideration . through the conference committee reports accompanying appropriations acts , congress directs funds for individual projects in increments over the course of several years . the corps considers a project or study to have been appropriated funds if the project or study has received such direction in a committee report . if the project has been appropriated funds , the district enters into a cost - sharing agreement with the nonfederal sponsor . once funds have been appropriated and a cost - sharing agreement is in place , the construction phase can begin and the corps may obligate funds for a project . construction is generally managed by the corps but performed by private contractors .