gao - 02-413 . washington , d.c.: april 5 , 2002 . states are affected differently by these conditions . gao - 02-500t . washington , d.c.: march 12 , 2002 . while these conditions sometimes facilitated states' coordination efforts , other states faced with similar conditions found coordination difficult . although research has shown that a variety of conditions influence coordination efforts , it has not clearly examined how coordinated service delivery through one - stops affects tanf clients' outcomes . a variety of conditions continue to affect how states and localities coordinate tanf services with one - stop centers . the nature of historical relationships between welfare and workforce agencies at the state and local level , specifically agencies' experience in working with each other in the past , often sets the stage for the level of present coordination . geographic considerations , such as variations in layout of agency service districts , physical distance between one - stop centers and welfare offices , and the number of tanf clients in a given area , can also affect how states and localities coordinate services . the availability of adequate facilities can also influence state and local coordination efforts . in addition , welfare and workforce agencies often have different perspectives on how to best serve tanf clients . while some states and localities have had success in using the flexibility afforded them under wia and tanf to coordinate in spite of these conditions , others lack information on the coordination efforts of other states and localities . although there is some “promising practices” information currently available on selected websites , it is not generally organized in a way that allows readers to readily obtain information on coordinating services . the existing level of coordination between tanf services and one - stop centers is often a reflection of how state and local agencies have worked with each other in the past . some officials said that their efforts to coordinate tanf services with one - stop centers have been complicated by state and local agencies' lack of experience working together , which sometimes resulted in a lack of trust between agencies . for example , some officials reported that coordination was difficult because , historically , there has been little cooperation between workforce and welfare agencies in their state . some states that had previously coordinated other employment and training programs among multiple agencies , noted that this experience made coordination of tanf services with one - stop centers easier . for example , in idaho , the state department of labor invited the state's welfare agency to join a focus group on coordination as early as 1992 , and a tanf representative has served on the state management team for workforce development since their earliest one - stop implementation efforts . also , officials in illinois reported that tanf staff regularly attended jtpa meetings in the past and have been involved with wia since it was implemented , laying the framework for coordinating tanf services with one - stop centers . local areas sometimes have found ways to creatively coordinate services even in states where state agencies had little experience working together .