resolved in 2003 . eleven areas of noncompliance , including general supervision ; due process hearings ; timeliness of evaluations and placements ; and provision of free appropriate public education in the least restrictive environment . not yet resolved . three findings remain open in july 2003: timely implementation of hearing decisions , placement in the least restrictive environment , and timely evaluations . fiscal management . not yet resolved ; year has not yet expired . ensuring iep components are determined at an iep meeting with all required participants ; placement of students in least restrictive environment . resolved in 2000 . general supervision ; identification and correction of deficiencies , iep violations , provision of related services and least restrictive environment . we do not agree with this position . the relevant statute specifically authorizes the department to hold a hearing and directs it to invite certain parties , including the state . while the department cannot compel a state to enter into a compliance agreement , we think initiating proceedings to consider the merits of entering into such an agreement could likely result in beneficial corrective action discussions between the department and the state . it could also result in greater reliance on the 3-year compliance agreement or at least improve corrective action planning by the state . while education may impose other remedies such as partial or full withholding of funding , issuing a cease and desist order , or referring a state's noncompliance to the department of justice , we believe that in many instances of noncompliance , the 3-year compliance agreement could be the least onerous , and perhaps most helpful , tool to improve state compliance with idea . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of education and the house and senate committees with oversight responsibility for the department . we will also make copies available to other parties upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http / / :www.gao.gov . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-7215 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . as requested , our review focused on the department of education's monitoring of the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , part b , those aspects of the law that regulate the provision of services to disabled school - aged and preschool children . in conducting our review , we examined education's monitoring procedures and guidance since congress last amended idea legislation in 1997 . additionally , we examined reports submitted to education to document compliance , including self - assessments , section 618 data reports , and improvement plans . we also reviewed compliance and enforcement documentation and education monitoring reports for the 31 states visited for part b monitoring since 1997 ( see below for more information ) . because education infrequently used sanctions , we examined the previous 10-year period to capture a more comprehensive picture of enforcement actions .