more than 40 percent in another region reported the same . we encountered similar complaints during our overseas fieldwork . for example , in morocco , the former public affairs officer stated that so little information had been provided from washington on state's post - september 11 public diplomacy strategy that he had to rely on newspaper articles and guesswork to formulate his in - country public diplomacy plans . in contrast to state's lack of strategy , bbg has introduced a market - based approach to international broadcasting that aims to generate large listening audiences in priority markets that the board believes it must reach to effectively meet its mission . early implementation of this strategy has focused on markets relevant to the war on terrorism , in particular the middle east . the board's vision is to create a flexible , multimedia , research - driven u.s. international broadcasting system that addresses the many challenges we noted in our report , including that the board is faces a diverse organizational structure consisting of several broadcast entities with differing missions , broadcast approaches , and constituencies . mr. chairman , we believe it is especially important to emphasize as of february 4 , 2004 , no interagency public diplomacy strategy has been implemented that lays out the messages and means for governmentwide communication efforts to overseas audiences . the absence of an interagency strategy complicates the task of conveying consistent messages and thus achieving mutually reinforcing benefits . state officials told us that , without such a strategy , the risk of making communication mistakes that are damaging to u.s. public diplomacy efforts is high . they also said that the lack of a strategy diminishes the efficiency and effectiveness of governmentwide public diplomacy efforts . our overseas fieldwork in egypt and morocco underlined the importance of interagency coordination . embassy officers there told us that only a very small percentage of the population was aware of the magnitude of u.s. assistance being provided to their countries . egypt is the second largest recipient of u.s. assistance in the world , with assistance totaling more than an estimated $1.9 billion in 2003 . assistance to morocco totaled more than an estimated $13 million in 2003 . most interagency communication coordination efforts have been ad hoc in recent years . immediately after september 11 , the white house , state department , department of defense , and other agencies coordinated various public diplomacy efforts on a day - to - day basis , and the white house established a number of interim coordination mechanisms . one such mechanism was the joint operation of the coalition information centers in washington , london , and islamabad , set up during the early stages of u.s. military operations in afghanistan in 2001 . the centers were designed to provide a rapid response capability for correcting inaccurate news stories , proactively dealing with news items likely to generate negative responses overseas , and optimizing reporting of news favorable to u.s. efforts . in january 2003 , the president established a more permanent coordination mechanism , the white house office of global communications , which is intended to coordinate strategic communications from the u.s. government to overseas audiences .