we will continue to review this issue . when we last testified in june 2003 , the fbi was in the process of compiling the building blocks of a strategic plan . at that time it was anticipated that the plan would be completed by the start of fiscal year 2004 . although delayed by about 5 months , the fbi has since completed its strategic plan . fbi officials indicated that the implementation of two staff reprogrammings and delays in the appropriation of its fiscal year 2003 and fiscal year 2004 budget , as well as initiatives undertaken to protect the homeland during the war in iraq , delayed the completion of the strategic plan . we are not intending to imply that , even with more information from past experience , that all leads should not be investigated , but more analytical information about leads could help prioritize them . neither the fbi nor we were in a position to determine the right amount of staff resources needed to address the priority areas . however , the body of information that might help to make these determinations is growing . since the september 11 attacks , the fbi has updated its counterterrorism threat assessment and has gained additional experience in staffing priority work . this development , along with an analysis of the nature of all leads ( those that turn out to be significant and those that do not ) and the output from them , could put the bureau in a better position to assess the actual levels of staff resources that the agency need in counterterrorism , counterintelligence , and cyber programs . as would be expected , the number of newly opened drug , violent crime , and white collar crime cases has fallen in relation to the decline in the number of field agent positions allocated or assigned to work on these programs . the change in priorities and the accompanying shift in investigative resources have affected the fbi's drug program the most . nearly half of the fbi field agent drug positions have been permanently reallocated to priority program areas . since september 11 , about 40 percent of the positions allocated to fbi field offices' drug program have been reallocated to counterterrorism and counterintelligence priority areas . as figure 4 shows , just prior to september 11 , about two - thirds ( or 890 ) of the 1,378 special agent positions allocated to fbi field offices for drug program matters were direct - funded . the remaining one - third ( or 488 ) of the special agent positions was funded by the organized crime and drug enforcement task force program ( ocdetf ) . as of the first quarter of fiscal year 2004 , the number of direct - funded positions allocated to fbi field offices for the drug program had decreased over 60 percent , going from 890 to 337 . ocdetf - funded agent positions , which have remained constant , now account for about 60 percent of the fbi field offices' drug program staff resources .