see figure 2 below . dhs could not demonstrate that it had assigned codes to 95 percent of its positions , as reported , since its coding progress data never indicated such a percentage . the percentage of coded positions reported for dhs was overstated because it was not based on complete information . specifically , the percentage reflected information on the progress of filled federal civilian cybersecurity positions , but excluded vacant positions , even though the act required dhs to report these positions . among the six components that we selected for our review , five of them had not yet completed the coding of their positions . figure 2 shows the results of our analysis of dhs's progress in coding its cybersecurity positions , which considered both filled and vacant federal civilian cybersecurity positions , in comparison to what the department identified , which considered incomplete data — using only filled positions . in addition to being incomplete , dhs's results were not accurate . specifically , ochco developed a bi - monthly dashboard to monitor and report coding progress ; however , the office did not have assurance that its data were accurate . ochco officials stated they did not verify the components' data for accuracy . for example , while no more than 100 percent of identified positions should be coded , ochco reported 122.7 percent of positions as being coded for the office of the chief information officer . such anomalies were due to dhs components reporting the total number of identified cybersecurity positions on a semi - annual basis , while ochco determined positions coded on a bi - monthly basis using data from the national finance center personnel and payroll system . yet , ochco analyzed and reported these numbers together , even though they were representative of different time periods . this produced unreliable results that were not representative of actual progress . table 4 provides examples of components' coding progress , as reflected in dhs's august 29 , 2017 dashboard report , which showed one component that had more cybersecurity positions coded than were identified . ochco officials reported several factors related to their processes and systems that had limited their ability to collect and use data that were complete and accurate . specifically , the officials stated that ochco did not have documented processes to collect and verify data from the components . the officials also stated that the components did not report vacancies consistently , and that the department does not have a system to track the vacancies . the officials further stated that the cybersecurity workforce amounts frequently changed , and that they could not review workforce data for reliability , as such a review was a resource - intensive activity . however , if dhs does not assure that processes are in place to obtain and use data that are complete , including vacant positions , and accurate , then the department cannot be assured that it will have an accurate understanding of its internal coding progress . without the ability to code its cybersecurity positions in a complete and accurate manner , dhs will not be able to effectively examine the cybersecurity workforce ; identify skill gaps ; and improve workforce planning .