this phase is not included in may 2002 plan . does not include any information on where mission indirect will be installed . does not include any information on the status of the next generation - awps . does not include any information on the status of the base operations - next generation . no date provided no date provided no date provided no date provided no date provided installed at maintenance depots and will be installed at other sites over the course of the year . completion february 2003 at tobyhanna and other commodity commands at about 3-month intervals . as of october 2001 , awps has been operational at all five maintenance depots , ammunition logistics , ammunition manufacturing ( crane and mcalester ) , and base operations at all maintenance depots . to determine whether the army's may 2002 master plan contains adequate information to assess the army's progress in implementing awps , we reviewed the army's may 2001 and may 2002 master plans . we compared the contents of these plans to the key requirements set forth in section 346 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2002 . in addition , we reviewed the may 2002 master plan to determine the extent to which it addressed the recommendations outlined in our november 1999 report.we also examined the department of defense's regulation outlining the mandatory procedures for the acquisition of major automated information systems to determine specific criteria required for a progress report . we compared the contents of the may 2002 master plan to the criteria outlined in this regulation . although this regulation does not specifically apply to the development of the awps system , we believe that sound management practices support the need to address these parameters in the army's progress reports . we also met with officials at the headquarters , department of the army ; headquarters , army material command ; and the operations support command in rock island , illinois , to discuss the development and implementation of the awps system . in addition , we discussed the benefits and problems that the depots have experienced with awps with officials at tobyhanna army depot , tobyhanna , pennsylvania ; and corpus christi army depot , corpus christi , texas . we did not , however , independently review the effectiveness of the awps system at the depots we visited . lastly , we relied on prior work done in connection with the implementation of awps . to identify the measures the army has taken to ensure appropriate coordination and data sharing between awps and the logistics modernization program , we reviewed the february 2002 interface control document developed jointly by the department of the army and the computer sciences corporation , and discussed the related interface initiatives with appropriate army and contractor officials . we also reviewed the actions the army had taken to facilitate the interface and data sharing between the two systems to identify what additional actions were needed before the army could be assured that the awps system would remain fully operational during the transition period .