cfpb . cfpb's four largest advertising and public relations contracts represented nearly 70 percent of obligations for these contracts over fiscal years 2012 through 2016 ( $22.6 million out of $32.8 million ) . public relations . contract documentation linked the need for increasing general awareness of cfpb's tools and resources to cfpb's statutory responsibility to develop and implement initiatives intended to educate and empower consumers to make better financial decisions . according to cfpb officials , promoting awareness of cfpb's tools and the services it provides is intended to increase their use . in particular , research conducted by a cfpb contractor in 2015 showed that before cfpb's campaign to increase awareness of its tools and resources , awareness and use of these tools and resources had remained level over the prior two and a half years . figure 1 shows an example of cfpb outreach promoting its tools and resources . fema . the largest of fema's advertising and public relations contracts represented just over 40 percent of all obligations for these contracts over fiscal years 2012 through 2016 ( $8.7 million out of $20.7 million ) . this contract , and several others , supported the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) . according to fema officials , part of its role in administering the nfip involves public communications and advertising to encourage people to buy flood insurance to better prepare themselves for disaster . fema's other high - value contracts included ones for services promoting emergency preparedness , including those supporting the ready campaign . the ready campaign promotes preparedness for many types of emergencies , including hurricanes , extreme heat , and tornadoes . figure 2 illustrates ready campaign outreach related to extreme weather alerts . nasa . nasa's two largest advertising and public relations contracts represented just under half of all obligations for these contracts over fiscal years 2012 through 2016 ( $7.6 million of $17.1 million ) . these two contracts , and other lesser - value ones , supported nasa's communications support services center . this center provides support services across the agency , such as developing products that support the agency's education and public outreach programs . according to nasa officials , the contracts are for services that are less efficient for nasa staff to perform or for which staff do not have the needed expertise . figure 3 shows an example of nasa outreach illustrating a program to grow plants in space . uscis . uscis' two largest advertising and public relations contracts represented just over 90 percent of obligations for these services over fiscal years 2012 through 2016 ( $18.1 million out of $19.8 million ) .these two contracts supported planning and developing media and educational messaging tools for the e - verify and systematic alien verification for entitlements ( save ) programs . e - verify is an internet - based system that allows businesses to confirm the eligibility of their employees to work in the united states . advertising and public relations contracts do not necessarily capture all of the advertising and public relations activities carried out by the four case study agencies .