the agencies reported some other examples of social distancing strategies . since the production of the checks must be done according to a deadline and internal controls must be maintained , schedules are not flexible . the kfc explained that its peak production workload is toward the end of the month when it is preparing the monthly social security benefit payments . pfc officials noted that although they could identify certain positions that could be performed remotely , there are issues surrounding personally identifiable information , which must be protected and which requires that special equipment needs be addressed . the pfc is exploring its telework options as part of its pandemic planning , but officials acknowledged that protecting sensitive data would be a significant consideration of any formal telework program . fms officials had not made any arrangements for pandemic pharmaceutical interventions for the regional financial centers . according to an fms official , treasury asked its components to determine the number and courses of antiviral medications needed for very high - risk , high - risk , and medium - risk staff with critical professional responsibilities , consistent with hsc guidance documents . aside from that action , fms had not determined priorities for medical countermeasures in part because the relatively small number of essential employees required to be on - site , as well as the large open spaces in the regional facilities , makes social distancing measures more feasible . faa , a component of dot , expects the national airspace system to function throughout an influenza pandemic , in accordance with the preparedness and response goal of sustaining infrastructure and mitigating impact to the economy and the functioning of society . faa's interim plan for sustaining essential government services ( segs ) during a pandemic states that since an influenza pandemic would not damage physical infrastructure , faa facilities would remain operational and day - to - day operations would continue based on the number of available personnel . maintaining the functioning of the national airspace system will require that faa's air traffic controllers , who ensure that aircraft remain safely separated from other aircraft , vehicles , and terrain , continue to work on - site . under nonpandemic circumstances , faa's over 15,000 air traffic controllers guide more than 7,000 aircraft in the united states each hour during peak hours and about 50,000 aircraft each day through the national airspace system . while faa expects the demand for air traffic control , which manages cargo as well as passenger travel , to be reduced in the event of a severe pandemic outbreak , its contingency plans assume full air traffic levels as a starting baseline . according to an faa official , although passenger travel may be diminished , the shipping of cargo may increase . dot and faa pandemic plans and guidance provide the basis for the air traffic management facility pandemic plans . dot's guidance to the office of the secretary of transportation ( ost ) and operating administrations ( oa ) addresses the protection of employees and explicitly distinguishes pandemic plans from coop plans , emphasizing a pandemic's duration and expected absenteeism rate and stating that plans must address workforce protective policies , equipment , and measures .