turnover of the product is required to ensure quality . for example , doe found that when gasoline is stored in above - ground tanks , the turnover time is 18 to 24 months . § 6240 ( b ) . spr has sold or exchanged oil on several other occasions , including providing small quantities of oil to refiners to help them through short - term localized oil shortages . oil markets have changed substantially in the 34 years since the establishment of the spr . at the time of the arab oil embargo , price controls in the united states prevented the prices of oil and petroleum products from increasing as much as they otherwise might have , contributing to a physical oil shortage that caused long lines at gasoline stations throughout the united states . now that the oil market is global , the price of oil is determined in the world market primarily on the basis of supply and demand . conversely , crude oil provides flexibility in responding to fluctuations in refined product market needs as regional fuel specifications and environmental requirements change over time . furthermore , the switching of seasonal blends to meet environmental requirements and product degradation would require inventory turnover as compared to crude oil storage , which does not require the same level of turnover . fourth , there are several policy choices that might diminish the growth in u.s. demand for oil . also in our august 2006 report , we recommended that doe consider filling the spr by acquiring a steady dollar value of oil over time , rather than a steady volume as has occurred in recent years . this “dollar - cost - averaging” approach would allow doe to take advantage of fluctuations in oil prices and ensure that more oil would be acquired when prices are low and less when prices are high . in august 2006 , we reported that if doe had used this approach from october 2001 through august 2005 , it could have saved approximately $590 million in fill costs . we also ran simulations to estimate potential future cost savings from using a dollar - cost - averaging approach over 5 years and found that doe could save money regardless of the price of oil as long as there is price volatility , and that the savings would be generally greater if oil prices were more volatile . we would expect a dollar - cost - averaging acquisition method to also provide positive benefits when acquiring refined petroleum products . maximize cost - effective storage options . according to doe , salt formations offer the lowest cost , most environmentally secure way to store crude oil for long periods of time . in the absence of price controls , scarcity is generally expressed in the form of higher prices , as purchasers are free to bid as high as they want to secure oil supply . in a global market , an oil supply disruption anywhere in the world raises prices everywhere . releasing oil reserves during a disruption provides a global benefit by reducing oil prices in the world market .