( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to gsa , omb , and the secretaries of the departments of labor , education , the treasury , and health and human services for review and comment . our selections are not representative or generalizable to all agencies or projects . to gain insights into how selected agencies considered costs in their office space decisions , we reviewed their real property management policies and project documentation and interviewed agency officials . we analyzed this information to identify common themes across the agencies . because gsa's public buildings service ( pbs ) acquires , manages , and disposes of office space on behalf of agencies , we reviewed pbs's policies and its analyses for most of our selected projects . we also interviewed pbs headquarters officials to understand how pbs considers costs when helping agencies obtain space . appendix i describes our objectives , scope , and methodology in greater detail . we used gsa's data and the cost avoidance approach gsa developed with omb to identify that $114 million of the estimated cost avoidance can be attributed to civilian agencies' office space reductions since fiscal year 2015 . the estimated cost avoidance measure reflects overall federal cost avoidance because it accounts for space that agencies have returned to gsa but that remains unoccupied . under certain conditions , agencies may vacate gsa - managed space prior to the end of their occupancy agreement and report that as a reduction in their space . however , until this space is reoccupied or gsa disposes of it , the federal government continues to incur costs to operate and maintain the space . because of these continued costs , gsa accounts for vacant space when it estimates cost avoidance . for example , from fiscal year 2016 to fiscal year 2017 the amount of vacant gsa - managed office space increased more than the amount of space agencies reduced . since this increase meant that the federal government had not reduced office space overall when the calculation was made , gsa estimated that rather than avoiding costs , costs for civilian office space increased by roughly three - quarters of a million dollars during this period . gsa officials noted that this estimate represents estimated cost avoidance at a single point in time and does not capture fluctuations in agencies' space or vacant federal space throughout the year . all of the agencies obtain at least some of their office space through gsa's pbs ; in fact , two - thirds of the 23 agencies' office space is gsa - managed space . when agencies obtain space through gsa , they enter into occupancy agreements with pbs and pay rent , operations , and maintenance costs to pbs . when gsa obtains space for its own employees , it also enters into occupancy agreements with pbs . pbs maintains a record of agencies' gsa - managed space , including information on square footage and costs , in its occupancy agreement database . we discuss pbs's role in agencies' office space decisions later in this report .