we disagree . first , while dod's justifications for the wastewater treatment funding cite the need for remedies and residents' current needs , the justifications also state that the funding and project is required to support growth resulting from the military realignment . given that the size of the realignment has been reduced significantly , a revalidation of the wastewater project remains warranted . second , without a revalidation of the wastewater project , it will continue to be unclear to what extent the requested funds for the project are still necessary or necessary to the same extent given the significant reduction in forces under the revised realignment plan and the as yet undetermined location of the main marine corps installation . specifically , as discussed in the report , a possible location for the main marine installation is naval base guam , which handles its own wastewater needs and does not require dod to rely on the public wastewater system . if this location is chosen , dod would appear to no longer have a basis for its cited need for additional wastewater capacity to support the realignment as part of its budget request justifications . dod stated that it partially concurred with our second recommendation to conduct a comprehensive analysis across all applicable public infrastructure sectors to determine what infrastructure requirements and costs are needed to address long - standing deficiencies in guam's infrastructure and which are needed to directly support the realignment . dod noted that a determination of realignment - related infrastructure requirements and costs is an anticipated outcome of the supplemental eis . dod's comments , however , do not address whether it plans to clearly differentiate between those infrastructure requirements and costs needed to address existing deficiencies in guam's infrastructure and those needed to directly support the additional capacity associated with the realignment , as we specifically recommended . doing so is important , because as explained in the report , clearly differentiating between existing public infrastructure deficiencies and any additional capacity needed to support the realignment would help dod more accurately identify the costs directly attributable to the realignment . dod's analysis would then provide congressional decision makers with information they need to appropriately fund requests for public infrastructure projects on guam . dod partially concurred with our third recommendation to fully incorporate the best practices identified by gao for developing high quality cost estimates , as future cost estimates for guam public infrastructure projects are developed . in response to this recommendation , dod stated that future realignment - related cost estimates and budget submissions will be developed in accordance with dod's financial management regulation and that final engineering cost estimates for specific projects will be developed in the normal course of executing the fiscal year 2014 program . while budget submissions must conform to dod guidance , omb guidance and our cost estimating and assessment guide , which is a compilation of cost estimating best practices from across industry and government , confirm that cost estimates should conform to best practices and follow certain specific steps to ensure that they are reliable and credible . development of reliable and credible cost estimates is important , whether as part of budget submissions or in advance of those submissions .