hinze , jimmie . ” practice periodical on structural design and construction , vol . iii for a copy of the survey ) . “an investigation of the relationship between safety climate and medication errors as well as other nurse and patient outcomes.” personnel psychology , vol . hoonakker , peter , todd loushine , pascale carayon , james kallman , andrew kapp , and michael j. smith . “the effect of safety initiatives on safety performance: a longitudinal study.” applied ergonomics , vol . huang,yueng - hsiang , michael ho , gordon s. smith , and peter y. chen . ( 3 ) what actions has osha taken to address how workplace safety incentive programs and other policies may affect injury and illness reporting ? to learn what is known about the effect of safety incentive programs and other workplace safety policies on injury and illness reporting , we interviewed osha and state occupational safety and health agency officials , union and employer representatives , and researchers ; and identified and analyzed 26 studies that appeared in peer - reviewed journals from 2001 to 2011 . to describe the prevalence of workplace safety incentive programs and other policies , we surveyed a nationally representative sample of manufacturing worksites about their safety incentive programs and workplace safety policies and analyzed the results . to identify the actions osha has taken to address safety incentive programs and policies that may affect injury and illness reporting , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and osha program guidance ; analyzed osha inspection data ; and interviewed osha and state occupational safety and health agency officials and experts . we conducted this performance audit from september 2010 to april 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for more information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . osha administers the occupational safety and health act of 1970 ( osh act ) , which was enacted to assure so far as possible safe and healthful working conditions for the nation's workers . zohar , dov , and gil luria . “the use of supervisory practices as leverage to improve safety behavior: a cross - level intervention model.” journal of safety research , vol .