we requested comments on a draft of this report from dhs . these respondents included federal and nonfederal stakeholders . for example , one survey respondent noted that stakeholders were asked to react to information provided by dhs rather than participating in formulating the approach and execution of the studies . in addition to indications of collaboration challenges in our stakeholder survey results , during our interviews with federal departments and agencies , six of nine federal representatives stated that they felt dhs's communication with them was “one - way” and led to an overall sense that stakeholder input was not valued or genuinely sought after . ( 3 ) to what extent did dhs collaborate with stakeholders during the 2014 qhsr process ? this report also examines whether the qhsr and dhs strategic plan addressed the reporting elements specified for the qhsr in the 9 / 11 commission act , which we describe in appendix i . to determine the extent to which dhs has examined and used risk information to inform the qhsr and its implementation , we analyzed dhs documentation on its risk analysis process and results , such as dhs's current strategic environment and future strategic environment reports and classified risk characterization results . we also interviewed current and former dhs office of strategy , plans , analysis , and risk ( spar ) officials responsible for developing the qhsr risk analyses . we compared dhs's risk assessment process and documentation to the national infrastructure protection plan's ( nipp ) key characteristics of a successful risk assessment . specifically , we evaluated dhs's documentation to determine the extent to which the qhsr's risk assessment was complete , documented , defensible , and reproducible . further , we evaluated dhs's use of risk information in the qhsr against risk management guidance in the nipp and dhs's risk management fundamentals , as well as against our prior work on key characteristics for risk assessment and management . to determine the extent to which dhs has aligned its budget and performance measures with the mission goals in the qhsr , we analyzed dhs documents related to the 2014 qhsr and the fiscal years 2014- 2018 strategic plan , including: dhs budget in brief documents from 2015 through 2017 to determine dhs's budget priorities since issuance of the first qhsr ; fiscal years 2012 through 2015 future years homeland security program ( fyhsp ) reports ; excerpts from dhs's fiscal years 2017-2021 and 2018-2022 resource planning guidance to determine the extent to which budget guidance reflects the dhs missions and goals ; and dhs reports on its progress implementing a common appropriations structure . further , we reviewed congressional research service reports on dhs's appropriations from fiscal year 2015 and 2016 . we also interviewed dhs officials from the office of the chief financial officer , spar , and from u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , and transportation security administration ( tsa ) .