mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact eileen larence at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or by e - mail at larencee@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include mary catherine hult , tom lombardi , and jeffrey niblack . fusion center officials reported challenges accessing and managing multiple information systems . both dhs and doj have established program offices to oversee their relationships with fusion centers . in october 2007 , the president issued the first national strategy for information sharing: success and challenges in improving terrorism - related information sharing ( national strategy ) , which further highlights the importance of state and local fusion centers as valuable information - sharing resources to be incorporated into the national information sharing framework . in addition , the 9 / 11 commission act contains several provisions related to fusion centers . for example , in accordance with the act , dhs established a fusion center program office . to improve information sharing — related to homeland security , terrorism , and law enforcement — among federal , state , and local entities and to prevent terrorism or threats after the attacks of september 11 were the most frequently cited reasons for establishing a fusion center . several officials cited the need to enhance information sharing within their own jurisdictions across disciplines as the reason why they established a center . while 9 centers opened in the couple of years after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , 34 of the 43 operational centers have opened since january 2004 as shown in figure 1 . consistent with the 9 / 11 commission act's definition of a fusion center and the purpose of a fusion center , as defined in the fusion center guidelines , officials in 41 of the 43 operational centers we contacted said that their scopes of operations focused on more than just counterterrorism . for instance , officials in 22 of these centers described their centers' scope as all crimes or all crimes and counterterrorism , and officials in 19 operational centers said that their scopes of operations included all - hazards information ( such as related to public health and safety or emergency response ) . further , 23 of the 36 operational fusion centers that provided us mission statements had missions that involved collecting , analyzing , and disseminating criminal as well as terrorism - related information . eleven other fusion centers had missions that involved enhancing , supporting , or coordinating information and intelligence dissemination to both law enforcement and homeland security agencies . officials told us that adopting a broader focus helped provide information about all threats because of the link of many crimes to terrorist activity and also increased the centers' sustainability , for instance , by including additional stakeholders . indeed , the national strategy highlights the importance of the centers fostering a culture that recognizes the importance of fusing “all crimes with national security implications” and “all hazards” information , which often involves identifying criminal activity and other information that might be a precursor to a terrorist plot .