suitability of standards . officials we interviewed at our case - study agencies told us that they are selective in their use of isc standards because the standards are not suitable for the types of facilities in their portfolio . for example , usps officials said that , consistent with isc standards , they establish a baseline level of protection at their facilities that address facility - specific functions and threats , but they do not follow some practices included in the isc standards — particularly those related to access control — because the practices are not suitable for the high degree of public access needed at post offices . likewise , va officials told us that they do not use isc standards for all of their facilities because some practices included in the standards do not cover security topics that are specific to their facilities , such as hospitals and health clinics . in response to these comments , isc officials told us that isc's standards are designed to be suitable for all facilities and to accommodate a broad range of security needs , conditions , and types of facilities . for example , isc's physical security criteria for federal facilities — one of isc's key standards — establishes a decision - making process to help agencies consistently determine the baseline level of protection needed for each facility . the criteria provide agencies the flexibility to build upon or customize the baseline level of protection to address facility - specific conditions . according to the criteria , consistency in the process used to determine a baseline level of protection for each facility is important because it helps ensure that the risks that all facilities face — regardless of the type facility — are mitigated to an acceptable level . furthermore , according to isc officials , the criteria do not prescribe specific countermeasures and , as a result , can be used by all agencies regardless of the type of facilities in their portfolio . use of other physical security standards . officials we interviewed at our case - study agencies also told us that they do not make greater use of isc standards because they have their own standards for physical security . for example , officials at doe told us that the atomic energy act was the foundation for their security program long before the isc was created and isc standards developed . additionally , doe officials told us that the act and doe's security policy derived from it establishes physical security requirements for their facilities with classified or nuclear material and that these requirements are usually more stringent than isc requirements . similarly , va officials told us that they have developed their own physical security standards that are specific to the needs of their hospital and clinic facilities , and that these standards go above and beyond isc standards . isc officials told us that , because isc standards are intended to ensure a minimum or baseline level of protection , it is appropriate for agencies to have their own requirements and standards that exceed those of isc .