implemented 1 / 2001 . ii for more details on the initiatives ) . examples of these different categories follow . an example in the first category would include ebillpay . according to usps , ebillpay , part of usps' epayments initiative , was developed primarily for the purpose of directly generating revenue from retail customers and has not generated revenue toward any existing core postal product , such as stamps . thus , usps considers epayments a stand - alone e - commerce initiative . other examples of stand - alone initiatives include netpost certified and postecs ( see app . an example of the second category of initiatives is the postal store ( an enhancement of its previous initiative , stamps online ) , which was intended primarily to provide an electronic alternative for customers desiring to purchase stamps via the internet . thus , according to usps officials , it indirectly generates revenue toward an existing usps core product , that is , postage stamps , and is not considered an e - commerce initiative . the third category of initiatives includes delivery confirmation , which is a special feature added to other products and services that is intended to provide customer ease of use as well as generate direct revenue . usps also does not consider delivery confirmation to be an e - commerce initiative . usps officials have noted that it has become increasingly difficult to separate e - commerce initiatives from core products because in the future many new products and services will involve some form of internet component . since our previous report was issued in september 2000 , usps has implemented four e - commerce - related initiatives or enhancements to initiatives that were mentioned in that report , with the exception of net post cardstore: netpost mailing online was implemented in september 2000 , netpost cardstore in december 2000 , and netpost certified in january 2001 . in addition , usps implemented enhancements to its epayments initiative in september 2001 . two other e - commerce initiatives — the postal store and moversnet ( moversguide.com ) — also mentioned in our previous report were implemented , but as of december 2001 , usps no longer considers these to be e - commerce initiatives . overall management of usps' e - commerce program has been fragmented and inconsistent across the nine business units involved in developing and managing e - commerce and internet - related initiatives . there has been no clear accountability or consistency in the development , approval , implementation , performance and day - to - day monitoring of initiatives . since our september 2000 report recommending that usps follow its processes and controls for developing and approving e - commerce initiatives , usps has made several revisions to its processes for approving and implementing e - commerce and other new internet - related products and services . however , over the past year inconsistencies remain in the implementation of usps' processes for its e - commerce activities . in september 2001 , the postmaster general announced a sweeping management restructuring , changing both the reporting structure and managers responsible for its e - commerce program . management of usps' e - commerce program has been fragmented because of various factors .