ii ) . the director stated that , as we acknowledged in our report , federal law places considerable restrictions on the disclosure of taxpayer information by irs to other federal entities , including the recovery board . he further stated that should such access to such taxpayer information be made available to the recovery board , they could more proactively work to prevent fraud , waste , and abuse of government funds . as far back as 1992 , we have said that congress should consider whether tax compliance should be a prerequisite for receiving a federal contract . in 2004 , we recommended that the director of omb develop and pursue policy options ( in accordance with restrictions on the disclosure of taxpayer information ) for prohibiting federal contract awards to contractors in cases in which abuse to the federal tax system has occurred and the tax owed is not contested . options could include designating such tax abuse as a cause for governmentwide debarment and suspension or , if allowed by statute , authorizing irs to declare such businesses and individuals ineligible for government contracts . we continue to support efforts to implement this recommendation . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly release its contents earlier we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of the financial management service , the commissioner of internal revenue , the chairman of the recovery accountability and transparency board and other interested parties . the report is also available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . our objectives were to: ( 1 ) determine , to the extent possible , the magnitude of known tax debt which is owed by recovery act contract and grant recipients ; and ( 2 ) provide examples of recovery act contract and grant recipients who have known unpaid federal taxes . to determine , to the extent possible , the magnitude of known tax debt owed by recovery act contract and grant recipients , we obtained and analyzed quarterly recipient reports submitted by contractors and grantees , as available through www.recovery.gov ( recovery.gov ) through july 2010 . specifically , we obtained all contract and grant recipient reports from the fourth quarterly submission , and all reports from prior quarterly submissions that were marked as “final” by the recipients . since recovery.gov data do not contain taxpayer identification numbers ( tins ) required for comparisons against irs tax debt data , we obtained the central contractor registry ( ccr ) database in order to obtain the tins for recovery act contract and grant recipients . we matched the data universal numbering system ( duns ) number available in the quarterly recipient reports with ccr to obtain the tins for the recovery act contract and grant recipients .