what are conflicts of interest ? a personal conflict of interest exists when an individual employed by an organization is in a position that could materially influence research findings or recommendations and may lack objectivity due to their financial interests , personal activity , or relationships . an organizational conflict of interest exists when , because of other interests or relationships , an entity is unable or potentially unable to render impartial assistance or advice to the government or the entity might have an unfair competitive advantage . the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) requires an ffrdc to conduct its business in a manner befitting its special relationship with the government and to be free from conflicts of interest . to perform its responsibilities to the sponsoring agency , an ffrdc and its employees have access beyond that which is common in a normal contractual relationship , including access to sensitive and proprietary data and information , equipment , and property . to accomplish this , the far and dod instruction state that an ffrdc must be free from conflicts of interest and fully disclose financial and outside interests to the sponsoring agency . conflicts of interest can be personal or organizational . personal conflicts of interest can be , but are not limited to , financial interests of the employee or close family members , other employment , gifts , consulting relationships , other forms of research funding or support , investment in the form of stock or bonds ownership , real estate , or business ownership . additionally , the dod instruction outlines steps ffrdc parent organizations should take to prevent and mitigate conflicts of interest . these steps include , but are not limited to , having procedures in place to screen employees for potential conflicts of interest ; requiring disclosure of financial and other interests that might affect the employee's objectivity ; establishing policies and procedures to protect proprietary , privileged , and sensitive information from disclosure ; and reporting any conflicts of interest to the applicable contracting officer or contracting officer's representative and the primary sponsor as soon as it is identified . see figure 5 for dod's conflict of interest elements outlined in the dod instruction that primary sponsors are to require from ffrdc parent organizations . each of the five s&a centers we reviewed has corporate - wide conflict of interest policies and practices which incorporate various key elements of the dod instruction . for example , all s&a center policies we reviewed have measures that require personnel to protect proprietary , privileged , and sensitive information . s&a center representatives told us they undertake various approaches in practice that meet key elements in the dod instruction in order to ensure they operate in the public interest with objectivity and independence . for example: reviewing all personnel annually or on a task - by - task basis for conflicts of interest . generally , representatives we spoke with from the five s&a centers address conflicts of interest annually or task - by - task , which is an option outlined in the dod instruction .