as the acreage affected by these natural disturbances increased , so did reforestation needs . however , funding allocated to pay for reforestation did not increase at the same rate , so needs began to accumulate . for timber stand improvement , agency officials said that management practices have been the primary factor contributing to the increase in acreage needing treatment . for example , some regions prioritize funding for reforestation treatments over timber stand improvement treatments and consequently do not treat timber stand improvement needs as quickly as they are accumulating . forest service officials acknowledge these problems and are preparing an action plan to address them . forest service officials told us that reforestation needs have been rising largely because such needs have increasingly been generated by causes other than timber harvests , and funding to address these needs has not kept pace . during the early 1990s , the agency shifted its management emphasis from timber production to enhancing forest ecosystem health and , as a result , harvested less timber . timber harvests , which provided sufficient revenue to pay for related reforestation needs , are no longer the main source of such needs . according to forest service reports , beginning around 2000 , the acreage burned in wildland fires and damaged by insects and diseases annually began to increase significantly , leaving thousands of acres needing reforestation . nationally , wildland fires burned over 8 million acres in 2000 , compared with about 2.3 million acres in 1998 . the latter approach sometimes requires the sites to be prepared by removing unwanted vegetation that could compete with young seedlings . as with reforestation , forest service staff identify areas of a forest needing timber stand improvement and plan specific treatments . these treatments are intended to provide better growing conditions for trees and include activities such as removing competing vegetation and thinning forests when trees are too crowded . in 1974 , the forest service reported a reforestation and timber stand improvement backlog affecting 3.3 million acres of forested lands . to address this backlog , the congress included a provision in the national forest management act of 1976 ( nfma ) requiring the forest service to annually report the estimated funding needed to prevent the recurrence of a backlog on lands available for timber production . the forest service primarily uses moneys generated from the sale of timber to reforest areas where timber has been harvested , whereas it relies primarily on annual appropriations to reforest areas affected by natural disturbances . in 1980 , the congress created the reforestation trust fund , which is funded through tariffs on imported wood products , to provide dedicated funding for reforestation and timber stand improvement treatments and to help eliminate the backlog . in 1985 , the forest service declared that it had virtually eliminated the backlog reported in 1974 . the forest service's implementation , management , and oversight of the reforestation and timber stand improvement program are decentralized . its headquarters and 9 regional offices establish policy and provide technical direction to 155 national forest offices on various aspects of the program .