the bureau is working with the u.s . postal service , other federal agencies , and state , local , and tribal governments on an initiative that allows government agencies at all levels to regularly share and continuously update their address lists and road data with the bureau . to help fill in gaps and better target reduced resources , in january 2015 the bureau solicited information from commercial firms on their capabilities to detect changes in addresses in local areas . to what extent does the bureau have access to these records for operational purposes ? some of the data the bureau may want to use is personally identifiable information collected for other specific purposes . in some cases , the bureau may need to enter into agreements with other agencies or levels of government to obtain access . in other cases , legislative changes may be needed to provide the bureau with the necessary access authority . the bureau will need to be sensitive to the time involved for these efforts so that it has the access it may need in time for 2020 . to what extent will the public accept the sharing of personal data across government agencies for purposes of the census ? the bureau and others have ongoing research exploring public perceptions on topics such as trust , the potential for decreased burden on respondents , and the social benefits of sharing data . this research is also exploring the factors relating to public outreach that the bureau may need to focus on in order to enhance the public's acceptance of greater use of administrative records . we have ongoing work examining the bureau's efforts to research the use of administrative records for the 2020 census , including the test in maricopa county , arizona . the bureau has relied on this operation to help identify hidden housing units — that is , people living in , for example , converted basements or lofts — as well as changes to the address list such as from newly constructed or demolished residences . to reduce the scope of this operation , the bureau is focusing on areas that it believes have experienced change , such as rapid recent housing development , and for which the bureau has no data sources capturing those changes . additionally , in february 2015 the bureau solicited commercial proposals to provide national address or imagery datasets . we anticipate issuing the results this fall . the bureau estimates it will save up to $1 billion with the successful implementation of this initiative . going forward , the bureau's success at more efficiently updating its address list and maps depends on how it resolves questions such as the following: which map and address data sources are the most cost - effective ? in october 2014 , we found that the bureau needed to implement processes for reviewing the cost and quality of data source selections and for documenting support for those decisions while documenting management approval of key data source decisions . the bureau agreed with our corrective recommendations and is taking steps to address them . the bureau has ongoing research to determine how best to measure cost and quality trade - offs in data sources .