i for more information ) . competitive grants . nifa awards nearly 40 types of competitive grants for research , extension , and higher education , as well as for projects that integrate all three activities . competitive grants are designed to enable usda to ( 1 ) attract a wide pool of applicants to work on agricultural issues of national interest and ( 2 ) select the best - quality applications submitted by highly qualified individuals , institutions , or organizations . eligibility , administrative rules , and procedures vary for each specific competitive grant program according to authorizing statutes , and nifa awards funds following external peer review of the applications . nifa's flagship competitive grant program is the agriculture and food research initiative , which funds research , education , and extension in the food and agricultural sciences and , according to nifa's website , awards grants to address agricultural problems of national , regional , or multistate importance . noncompetitive grants . before fiscal year 2011 , according to the 2011 congressional research service report , appropriated nifa funds were directed by congress to support a designated institution or set of institutions for particular research , education , or extension topics of local , regional , or national priority . these projects were supported through “special research grants” or “direct federal administration research or education grants.” recent appropriations have not included such spending items , allowing nifa to award more of its funds through competitive grants , according to usda officials . even with growing demand for agricultural research over the past decade , total appropriations for ars and nifa decreased when adjusted for inflation . specifically , from fiscal year 2002 through fiscal year 2011 , funding for ars decreased by 23 percent , from $1.2 billion to $934 million , and funding for nifa increased by more than 28 percent , from $1.1 billion to $1.3 billion . when adjusted for inflation , however , ars and nifa funding decreased by nearly 42 percent and 3 percent , respectively . to document usda's publicly funded activities , including research conducted or funded by the department , and to provide ready access to information about its research projects and related work , usda in 1966 developed cris . according to officials from nifa , which is responsible for managing this system , cris contains descriptive project - by - project information for all completed and ongoing projects carried out or funded by ars and nifa , respectively , and by some other usda agencies and state institutions . for example , criteria for the agency's agriculture and food research initiative include , among other factors , originality of proposed research and relevance to nifa priorities , including the importance of the proposed topic to agriculture . as part of their assessments , peer review panels check that the proposed work is not already funded by other grant - making agencies . according to usda officials , panelists rely on their own familiarity with work in their fields to determine whether a proposed project duplicates existing work in those fields . application forms for competitive grants . according to agency officials , they use the application process to help identify and discourage potential duplication .