for federal agencies . - febs will assess local emergency situations in cooperation with federal , state and local officials . - febs will activate established notification system for transmission of local emergency information , as prescribed by the feb's protocol ( communications plan ) . - febs will provide problem resolution assistance as appropriate , to include identifying federal resources which may be available to assist the community in responding to , or recovering from , an emergency . - febs relay local emergency situation information , by way of periodic reports to the appropriate authorities , to include , but not limited to: opm / dc , feb members , media , state and local government authorities . - febs will disseminate information received from opm / dc regarding emergency information at the national level – decision on employee work status , information from other departments / agencies , etc . - febs alert those responsible for implementing the occupant and agency emergency plans and serve as a redundant ( back - up ) communication vehicle to ensure notification . in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were william doherty , assistant director ; dominic barranca ; scott behen ; kathleen boggs ; deirdre brown ; beverly burke ; jimmy champion ; betty clark ; derrick collins ; daniel concepcion ; amber edwards ; richard guthrie ; bonnie hall ; charles hodge ; aaron kaminsky ; judith kordahl ; susan mak ; signora may ; samuel scrutchins ; gabriele tonsil ; george warnock ; and daniel zeno . conversation tools and tips . the minnesota feb has been a leader among the boards in pandemic influenza planning . using a tabletop exercise it created , the board hosted its first pandemic influenza exercise in february 2006 , with a follow - up exercise in october 2006 . the october exercise included approximately 180 participants from 100 organizations within federal agencies , state and local government , and the private sector . figure 3 illustrates the breadth of participation in the exercises , including key infrastructure businesses such as power and telecommunications . the minnesota feb executive director noted that minnesota has excellent state and local government relationships , which help to facilitate planning of this nature . examples of partnerships the board has with state and local entities include those with the state of minnesota division of homeland security and emergency management , the minnesota department of health , the st. paul chamber of commerce , and the american red cross . the implementation plan for the national strategy for pandemic influenza emphasizes that government and public health officials must communicate clearly and continuously with the public throughout a pandemic . the plan recognized that timely , accurate , credible , and coordinated messages will be necessary . according to many of the feb representatives we interviewed , the communications function of the boards is a key part of their activities and could be an important asset for pandemic response .