va's reasons seem valid . however , implementation problems relating to vha's decision to distribute hepatitis c funding through its general allocation system without alerting networks to the portion budgeted for hepatitis c activities could also be a major contributing factor . this review indicated that inpatient expenditures frequently involved treatment of secondary problems relating to advanced hepatitis c — including fluid retention in the abdomen , internal bleeding , neurological impairment , and liver cancer . treatments varied from stabilizing patients' conditions to liver transplants . our review of medical records indicates that outpatient expenditures frequently involved treatment of conditions that could preclude the use of antiviral drug therapy . for example , because excessive alcohol consumption reduces the effectiveness of antiviral therapy , vha may provide alcohol use counseling and treatment in order to provide veterans with the best opportunity to benefit from antiviral treatment . veterans who are intravenous drug users also need counseling and drug treatment before starting antiviral therapy . va's briefing paper reported that expenditures for such related medical conditions were probably undercounted for many veterans . to be counted , vha requires providers to include a hepatitis c code in its computerized records system when veterans receive inpatient or outpatient services for liver - related conditions , such as cancer ; such coding signifies that hepatitis c was a co - morbid condition . officials at one network we visited were aggressively trying to improve coding accuracy . their efforts suggest that more than half of their hepatitis c - infected veterans received treatments for hepatitis c - related conditions that were not coded as such . this problem persists systemwide , despite vha's efforts over the past 2 years to encourage — through training and other educational aids — accurate coding by providers . va officials told us that the fiscal year 2002 budget estimate for hepatitis c of $171 million includes funding for all these activities: screening , antiviral therapy , and treatment of hepatitis c - related conditions . this estimate , they said , was developed using the same estimating model that was used to identify the hepatitis c expenditures reported for fiscal year 2000 , rather than the model used to develop fiscal year 2000 and 2001 budget estimates . also , va's briefing paper reported that its budget planning process for fiscal year 2003 will include a more comprehensive revision of its hepatitis c model . in this regard , vha proposes the creation of a registry for its patients with hepatitis c infection . this registry will document important demographic and clinical data , including all inpatient and outpatient care regardless of diagnostic coding of individual episodes of care . va plans to develop a new software system to interface with existing electronic medical records , which vha estimates could become operational by the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2002 . distributions to 22 networks appear adequate , given that funding levels could support significant expansion of screening and treatment workloads . va included $340 million to screen and provide antiviral drug therapy to veterans in its fiscal year 2001 budget request .