( see fig . each plan describes an agency's overall strategic and tactical approach in managing its real property , provides a rationale for and justifies its optimum portfolio , and directs the identification and execution of real property disposals , efficiency improvements , general usage , and cost - savings measures . the content analysis of the plans helped us to understand the approaches agencies used to reduce space , how space - reduction targets were set , and any challenges they experienced in reducing their space . to identify agencies' approaches to achieving their rtf targets , we reviewed all agencies' plans to determine the most frequently mentioned approaches agencies reported using or planned to use to reduce their real - property footprints . as part of their plans , each agency is required to include a section detailing approaches it plans to use to reduce space . while these sections were the primary focus of the analysis , we analyzed the plans as a whole for any additional mention of agencies' approaches to reduce space . based on the frequently identified approaches , codes were developed . an analyst reviewed all the agencies' plans and coded the approaches and another analyst reviewed the coding . if there was a disagreement , the two analysts reviewed and discussed until they reached an agreement . as a result of the analysis , five approaches were identified that agencies most frequently reported using or were planning to use to achieve their rtf targets . also , agencies are responsible for supervising decontamination of excess and surplus real property that has been contaminated with hazardous materials of any sort . in its fiscal year 2017 plan , energy estimated that over 60 percent of its excess buildings require extensive decontamination prior to disposal . the federal government is committed to reducing vacant and underutilized real property and its associated costs . federal real property management has been on our high - risk list since 2003 , in part because we have found that the government maintains more property than it needs . in 2012 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) directed the 24 chief financial officers ( cfo ) act agencies to “freeze” their footprint and maintain their civilian real estate inventory at or below their then - current levels . co - location: thirteen of the 24 agencies' plans stated that they are exploring or implementing co - location projects to reduce space by merging staff from different components or agencies into another agency's space . for example , the social security administration ( ssa ) recently initiated a co - location pilot program with the internal revenue service ( irs ) within treasury to combine ssa field offices with irs taxpayer assistance centers . co - location of operations can reduce the overall space required by allowing agencies to share common space such as waiting rooms , an action that can reduce rent and operating costs for the co - located agencies . since the inception of the 1-year program in january 2017 , four irs offices are participating and have moved into ssa field offices . we received technical comments from energy , which we incorporated , where appropriate .