dhs concurred with our recommendation . according to fema officials , to address our past recommendation they have developed quality assurance tools to verify and validate the post - award grant monitoring information that awardees are required to provide as part of their progress and close - out reports . however , they said that the regional offices have not yet implemented these tools and gpd is developing an implementation work plan that includes additional verification steps . gpd officials said they are negotiating a memorandum of understanding to provide structure and guidance to the 10 regional offices , and plan to distribute quality assurance tools to the regional offices , once this agreement is in place . as these efforts are ongoing , our recommendation will remain open until fema demonstrates that they have fully implemented the additional verification and validation steps . substantiating the post - award , grant monitoring information that awardees are required to provide will be important , particularly in light of recently completed assessments of afg and safer grants' post - award activities by the dhs office of inspector general . specifically , the inspector general reported in june 2016 that gpd did not sufficiently manage or oversee afg or safer grants , grantees did not comply with grant guidance and requirements , and , as a result , fema cannot ensure grant funds were spent appropriately or used for their intended purpose . fema concurred and is planning to implement validation processes by december 31 , 2016 . the data that fema collects and analyzes for two of its program measures do not fully align with national standards used for similar assessments related to national preparedness efforts . as a result , the information that fema reports will be of limited utility for broader national preparedness assessments . specifically , in developing its 21 performance assessment system measures , fema identified a subset of six measures as program priority measures that were intended to identify the afg and safer programs' contributions to promoting fire safety and national preparedness . two of these measures are designed to help describe the extent to which afg and safer grantees are “responsible for protecting critical infrastructure.” according to fema , fire grant program policies define critical infrastructure as “any system or asset that if attacked would result in catastrophic loss of life or catastrophic economic loss” and include a list of examples , such as public water and power systems , chemical facilities , and facilities that support large public gatherings , such as sporting events or concerts . using this definition , fire grant applicants indicate on their applications whether they have critical infrastructure within their jurisdiction , and fema counts the instances when applicants provide this information on their application . for example , for fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , 91 percent of all fire grant applicants indicated that they had critical infrastructure within their jurisdictions .