dept . dept . dept . dept . dept . we reported in february 2004 that strategies themselves are not endpoints , but rather , starting points , and , as with any strategic planning effort , implementation is the key . this work also reported that the ultimate measure of these strategies' value will be the extent to which they are useful as guidance for policy and decision makers in allocating resources and priorities . however , for an undertaking such as developing a national biosurveillance capability , those policy and decision makers are spread across the interagency and intergovernmental network . in our work related to combating terrorism , we reported that an interagency and intergovernmental undertaking can benefit from the leadership of a single entity with sufficient time , responsibility , authority , and resources needed to provide assurance that the federal programs are based upon a coherent strategy , are well coordinated , and that gaps and duplication in capabilities are avoided . according to our analysis of requirements in laws and presidential directives related to biosurveillance , a focal point has not been established with responsibility and authority for ensuring the development of a robust , integrated , national biosurveillance capability . the mission responsibilities and resources needed to develop a biosurveillance capability are dispersed across a number of federal agencies , and , according to officials at a number of federal agencies — cdc , usda , and dhs — chief among them , agencies have capabilities that could be leveraged to support a robust , integrated , national biosurveillance capability . however , our analysis indicates that no entity has the responsibility , authority , and accountability for working across agency boundaries to guide and oversee the development and implementation of a national effort that encompasses all stakeholders with biosurveillance responsibilities . for example , cdc has been given the operational lead for developing the vision of hspd - 21 for a human health biosurveillance capability . however , according to cdc officials , responsibility for developing a national biosurveillance capability that includes human as well as animal , plant , food , and environmental surveillance has not been assigned to a single entity such as an intergovernmental council , a federal agency , or an individual official . officials in various agencies have taken the lead to fulfill their agencies' biosurveillance missions , but they lack authority to direct other agencies with whom they must partner to take specific action . for example , cdc has undertaken some efforts to coordinate federal efforts relating to human and zoonotic disease surveillance , but according to cdc officials , it has limited authority to ensure the implementation of specific activities at other agencies . according to cdc officials , an overarching organizational mechanism and clearly articulated roles and responsibilities across the separate surveillance programs that serve a range of purposes could help address common surveillance issues within cdc and across the biosurveillance enterprise by coordinating communication and planning . officials from cdc , dod , dhs , usda , and hhs stated that having a focal point would help coordinate federal efforts to develop a national biosurveillance capability .