gao - 06-643 . washington , d.c.: may 25 , 2006 . these units were judgmentally selected . combating terrorism: selected challenges and related recommendations . gao - 01-822 . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2001 . while we cannot generalize the results of these discussions to all units , they were selected to provide a cross section of units from different services , from both the active and reserve forces , and from units that will provide either specialized cbrne capabilities or general support capabilities . to determine ccmrf fund planning and the linkage to mission requirements , we met with officials from northern command , army north , army forces command , and the army reserve command to discuss mission funding requirements and funding sources . we also reviewed guidance and funding plans to determine efforts to develop ccmrf - unique requirements and to identify the status of funding plans for meeting requirements . we met with the national guard bureau to discuss their current capabilities , identified shortfalls , and their approach to mitigate any identifiable shortfalls . further , we reviewed program - identified funding shortfalls to determine the impact of planning , coordination , and execution of homeland defense training and readiness exercises . we discussed with unit officials the funding guidance that their units were provided to meet the ccmrf mission and obtained their perspectives on the extent to which additional specialized equipment beyond the units' standard equipment would be needed to perform the ccmrf mission . we also discussed funding requirements with officials from the department of the army to determine long - term funding plans for units designated for the ccmrf mission . we also met with u.s. army reserve command officials to determine equipment and training costs for general support and commercial - off - the - shelf equipment costs for technical support units for the ccmrf mission . in addressing our objectives , we reviewed plans and related documents , obtained information , and interviewed officials at the following locations: united states northern command , peterson air force base , colorado joint forces command , norfolk , virginia the office of the secretary of defense , washington , d.c . the joint chiefs of staff , washington , d.c. joint task force civil support , ft. monroe , virginia u. s. army north , ft. sam houston , texas army forces command , ft. mcpherson , georgia army reserve command , ft. mcpherson , georgia national guard bureau , arlington , virginia department of homeland security , washington , d.c. federal emergency management agency , washington , d.c. we conducted our review from february 2008 to october 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . davi m. d'agostino , ( 202 ) 512-5431 or dagostinod@gao.gov .