controlled . a schedule is controlled if it is updated regularly by trained schedulers using actual progress and logic to realistically forecast dates for program activities . it is compared to a designated baseline schedule to measure , monitor , and report the program's progress . the baseline schedule is accompanied by a baseline document that explains the overall approach to the program , defines ground rules and assumptions , and describes the unique features of the schedule . the baseline schedule and current schedule are subject to a configuration management control process . gmm's schedule was unreliable because it minimally addressed three characteristics — comprehensive , credible , and controlled — and did not address the fourth characteristic of a reliable estimate — well - constructed . one of the most significant issues was that the program's fast approaching , final delivery date of september 2020 was not informed by a realistic assessment of gmm development activities , and rather was determined by imposing an unsubstantiated delivery date . table 4 summarizes our assessment of gmm's schedule . in discussing the reasons for the shortfalls in these practices , program officials stated that they had been uncertain about the level of rigor that should be applied to the gmm schedule , given their use of agile development . however , leading practices state that program schedules should meet all the scheduling practices , regardless of whether a program is using agile development . as discussed earlier in this report , gmm has already experienced significant schedule delays . for example , the legacy data migration effort , the afg pilot , and the agile development contract have been delayed . program officials also stated that the delay in awarding and starting the agile contract has delayed other important activities , such as establishing time frames for transitioning legacy systems . a more robust schedule could have helped fema predict the impact of delays on remaining activities and identify which activities appeared most critical so that the program could ensure that any risks in delaying those activities were properly mitigated . in response to our review and findings , program officials recognized the need to continually enhance their schedule practices to improve the management and communication of program activities . as a result , in august 2018 , the officials stated that they planned to add a master scheduler to the team to improve the program's schedule practices and ensure that all of the areas of concern we identified are adequately addressed . in october 2018 , the officials reported that they had recently added two master schedulers to gmm . according to the statement of objectives , the agile contractor is expected to develop an integrated master schedule soon after it begins performance . however , program officials stated that gmm is schedule - driven — due to the executive steering group's expectation that the solution will be delivered by september 2020 . the officials added that , if gmm encounters challenges in meeting this time frame , the program plans to seek additional resources to allow it to meet the 2020 target . gmm's schedule - driven approach has already led to an increase in estimated costs and resources .