app . iv provides more detailed information about differences between divisions in the number and proportion of ndas with these key features. ) we also found differences between divisions in the proportion of ndas that they reviewed under an expedited program — the fourth key feature of ndas . for example , none of the ndas reviewed by the metabolism and endocrinology division qualified for one or more expedited programs , while 52 percent of the ndas reviewed by the antiviral division qualified for one or more expedited programs . ( see fig . app . v provides more detailed information about differences between divisions in the number and proportion of ndas that qualified for one or more expedited programs. ) it is not unexpected that divisions differ in the proportion of their applications with key features linked to fda's time frames for review or qualification for expedited programs because the divisions are responsible for different products . for example , some divisions , such as the oncology divisions , regulate products for conditions that are more likely to be serious or life - threatening , and therefore the ndas reviewed by these divisions are more likely to qualify for priority review designation and expedited programs , compared with other divisions , such as the dermatology and dental division . our analysis of review times for the 637 original ndas submitted from fiscal years 2014 through 2018 shows that fda divisions differed in the number of days they took to complete their initial reviews . for example , the median time taken to complete an initial review of an nda by the anti - infective division was about 2 months faster than the median time taken by the gastroenterology and inborn errors division . ( for more information about initial review times , see app . vi. ) we found , however , that these differences in initial review times largely reflected key features of the ndas reviewed by the divisions , particularly those features linked to fda's time frames for review under its pdufa goals . we analyzed initial review times using a statistical regression with two variables reflecting key features of the ndas — target time frame for review of the application under fda's pdufa goals ( in days , from fda's receipt of the nda to fda's targeted date for completion of the initial review ) and number of expedited programs ( 0 , 1 , or 2 or more ) — along with division as independent variables . we found that each of these variables was a significant determinant of initial review times . specifically , our regression analysis shows that on average the shorter the target time frame for initial review of the nda under fda's pdufa goals , the shorter the initial review , and this target time frame was responsible for the majority of variation in initial review times . the greater the number of expedited programs for which the nda qualified , the shorter the time fda took to complete the initial review . controlling for the effects of these key nda features , however , we found that most of the divisions' average review times were similar to ( within 2 weeks of ) each other .