liquidity . our indicator of liquidity is short - term debt ( excluding deposit liabilities ) as a percentage of total consolidated assets ( excluding separate account assets ) . we calculated each indicator for each designated nonbank for each quarter from the second quarter of 2012 to the second quarter of 2015 . we also calculated the medians of each indicator for publicly traded banks and insurance companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more to provide a frame of reference . we control for whether or not a bank holding company participated in the capital purchase program component of the troubled asset relief program to differentiate any impact that this program may have had from the impact of the dodd - frank act . we also conducted several sets of robustness checks: we restricted our sample to the set of institutions with assets that are “close” to the $50 billion cutoff for enhanced prudential regulation for bank sifis . specifically , we analyzed two restricted samples of bank holding companies: ( 1 ) bank holding companies with assets between $25 billion and $75 billion and ( 2 ) bank holding companies with assets between $1 billion and $100 billion . we examined different treatment start dates . specifically , we allowed the dodd - frank act's new requirements for sifis to have an impact in the third quarter of 2009 , 1 year before the passage of the act . we did so to allow for the possibility that institutions began to react to the act's requirements in anticipation of the act being passed . we allowed the effect of the treatment to vary by quarter to allow for the possibility that the impact of the act varied over time . we conducted our analysis using quarterly data on top - tier u.s. bank holding companies that filed form fr y - 9c , including top - tier u.s. - based bank holding company subsidiaries of foreign banking organizations . we analyzed these companies for the period from the first quarter of 2006 through the second quarter of 2015 . we obtained these data from the federal reserve bank of chicago and the board of governors of the federal reserve system . while some of the sifi - related rulemakings have yet to be implemented , our estimates are suggestive of the initial effects of the dodd - frank act on bank sifis and provide a baseline against which to compare future results . our baseline estimates suggest that the dodd - frank act has not been associated with a significant change in funding costs of bank sifis ( see table 15 ) . to the extent that the cost of credit provided by bank sifis is a function of their funding costs , the new requirements for sifis are likely to have had little effect on the cost of credit to date through the funding cost channel . our estimates also suggest that the dodd - frank act is associated with improvements in some measures of bank sifis' safety and soundness . bank sifis appear to be holding more tangible common equity as a percentage of assets than they otherwise would have held since dodd - frank act enactment ( see panel 1 in table 15 ) .