it does a lot of good . floods are horrible occurrences . a homeowner sees the water coming but can do nothing to stop it . the smell is horrible . whole communities are affected , and the emotional toll is tremendous . i have seen the nfip do great good for many people.” each of the interviewees , when asked how the nfip could be improved , said that fema should look for ways to make the program less complex and more similar to other property insurance programs . for example , a vendor manager noted , “if the customers , the agents , and the adjusters all have difficulty understanding the program , it is too complicated.” “as fema has tried to make the flood program more actuarily sound , it has made it more complex . fema has required of us more information , more forms , and more photos to be scanned into files . those requirements cost money to implement . as an industry , we are looking at how the flood line might be more compatible with other lines of insurance business to be more cost - efficient . now the flood business is so unique that it requires special handling.” fema officials said that some documentation ( i.e. , elevation certificates ) is required because the nfip is part of fema's broader flood plain management strategy that combines insurance protection with hazard mitigation to reduce future flood damage to homes . the officials noted that , while the nfip has different requirements than homeowners insurance , it is not necessarily more complex and that the more familiar agents become with the requirements of the nfip , the easier it becomes for them to routinely handle documentation requirements . congress mandated that within 6 months of the enactment of the flood insurance reform act , fema establish ( 1 ) insurance agent education and training requirements , ( 2 ) new processes for explaining coverage to policyholders when they purchase and renew policies , and ( 3 ) an appeals process for claimants who are dissatisfied with the settlement of their claims . the 6-month mandated deadline elapsed on december 30 , 2004 , but fema is still working to complete these mandated efforts . according to fema officials , in order to address the requirements to establish insurance agent education and training and for explaining coverage to policyholders , the agency must go through the rule - making process . fema officials also said to address the requirement for explaining policy coverage , they are waiting for dhs approval before finalizing the draft materials that will accompany the flood insurance policy . when dhs approves the draft materials , they will be published in the federal register as part of the rule - making process . regarding the requirement for an appeals process , the agency must initiate and complete formal rule making . fema officials said that this process takes more than 6 months and could not be completed within the mandated time frame . to address the requirement in the flood insurance reform act of 2004 to establish insurance agent education and training requirements , fema is working with state insurance commissions .