gao - 09-530r . washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2009 . coast guard: administrative law judge program contains elements designed to foster judges' independence and mariner protections assessed are being followed . gao - 09-489 . washington , d.c.: june 12 , 2009 . the coast guard has implemented or is in the process of implementing these recommendations . gao - 09-620t . washington , d.c.: april 22 , 2009 . other management challenges associated with the deepwater program have operational or mission performance implications for the coast guard . our prior reports and testimonies have identified problems with management and oversight of the deepwater program that have led to delivery delays and other operational challenges for certain assets — particularly ( 1 ) patrol boats and their anticipated replacements , the fast response cutters and ( 2 ) and the national security cutters . the coast guard is working to overcome these issues , as discussed below . as we reported in june 2008 , under the original ( 2002 ) deepwater implementation plan , all 49 of the coast guard's 110-foot patrol boats were to be converted into 123-foot patrol boats with increased capabilities as a bridging strategy until their replacement vessel ( the fast response cutter ) became operational . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a component of dhs , the coast guard is a multimission military service that serves as the principal federal agency responsible for maritime safety , security , and environmental stewardship . in addition to being one of the five armed services of the united states , the coast guard serves as a law enforcement and regulatory agency with broad domestic authorities . in its most recent posture statement , the coast guard reported having nearly 49,900 full - time positions — about 42,600 military and 7,300 civilians . in addition , the service reported that it has about 8,100 reservists who support the national military strategy or provide additional operational support or surge capacity during times of emergency , such as natural disasters . the coast guard also reported that it utilizes the services of approximately 29,000 volunteer auxiliary personnel who conduct a wide array of activities , ranging from search and rescue to boating education . the coast guard has responsibilities that fall under two broad mission categories — homeland security and non - homeland security . within these categories , the coast guard's primary activities are further divided into 11 statutory missions , as shown in table 1 . for each of these 11 missions , the coast guard has developed performance measures to communicate agency performance and provide information for the budgeting process to congress , other policymakers , and taxpayers . each year , the coast guard undergoes a process to assess performance and establish performance targets for the subsequent year . in may 2009 , the coast guard published its most recent performance report , which presents the service's accomplishments for fiscal year 2008 . to help carry out its missions , the coast guard has a large - scale acquisition program , called deepwater , under way to modernize its fleet .