( recommendation 3 ) . in written comments reproduced in appendix ii , dod concurred with all three recommendations and noted the actions it was taking to address each recommendation . in response to our third recommendation , dod noted that it has completed an extensive review of manpower requirements for the management structure of the dha . information on efforts to maximize efficiencies in the activities carried out by the dha . in its plan , dod included information about its three principle efforts currently underway to address efficiencies . specifically , dod describes its broader efforts to streamline clinical and business processes across the military health system and links some of these broader initiatives to section 702 . we found that the dha had not completed the personnel requirements assessment process or developed a baseline estimate of personnel in the military health system before the dha was created . as discussed previously , we made five recommendations , with which dod concurred or partially concurred . as of january 2018 , dod had not taken action to fully address three of these recommendations . dod addressed each of the four statutory elements in its june 2018 plan . dod dedicated most of the plan to describing the governance structure of dod's new administrative framework and to describing the schedule for the phased transfer of the administration of approximately 457 mtfs to the dha by october 1 , 2021 . dod's plan provided less detail on addressing efforts to eliminate duplicative activities ; maximizing efficiency ; and reducing the number of headquarters - level military , civilian , and contractor personnel . the following provides a summary of what dod's plan included for each of the four elements in the statute: information on efforts to transfer the administration of the mtfs to the dha . in its plan , dod described the transfer of the mtfs to the dha , including budgetary matters , information technology , health care administration and management , administrative policy and procedure , military medical construction , and all other mtf operations . dod dedicated most of the plan to describing the ( 1 ) new governance structure of the proposed administrative framework model and ( 2 ) timeline for the phased transfer of the administration of the 457 mtfs from the military departments' respective medical commands to the dha . for example , dod states that military health system governance will shift its focus from consensus - driven bodies that address both policy and management issues to a smaller , streamlined set of oversight councils that focus on high - level , military health system - wide policy and budgetary matters . according to the plan , the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs will resolve matters that involve both the military departments and the dha . dod also stated that the dha plans to establish six intermediate management organizations ( two for each region ) to assist with the administration and management of the mtfs , which are broken out as follows: an east region , a west region , and outside the united states .