portfolio review . agencies are to annually review it investment portfolios in order to , among other things , increase efficiency and effectiveness and identify potential waste and duplication . in establishing the process associated with such portfolio reviews , the law requires omb to develop standardized performance metrics , to include cost savings , and to submit quarterly reports to congress on cost savings . expansion of training and use of it acquisition cadres . however , this particular acquisition was approved by an it project manager . further , two agencies allowed their cios to delegate it acquisition approvals to other officials , without having these assignments approved by omb . for example , three of nasa's selected acquisitions were reviewed and approved by the component cios ; however , nasa had not had these assignments approved by omb . approval of other documentation . in 26 instances , cios or designees reviewed and approved acquisition documentation other than the required acquisition plan or strategy . for example , cios or designees reviewed and approved documents such as a requisition , a procurement request , or a business case analysis . while the cios or designees reviewed and approved some form of acquisition documentation prior to the award of these acquisitions , these forms of documentation did not have all the elements typically associated with an acquisition plan . as a result , the cio ( or designee ) may not have been adequately equipped to make an informed decision about the acquisition . undocumented approvals . we identified 2 instances where the agency reported that the cio or designee approved the it acquisition , but did not document the approval . for example , regarding one contract , commerce officials stated that one of the agency's selected acquisitions was reviewed and approved by its component cio for the bureau of economic analysis . however , the agency could not provide evidence to show the cio's approval beyond an e - mail after the contract was signed stating that the cio was aware of and had approved that particular acquisition . until agencies fully satisfy fitara and omb's requirements by ensuring that cios , or their appropriate designees , review and approve it acquisitions , cios risk continuing to have limited visibility and input into their agencies' planned it expenditures and not being able to use the increased authority that fitara's contract approval provision is intended to provide . in addition , agencies are missing an opportunity to strengthen cios' authority and to provide needed direction and oversight of their it acquisitions . as a result , agencies may award it contracts that are duplicative , wasteful , or poorly conceived . given the history of failures and amount of money at stake , it is imperative that agencies properly oversee it acquisitions . while the 22 selected agencies reported $14.7 billion in it obligations , 21 agencies did not identify $4.5 billion as it . further , because the selected agencies did not always identify their it acquisitions , it is likely that agencies have additional unidentified it spending .