see figure 2 . of the 5 contracts where the follow - on requirement was competed , the contract values and circumstances varied , as illustrated by the following examples: the air force awarded a 5-year $76 million competitive follow - on contract for base operations support to replace a 10-year $523 million sole - source contract . officials told us that they made a concerted effort to engage different 8 ( a ) firms for the follow - on contract because their market research indicated that multiple firms could meet the requirement . although they had to award two short - term sole - source 8 ( a ) bridge contracts to the incumbent to meet the requirement while preparing the competitive follow - on award , once the requirement was opened for competition , they received proposals from seven vendors and awarded the competitive contract to a new vendor . in addition to shortening the period of performance , they removed a construction component of the requirement , and officials told us the removed component is now being met through a multiple award idiq contract that was competitively awarded to six vendors . the contracting officials also stated that they were exploring possible ways to insource other functions previously performed under the sole - source contract . the army competitively awarded a 4-year $140 million contract for base operations support , which was previously met by a 10-year $397 million sole - source 8 ( a ) contract . the contracting office had to award three short - term sole - source bridge contracts to the incumbent vendor to provide more time to prepare a competitive follow - on award . however , during the competitive process , six 8 ( a ) firms competed for the follow - on award and the current contract value is about $7 million less annually than the value of the most recent sole - source bridge contract . the follow - on award went to an 8 ( a ) firm owned by the same tribal entity as the incumbent firm . the navy awarded a competitive follow - on to a $49 million sole - source contract for engineering services . the requirement is now met by a multiple award idiq contract to six 8 ( a ) vendors with a total value of $99 million . a navy contracting official told us that the prior sole - source 8 ( a ) contract was one of many contracts providing similar services across this particular command , and , in 2011 , the contracting office implemented a new contracting strategy that would increase competition and meet its small business goals . this official noted that the multiple award contract is intended to avoid duplicative contracts across various contracting offices and that this new strategy is expected to result in cost savings . officials from almost half of the 14 offices we spoke with noted that a decline in budgets or a decline in the size of requirements rendered the 8 ( a ) justification not applicable because most of their contracts fall below the $20 million threshold .