ii ) . we also received technical comments from nih , which we incorporated where appropriate , and oral comments from seven external reviewers . the external reviewers represented industry and patient organizations . they included the american association of kidney patients ( aakp ) ; the renal physicians association ( rpa ) ; dialysis clinic , inc. ( dci ) , the largest nonprofit dialysis chain ; fresenius medical care ( fmc ) , the largest for - profit dialysis chain ; the national kidney foundation , a foundation for the prevention and treatment of kidney disease ; the national renal administrators association ( nraa ) , which represents employees at dialysis facilities ; and the renal leadership council ( rlc ) , an association representing the four largest for - profit dialysis facility chains . in commenting on a draft of this report , cms generally agreed with our findings and our conclusion that all outpatient dialysis services should be bundled into a single prospective payment amount based on facilities' allowable costs . although in the draft report we had also recommended that cms redesign the prospective payment system for dialysis facilities to bundle the costs of services , including separately billed drugs , into one payment amount , in its comments cms noted that it would not have the statutory authority to implement such a system . cms also noted that mma requires the secretary of hhs to report to the congress by october 1 , 2005 , on the elements and features necessary in the design and implementation of a broader payment system . the secretary is also required to conduct a 3-year demonstration project , beginning january 1 , 2006 , using a payment system incorporating patient characteristics identified in the report . cms also asked that we recognize its research on a bundled payment system that has been under way since october 2000 . as a result of these comments , we deleted the recommendation in the draft report . in addition , although mma was discussed in our draft report , we more prominently highlighted it and cms's research in the report . cms also stated that while our findings on beneficiary access were reassuring , it is concerned that we did not specifically address access issues at the regional level . according to cms , its staff has been told that hospitals in certain regions , such as new england and new york , are having difficulty discharging and placing esrd patients in dialysis facilities in those areas . we acknowledged in the draft report that supply varied geographically and by treatment method . we based our findings on aggregate indicators , such as trends in numbers of stations and facilities relative to the beneficiary population , which all suggested that access had been stable from 1998 through 2001 . we would not have been able to identify the extent to which supply has changed since 2001 , as 2001 data were the most recent available at the time of our analysis . comments from the industry representatives and patient organizations centered on three different areas: beneficiary access to dialysis , the data used in our analysis of medicare payment adequacy , and the appropriateness of the current payment methodology .