standardization . through a contract for the standards harmonization process for health it , hhs is promoting the implementation of standards required to enable the exchange of electronic health information in federal health care programs , as well as ensure the interoperability of electronic health records and it systems . such standards are essential for the development of a nationwide health information network . the contractor , in collaboration with the national institute for standards and technology , selected initial standards to address specific areas identified by the american health information community . these standards address , among other things , requirements for message and document formats , along with technical network requirements . according to the contractor , the secretary announced the recognition of these standards in january 2008 after a year - long period of review and testing by healthcare providers , government agencies , consumers and other stakeholders . federal agencies that administer or sponsor federal health programs are now required to implement these standards , in accordance with president bush's august 2006 executive order . networking and information exchange . the office of the national coordinator has taken steps to enable health care entities — such as providers , hospitals , and clinical labs — to exchange electronic health information on a nationwide basis . hhs has awarded nationwide health information network contracts that were designed to provide prototypes of national networks of health information exchanges . these exchanges are intended to connect providers and patients from different regions of the country and enable the sharing of electronic health information , such as health records and laboratory results . together , these connections are intended to form the “network of networks” that is envisioned to be the nationwide health information network . according to hhs , in early 2007 its contractors delivered final prototypes that could form the foundation of a nationwide network for health information exchange . in october 2007 , the secretary of health and human services announced the award of contracts totaling $22.3 million to nine regional and state health information exchanges to begin trial implementations of the nationwide health information network . at the end of the first contract year — september 2008 — hhs intends for the nine organizations and the federal agencies that provide health care services to test their ability to work together and to demonstrate real - time information exchange based upon nationwide health information exchange specifications that they define . hhs plans to place these specifications and related testing materials in the public domain , so that they can be used by other health information exchange organizations to guide their efforts to adopt interoperable health it . health information privacy and security . hhs has taken steps to further address privacy and security issues associated with the nationwide exchange of personal health information . in june 2007 , hhs reported the outcomes of its privacy and security solutions contract based on the work of 34 states and territories that participated in the contract . a final summary report described variations among organization - level business practices , policies , and laws for protecting health information that could affect organizations' abilities to exchange data .