omb circular no . a - 11 requires agencies to report obligations and outlays on a quarterly basis at the appropriation level ; however , those reports on budget execution and budgetary resources do not call for separately identifying amounts on a programmatic basis , such as hurricane relief and recovery efforts . thus , reporting under this circular will not provide the information needed to monitor the status of hurricane - related funding . although fema was required to provide weekly reports to the congress on obligation and expenditure information on the $42.6 billion it received ( although with limited usefulness as discussed previously ) , most of the other 22 agencies that received over $45 billion would only be responsible for tracking this information internally . while there are some reporting requirements included in the emergency supplemental appropriation acts , overall reporting requirements differ greatly . also , the reporting requirements do not call for consolidating information on obligations and expenditures on a governmentwide basis and , therefore , do not facilitate governmentwide reporting on hurricane - related spending . the reporting requirements that were included for the various agencies ranged from very detailed reporting to no reporting at all . for example , while fema was required to report obligations and expenditures , 16 other federal agencies did not have any reporting requirements . see appendix ii for more information on the reporting requirements included in the first four emergency supplemental appropriations acts . given that consolidated governmentwide reporting will require that financial information be compiled from 23 different agencies , an entity that regularly collects and compiles information from different agencies , such as omb or the department of the treasury , would likely be in the best position for requesting this information and preparing consolidated governmentwide reporting on hurricane - related funding . other options would be for either fema or the office of the federal coordinator for gulf coast rebuilding to compile this information . success in the rebuilding efforts of the gulf coast area is critical . the federal government has already invested billions of dollars for this effort with more likely to come . although fema is required to report on obligations and expenditures , these reports do not provide timely information from a governmentwide perspective . in addition , there is no framework or mechanisms in place to collect and consolidate information , and to report on the $88 billion in hurricane relief and recovery funds provided thus far to 23 federal agencies in the four emergency supplemental appropriations acts on a governmentwide basis . the government's progress in the rebuilding efforts will be difficult to measure if decision makers do not know how much has been spent , what for , how much has been obligated but not yet spent , and how much more is still available . without consistent , reliable , and timely governmentwide information on the use of this funding , the agencies and the congress could lose visibility over these funds and not know the extent to which they are being used to support hurricane relief and recovery efforts .