we agree . however , our report noted that multiple systems measuring the same parameter suggested the potential for unnecessary duplication and we recommended that noaa analyze the extent to which unnecessary duplication exists in its portfolio of observing systems . noaa also provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of commerce , the noaa administrator , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or fennella@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vii . this report ( 1 ) identifies and describes the ocean , coastal , and great lakes observing systems the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's ( noaa ) operates , ( 2 ) identifies the annual operations and maintenance costs of these systems for fiscal years 2012 through 2014 , and ( 3 ) examines the extent to which noaa has taken steps to integrate and improve the cost - effectiveness of its portfolio of observing systems , including ocean , coastal , and great lakes systems . to identify which of noaa's observing systems collect data on oceans , coasts , and the great lakes , we first identified a list of environmental variables , known as “parameters” related to the ocean , coast , and great lakes . after consulting with noaa officials , we determined that national aeronautics and space administration's global change master directory contained the federal government's most complete list of these environmental parameters . the directory is a web - based catalogue that we accessed in october 2013 to identify the 74 environmental parameters it contained related to the oceans , coasts , and great lakes . for example , the environmental parameters we identified included wave direction , sea level , salinity , and ocean temperature . in addition , we also identified another environmental parameter , stock assessment , based on noaa documentation and interviews with noaa officials . our final number of environmental parameters related to noaa's ocean , coastal , and great lakes observing systems totaled 75 . see appendix ii for a list of the 75 environmental parameters we identified . we then reviewed all of the systems that make up noaa's observing systems portfolio , as captured in its observing system architecture database , to identify which ones collect data on at least one of the 75 environmental parameters . this review identified 47 ocean , coastal , and great lakes observing systems . to obtain our final list of 41 systems , we excluded observing systems that , according to noaa documentation , are not yet deployed or collect data for short - term , limited - scope research experiments . if noaa's documentation was unclear for a specific observing system , we spoke with the noaa officials responsible for the system to determine whether the system was operational .