we did not make recommendations to dod in this report . we removed five contracts and eight orders from our sample . of the five contracts , we removed three contracts from our sample because they were incorrectly classified in fpds - ng as having been competed when they were not ; one contract because it was terminated after award due to a bid protest ; and one contract because it was classified . similarly , of the eight orders , we removed seven from our sample because they were incorrectly classified in fpds - ng as being competitively awarded when they were not and one because it was incorrectly identified as having a value over $5 million . after removing these contracts and orders , our generalizable sample consisted of 89 contracts and 83 orders . by tracing relevant fpds - ng data to the contracts and orders we reviewed , we determined these data were sufficiently reliable for us to project the number of contracts and orders valued over $5 million that the army , navy , air force , and dla competitively awarded in fiscal year 2017 using the lpta process . to identify the reasons why contracting officials chose to use the lpta process and to assess whether those officials considered the eight criteria in section 813 , we selected from our sample six contracts and eight orders that used the lpta process . we selected these 14 contracts and orders to include a mix of the most frequently purchased products and services . of these 14 contracts and orders , four orders were for services for which section 813 directs dod to avoid using the lpta source selection process , to the maximum extent practicable . for all of these selected contracts and orders , we obtained and analyzed relevant contract file documents including the acquisition plan , solicitation , and source selection decision document , and we interviewed contracting officials . findings from our review of these 14 contracts and orders cannot be generalized to all contracts and orders that used the lpta process . we also reviewed applicable sections of the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , the dfars , and dod's march 2016 source selection procedures to identify existing criteria regarding the appropriate use of the lpta process . we conducted this performance audit from january 2018 through november 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . far part 15 describes the use of several competitive source selection processes to meet agency needs , which include the lpta process and tradeoff process on a best value continuum ( see fig . the far states that when using the lpta process , tradeoffs are not permitted . this resulted in the identification of approximately 3,000 contracts .