further details are provided in appendix i . we obtained relevant documentation and interviewed officials from the following organizations: office of under secretary of defense for intelligence ; office of under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and office of performance assessments and root cause analyses ; director of operational test and evaluation ; cost assessment and program evaluation ; acquisition intelligence requirements task force and executive defense intelligence agency ; defense acquisition university ; u.s. marine corps ; u.s. air force ; office of the director of national intelligence we conducted this performance audit from december 2015 to november 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we defined intelligence input in this report as any action , process , or product that involved or included the participation of an intelligence professional and was provided for a specific acquisition program , and we then grouped the intelligence inputs we identified by inputs with similar names , document sources , or categories . to confirm our appropriate identification of intelligence inputs , we created a data collection instrument based on the spreadsheet of identified intelligence inputs . the instrument asked respondents to identify , for an acquisition category i program initiated as of june 1 , 2016 , ( 1 ) when , if at all , each of the identified intelligence inputs would be used throughout its acquisition lifecycle ; ( 2 ) whether their office would provide input for each entry we identified ; ( 3 ) whether these inputs are required to be provided ; and ( 4 ) to provide any comments or additional inputs , if necessary . for programs begun prior to milestone a , the intelligence inputs that we identified from a review of dod's acquisition - related guidance are to be provided prior to milestone a review , with several updated at points prior to subsequent milestone reviews . the responses to our data collection instrument from the joint staff , usd ( i ) , dia , and the service intelligence community indicated that each intelligence input we identified had one or more respondent reporting that the respondent's office would make that input , which verified the individual inputs we identified ( see table 3 ) . dia , and army also remarked that the validated online lifecycle threat report will replace the capstone threat assessment , and dia , the air force , and the army remarked that the validated online lifecycle threat report will replace the system threat assessment report . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we have noted that these inputs are to be phased out once the validated online lifecycle threat is operational .