( recommendation 6 ) . the coast guard uses three accounts for its shore infrastructure . amounts in the procurement , construction and improvements ( pc&i ) account are used for the acquisition , procurement , construction , rebuilding , and improvement of shore facilities and are directed to specific projects . one assessment we reviewed listed both dlm and olm projects , and provided the unit commander with detailed instructions accompanied by pictures explaining how to address these issues , whereas other assessments only identified dlm projects or “items of concern.” one senior official acknowledged that the coast guard did not have standardized assessments , and that developing them had not been the highest priority among numerous guidance documents the coast guard is trying to complete . without standardized assessments , the coast guard's ability to systematically compare projects for prioritization is limited , and this could directly impact its ability to establish appropriate levels of funding for addressing the backlog , as identified in this leading practice . coast guard officials told us they intend to issue guidance to standardize facility condition assessments , but they could not provide a date for completing the guidance that would be issued . moreover , according to the coast guard , it began to modernize its shore infrastructure civil engineering management in 2006 , and it has been working to develop its current asset management model , including updating guidance , since 2013 . by executing plans for a standardized facility condition assessment process and developing a plan with milestones and timeframes for standardizing the process , the coast guard will be better positioned with more consistent data to prioritize and plan its shore infrastructure projects . according to leading practices , establishing performance goals , baselines for performance outcomes , and performance measures allows agencies to track the effectiveness of maintenance and repair investments , provide feedback on progress , and indicate where investment objectives , outcomes , or procedures require adjustment . according to coast guard guidance , the chief of the office of civil engineering and the shore infrastructure logistics center are to identify and promulgate performance metrics annually . the coast guard partially met this leading practice by documenting and tracking facility condition information using a letter grade system and reporting this in its annual reports from 2015 through 2017 . however , the coast guard has not set performance goals for improving an asset's grade , or established baselines to indicate where investments require adjustment , because it continues to revise the formula it uses to calculate the letter grades . consequently , the letter grades from fiscal years 2015 through 2017 are not comparable year to year to measure performance . definitions of performance management common terms performance goal - a target level of performance expressed as a tangible , measurable objective against which actual achievement can be compared , including a goal expressed as a quantitative standard , value , or rate . a performance goal is comprised of a measure , a time frame , and a target .