iii ) . similarly , unhcr includes iraqi refugees in its iraq operation and obtains funding through a number of funding appeals made to the international community . some appeals , such as the 2008 un iraq consolidated appeal , were for efforts inside iraq ; others , such as the 2008 unhcr iraq situation supplementary appeal , were intended for programs that benefit iraqi refugees , internally displaced persons in iraq , non - iraqi refugees in iraq ( such as palestinian refugees in iraq ) , and iraqi returnees . for calendar years 2003 through 2008 , unhcr appeals for its iraq operation , including iraqi refugees , totaled about $730 million and resulted in about $542 million in contributions ( see app . iv ) . the united states contributed about 58 percent of the donor contributions to these appeals . moreover , in addition to providing unhcr funding , donor countries also fund the appeals and efforts of other un agencies and international organizations that assist iraqis and other conflict victims in the region . because of the number of overlapping appeals , it is difficult to track the amount requested and funded for all iraq - related humanitarian assistance . to better coordinate efforts among un agencies , humanitarian organizations , and donors , in december 2008 , for the first time , the un consolidated all of its iraq - related appeals for un agencies and over 15 ngos . the 2009 un consolidated appeal for iraq and the region requests $547.3 million , of which $355 million is requested for efforts to assist iraqi refugees and host country populations and $192.3 million is requested for efforts within iraq . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . state / population , refugees , and migration bureau ( prm ) usaid / office of u.s. foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) in region: government of jordan to meet the needs of iraqi refugees and host country population 48.8 in iraq: idps and vulnerable in region: iraqi refugees and host country populations 26.3 in iraq: idps and vulnerable 5.7 in iraq: idps according to usaid , in 2003 , usaid's food for peace program received $191.1 million , which was reallocated from funds originally appropriated in p.l . 108-7 to development assistance , economic support fund , child survival and health , and international disaster and famine assistance accounts . emergency refugee and migration assistance ( erma ) fund is drawn upon by the president to meet unexpected urgent refugee and migration needs whenever the president determines that it is in the u.s. national interest to do so . funds are appropriated annually to the erma fund and remain available until expended . u.s. portion of new contributions ( percentage ) in region: iraqi refugees and host country populations in iraq: idps and vulnerable populations in region: iraqi refugees and host country populations applicable the 2003 unhcr iraq revised appeal reduced the original appeal from $154.1 million to $90.6 million . the 2007 unhcr iraq situation response appeal increased the appeal from $59.7 million to $123.7 million .