see gao - 13-102 . some mues that are likely to become dos edits include those where it is anatomically impossible to exceed the mue limit . you requested that we further examine issues related to mues . this report examines the extent to which cms has ( 1 ) paid for services that exceeded the unpublished mue limits and ( 2 ) examined billing from providers that exceeded unpublished mue limits to determine if it was proper . to examine the extent to which cms has paid for services that exceeded the unpublished mue limits , we analyzed medicare claims data and interviewed five macs . specifically , we analyzed medicare paid claims in calendar year 2011 from cms's carrier part b 100 percent standard analytic file ( which contains claims data about noninstitutional providers , such as physicians and other practitioners ) , as well as their 100 percent dme claims file . we obtained the unpublished mue limits for calendar year 2011 from cms and analyzed the extent to which payments exceeded the per - day mue limits . about 1,800 of the 4,150 services with unpublished mues were included in the carrier part b standard analytic file and dme claims files , and these were the services we analyzed . we excluded any services billed with modifiers that potentially explained the reason for claiming additional units . in november 2012 , we recommended that cms implement mues that assess all quantities of services provided to the same beneficiary by the same provider on the same day — in other words , as per - day limits — but allow the limits to be exceeded if the provider included modifiers to explain the medical necessity of exceeding the limits . the mue contractor recently announced that cms began implementing our recommendation for certain services as of april 1 , 2013 . however , cms officials told us these are unlikely to be applied to some of the services with unpublished mues , such as part b drugs and dme services . at least three of the contractors had more restrictive limits for the 13 services we analyzed . contractors told us that they had developed more restrictive edits because the mue limits were being exceeded frequently or they had observed potentially fraudulent or abusive billing for these services . while the unpublished mue limits were implemented at a claim - line level , contractors told us that their local limits were implemented as per - day limits . contractors also told us that cms does not request information on their local edits , nor do they routinely share them with cms . the mue contractor told us that the mue workgroup was aware of one contractor's local edits for certain services with unpublished mues , but was not aware of other contractors' local edits for these services . because cms has not communicated with its contractors regarding their local edits or monitored their use , it is not evaluating these local edits . as a result , it may be missing an opportunity to identify situations in which savings could be achieved by implementing some of the local edits nationally . payments for services that exceeded the per - day mue limits were concentrated within certain services .