gao - 05-418 . washington , d.c.: june 17 , 2005 . the department concurred with our recommendations . over the years , we and interior's ig have reported on the difficulties blm and other federal land management agencies have had in managing land appraisals . conducting appraisals is an important function — between november 2003 and may 2006 , for example , interior appraised more than 6.5 million acres of land that was valued at over $7 billion . land appraisals are needed when interior agencies are buying , exchanging , or leasing land . such transactions are an integral part of interior's land management in order to achieve specific purposes , such as consolidating existing holdings , acquiring land deemed important for wildlife habitat or recreational opportunities , and opening land to the development of energy and mineral resources . interior generally requires land acquisitions to be based on market value and , thus , objective land appraisals are essential . past reports , however , have identified serious problems with interior agencies' appraisal programs , particularly with regard to appraisal independence , and have identified millions of dollars that the federal government had lost because of inadequate appraisals . while interior has made major program changes , significant problems continue . specifically , to remedy decades of problems with the quality and objectivity of its land appraisals , interior removed the land appraisal function from its land management agencies and consolidated it into a departmental office — the appraisal services directorate — in november 2003 . this was a substantial move in the right direction to help ensure the independence of the appraisal function , and we reported in september 2006 that the objectivity of appraisals has improved since the directorate's inception . however , we also identified two major remaining challenges . first , there is still wide variation in the quality of appraisals for land transactions involving potentially billions of dollars . for example , about 40 percent of interior's appraisals for land transactions that we reviewed did not comply with recognized appraisal standards . this lack of compliance occurred , in large part , because appraisers appeared not to apply the specialized skills needed to perform their duties for certain appraisals . in addition , peer reviews of appraisals were cursory , with reviewers approving appraisals without considering property characteristics that can impact the value of land , such as the presence of roads . second , the directorate does not have a system for ensuring that it sets and meets realistic time frames for appraisal delivery . of the 3,500 appraisals completed since the directorate was created , over 70 percent missed their deadlines , with an average delay of 4 months . delays in delivery of appraisals can impact the ability of land management agencies to carry out land acquisition missions , and some land deals have been scuttled as a result . since our report last fall , interior has taken encouraging steps to address our recommendations . for example , interior has stated that it has implemented a compliance inspection program for appraisals that are considered “high risk” to help ensure that such appraisals comply with recognized appraisal standards . we will continue to monitor the department's progress in this area .