iii ) . specifically , we noted that the criterion related to cost and savings does not indicate the department's intention to consider potential costs to other dod activities or federal agencies that may be affected by a proposed closure or realignment recommendation . also , we pointed out the criterion on environmental impact does not clearly identify to what extent costs related to potential environmental restoration , waste management , and environmental compliance activities would be included in cost and savings analyses of individual brac recommendations . we suggested that dod could address our concerns by incorporating these considerations either directly , in its final criteria , or through later explanatory guidance . dod indicated it would address our concerns through clarifying guidance rather than a change to the criteria . we have not yet seen that guidance . dod also received a variety of other comments on the draft criteria from members of congress , other elected representatives , and the general public but did not make any changes before issuing the final criteria . most of these comments involved the military value criteria ( see table 3: 1-4 ) and centered on the maintenance of adequate surge capacity ; the roles military installations fulfill in homeland defense missions ; the unique features of research , development , test , and evaluation facilities ; and the preservation of vital human capital in various support functions . in responding to those comments , dod expressed the view that the draft criteria adequately addressed these issues and did not see the need to make any changes to its draft criteria . for example , dod said that surge requirements will be addressed under criterion one , which requires the department to consider “current and future mission capabilities,” and criterion three , which requires dod to consider an installation's ability to “accommodate contingency , mobilization , and future total force requirements” to support operations and training . furthermore , dod noted that the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 requires the secretary of defense to “assess the probable threats to national security” and determine “potential , prudent , surge requirements” as part of brac 2005 . dod also noted that criterion two recognizes the role of military installations as staging areas for forces conducting homeland defense missions . collectively , in our view , many of the public comments on dod's criteria expressed concern that the criteria for the 2005 brac round focused more on assessing military value based on military missions and operational capabilities without recognizing important support capabilities such as research , development , test , and evaluation . although modifications to the criteria might have been made to address some of these concerns , the absence of such changes does not necessarily mean that these issues will not be considered in applying the criteria during the brac process . for example , the department has established a variety of joint cross - service groups to analyze various support functions during the upcoming round and each group will have to adapt the final criteria for its particular support area to assess military value related to each functional area .