see 48 c.f.r . § 15.305 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( iv ) . the far states that offerors without a record of relevant past performance may not be evaluated favorably or unfavorably on past performance — in other words , they must be given a neutral rating for the past performance evaluation factor . bidding process works , and learning how to secure a government contract . further , mbda officials noted that the federal contracting process was very different from contracting with private sector companies . they added that although federal agencies spend time and money holding sessions on doing business with the federal government , these sessions offered general information that could not be transferred to bidding on specific projects . similarly , agency officials also cited the lack of understanding of agencies' contracting needs . for example , an osdbu official from hhs emphasized that businesses that did not understand the mission of the agency with which they were seeking a contract or did not know what the agency bought and acquired might not know how to market their product or service appropriately to win the contract . advocacy group officials cited contract bundling as a significant challenge , although a majority of agency officials disagreed . advocacy group officials whom we interviewed said that contract bundling could reduce the number of contracting opportunities available for small and minority - owned businesses . mbda officials said that they believe that many contracts are bundled unnecessarily and agreed that this practice limited minority - owned businesses' ability to compete for these contracts . however , other federal agency officials we interviewed said that they did not believe that contract bundling was a significant challenge for minority - owned businesses at their agencies . in addition , some agency officials told us that they had specific policies regarding contract bundling . for example , hhs and dod contracting officials noted that their offices had policies that prohibited contract bundling and added that small businesses could protest a contract that they believed was unjustifiably bundled . further , officials from one hhs contracting office indicated that they worked with small business specialists to determine if contracts should be separated . advocacy group officials cited a lack of access to contracting officials as a significant challenge . officials from six advocacy groups that we interviewed stated that the agency officials present at outreach events , such as matchmaking events , often did not have the authority to make decisions about awarding a contract . however , with the exception of mbda , none of the federal agency officials we contacted said that access to contracting officers was a challenge at their agencies . the officials emphasized efforts that their agencies were making to assist businesses . for example , officials participate in industry days , where businesses can meet prime contractors as well as interact with agency procurement staff , and also conduct one - on - one appointments with businesses that seek to contract with their agencies . some federal contracting officials did note that limited resources might pose a challenge in accessing the contracting officers .