resources . the resources of both the institutionalized spouse and the community spouse are considered when determining initial financial eligibility for medicaid coverage for nursing home care . the community spouse may retain an amount equal to one - half of the couple's combined countable resources , up to the state - specified maximum resource level . states' maximum resource levels cannot exceed the maximum federal standard , which was $117,240 for 2014. generally referred to as the community spouse resource allowance . if one - half of a couple's combined countable resources is less than a state - specified minimum resource level , then the community spouse may retain resources up to the minimum level . states' minimum resource levels cannot be less than the federal minimum resource standard , which was $23,448 for 2014. to make up the difference . as of january 1 , 2014 , federal standards specified that most states' minimum needs allowance can be no lower than $1,938.75 , and no higher than $2,931.00 per month . federal law limits medicaid payment for long - term care services , including nursing home care , for individuals who divest themselves of — or “transfer” — their assets for less than fmv within a specified time period . as a result , when an individual applies for medicaid coverage for long - term care , states conduct a review , or “look - back,” to determine whether the applicant ( or his or her spouse , if married ) transferred assets to another person or party . per the dra , the look - back period for transfers made on or after february 8 , 2006 , is 60 months ; prior to the dra , the look - back period was generally 36 months . if the state determines that an applicant transferred an asset for less than fmv during the look - back period , the individual may be ineligible for medicaid coverage for long - the penalty term care for a period of time , called the penalty period.period generally begins on the later of ( 1 ) the first day of a month during or after an individual transfers assets for less than fmv , or ( 2 ) the date on which the individual would otherwise be eligible to receive coverage for services were it not for the penalty period . federal law exempts certain transfers made during the look - back period from the penalty provisions . exemptions include certain transfers of assets to a spouse or a disabled child , among other things . a transfer does not result in a penalty period if the individual can demonstrate to the state that the transfer was made exclusively for purposes other than qualifying for medicaid.the state determined that application of the penalty would result in an undue hardship ; that is , it would deprive the individual of ( 1 ) medical care such that the individual's health or life would be endangered , or ( 2 ) food , clothing , shelter , or other necessities for life .