morocco . the united states views morocco as a stable , moderate arab regime ; an ally against terrorism ; and a free trade partner . king mohammed vi retains ultimate power , including over the military . in may 2003 , moroccan suicide bombers attacked several sites in casablanca . in response , the government arrested an estimated 3,000 people and sentenced at least 900 for crimes under counterterrorism laws , according to state . moroccan - born extremists associated with al qaeda affiliates were implicated in the march 2004 train blasts in madrid . algeria . algeria has emerged from a period of terrorist and related violence during the 1990s when more than 100,000 lives were lost , according to state . since then , as algeria has made progress toward democratization , casualties have declined sharply . although algerian government actions have weakened terrorist groups domestically , algerians have been found among suicide bombers and terrorists captured in iraq . terrorist cells operate in the algerian east and far south and in the sahel , the area bordering southern algeria . state's most recent human rights report stated that the algerian government had several human rights problems , including impunity of security forces , allegations of abuse and torture of detainees , and arbitrary arrest and prolonged pretrial detention . state also credited the algerian government for taking steps to strengthen human rights , which resulted in fewer such incidents than in the past . according to state's human rights report , morocco's human rights record “remained poor in many areas.” the report highlighted accusations of excessive force and harsh sentences against demonstrators in western sahara and torture of human rights activists in that region . also included among the human rights problems were reports of police impunity , arbitrary arrest , and incommunicado detention . western sahara . morocco and the independence - seeking popular front for the liberation of saqiat al - hamra and rio de oro ( polisario ) have disputed the independence of western sahara since the 1970s , when spain decolonized the territory . following a long war in western sahara between morocco and the polisario , the un brokered a ceasefire that went into effect in 1991 , and a un peacekeeping force remains in the region . morocco currently occupies 80 percent of western sahara . the united states , which does not recognize moroccan sovereignty over western sahara , supports efforts to reach a mutually acceptable resolution under un auspices ; however , the situation remains at an impasse . this issue is the main impediment to improving bilateral relations between morocco and algeria , as algeria backs the polisario . tunisia . tunisia has a stable yet authoritarian government with a dominant majority political party and a president who has been in power since 1987 . the tunisian government harshly suppressed an islamist opposition movement in the late 1980s and early 1990s . more recently , suspected terrorists bombed a synagogue on the tunisian island of djerba in 2002 and tunisian expatriates have been arrested in europe and north america on terrorism - related charges . state's human rights report stated that tunisia's human rights record remained poor .