 undp . as the lead agency for the early recovery sector , undp was the only un agency with project offices located in the delta region prior to cyclone nargis . undp's eight project offices and associated staff helped distribute supplies , such as water , food , plastic sheets , cooking utensils , medicine , and clothing . undp obligated nearly $34 million , as of march 2011 , and adapted its pre - cyclone human development initiative projects to meet the early recovery needs of cyclone nargis survivors , focusing primarily on livelihood re - establishment , but also including grass - roots interventions in the areas of primary health care , the environment , hiv / aids , training and education , and food security . undp also adapted its micro - enterprise / micro - credit program to support enterprise creation and rehabilitation , including helping affected populations to rebuild their houses .  fao . to restore and strengthen food security by helping to restore livelihoods in agriculture and fisheries production in burma's cyclone - affected provinces , fao obligated about $17 million , as of march 2011 . as the lead agency for the agriculture sector , fao provided crop , vegetable , and fruit seedlings ; fertilizers ; technical assistance for crop and livestock production ; improved fishing techniques ; fish processing equipment ; livestock and fisheries inputs ; veterinary equipment ; and animal vaccinations . in response to cyclone nargis , the u.s. government obligated $84.6 million since may 2008 — $74.9 million for emergency response activities and $9.7 million for longer - term recovery assistance . of the total funds obligated , usaid obligated $71.7 million , of which $37.8 million went to un programs , and dod obligated $12.9 million . u.s. assistance covered multiple sectors throughout the delta region ; however , certain townships received a more extensive range of assistance . ( see app . iii for a map that shows the location and type of emergency assistance that u.s. agencies provided in response to cyclone nargis. ) text goes here figure 3: un assistance by sector , 2008 through march 2011 interactive instructions: the online version of this matrix is interactive . hover your mouse over each un organization for a description of that organization . to view these descriptions in the offline version , see appendix ii . ( illion u.s. doll ) lead responsibility for the sector ; also provided assistance un ocha provided a broad array of coordiantion assistance across the sectors . four un agencies — the world food program ( wfp ) , united nations children's fund ( unicef ) , united nations development program ( undp ) , and the food and agriculture organization of the united nations ( fao ) — contributed approximately 90 percent of the $288 million . nearly half of the total funding came through wfp , which distributed food and supplied common services , such as providing trucks and cargo vessels for transporting humanitarian assistance , to the un and other responding agencies . these four un agencies provided the following activities and services:  wfp .