 rate structure . before april 2011 , tva's distributor customers were charged the same electricity rate regardless of the time of day or season , so customers did not receive strong price signals that encouraged them to save energy.53 , 54 according to tva officials , beginning in april 2011 , tva started charging rates that vary by season and depending on the time of the day for peak and off - peak periods . tennessee valley authority: information on lease - leaseback and other financing arrangements . gao - 03-784 . for example , such improvements are most easily installed during construction of new buildings , but poor economic conditions have slowed new home construction , reducing opportunities for market penetration by energy - efficient technologies .  measurement and verification of savings . tva , like many utilities , faces challenges measuring and verifying savings achieved through energy efficiency . according to tva officials , to address this challenge tva has contracted with a third party to provide a framework for measurement and verification . tva's end - use wholesale rate combines fixed and variable costs into one energy charge , effectively removing demand charges and any incentive to reduce demand during peak periods . thus , if there is an increase in electricity demand , there is no change in the price per kilowatt - hour at any time during the day . tva's distributors are not - for - profit and must receive enough revenue from electricity sales to cover fixed costs necessary to provide reliable electrical distribution . tva's distributors have raised concerns that energy efficiency programs could reduce their revenues . tva , its distributors , and the tennessee valley public power association — an advocacy group serving more than 100 municipal electric systems and 50 electric cooperatives in tva's service area — recently agreed on a time - of - use rate structure intended to mitigate concerns about the impacts of increased rates , as well as give distributors greater opportunities to manage their system during peak periods , for example by promoting energy efficiency . participation , this could allow tva to adopt energy efficiency measures and increase rates more quickly and aggressively , if it were to decide this is desirable . tva's financial condition may hamper its ability to fund planned capital improvements over the next several years . tva plans to spend about $9.9 billion by fiscal year 2013 for various capital projects , including completing the construction of one nuclear power plant , upgrading existing fossil fuel plants , and finishing various environmental and transmission projects . unexpected cost overruns , however , may negatively affect tva's ability to make these planned capital investments . in addition , these investments may be constrained by limited financial flexibility due to existing debt levels , the fact that tva can only finance with debt , and projected increases in operating costs . tva plans several large capital investments — notably in capacity expansion , environmental measures , and transmission — but unexpected cost overruns may impact its ability to make these investments .