iii. ) from 2002 to 2004 , fsa retired 3 systems and incorporated their functionality into the common origination and disbursement ( cod ) system . cod supports a single process for delivering direct loan and pell grant aid to students and relies on middleware as a solution for exchanging data between incompatible systems while the agency works toward full integration . according to fsa , the consolidation of the three systems' functions into cod has improved the delivery of student aid by simplifying the process by which schools request , report , and reconcile federal pell grant and direct loan funds and by facilitating schools' submissions of student aid data through the use of a common student record . fsa also retired 3 systems that supported its financial activities , such as collecting on defaulted student loans , and incorporated these functions into its financial management system — creating a repository for the agency's financial information . fsa reported that these actions have helped improve financial decision - making and the ability to create financial reports for fsa , lenders , and guaranty agencies . nonetheless , fsa remains several years from operating in a fully integrated information systems environment . while it has reduced the number of systems supporting its programs , fsa plans further actions to reengineer the agency's information processing environment . in this regard , fsa has begun three major systems integration initiatives , which it plans to complete by 2008: front - end business integration is planned to simplify and improve the front - end processes ( for example , grant and loan originations ) associated with fsa's student aid delivery services by integrating the information , processes , and supporting systems that applicants , their parents , and others rely on in seeking financial aid . integrated partner management is planned to improve fsa's ability to reduce fraud and errors in its student aid programs by incorporating improved controls , such as common identifiers , system access information , and a single point of enrollment . the initiative is expected to reengineer or replace fsa's current database of entities , such as schools and lenders that participate in the student aid programs . common services for borrowers is planned to improve and simplify back - end services related to the management of student aid obligations ( for example , loan repayments ) by combining the borrower - related functions of existing loan servicing systems into an integrated process . fsa officials explained that , overall , the three integration initiatives are expected to streamline systems and operations through further consolidating common processing functions and interfacing systems that receive and process loan applications , monitor program participation , and track loan obligations . as an essential first step for sharing common financial aid data in the integrated environment , fsa is in the process of completing data standardization across its systems . in addition , the agency has begun hiring contractors to support the three integration initiatives . however , the agency has not yet fully defined the technological solutions for the initiatives — a step that is necessary to know what specific technology will be used to integrate the systems .