evaluation . sba has taken steps to monitor and evaluate its progress toward its human capital goals through its human capital accountability policy and tracking progress of the measures in its strategic human capital plan . however , because sba has not established a strategic workforce plan , the agency has not monitored and evaluated the results of its workforce planning efforts . without a workforce plan that fully addresses key principles , including a current agency - wide competency and skill gap assessment and a long - term strategy to close skill gaps , sba cannot provide reasonable assurance that its workforce has the skills needed to meet the agency's mission . for example , having a current assessment and completed workforce plan prior to its early retirement programs would have helped sba target its hiring and retention efforts . without having first taken these steps , sba risked compromising its efforts to reshape the agency . in a 2004 report , we concluded that effective training and development programs are an integral part of a learning environment that can enhance an agency's ability to attract and retain employees with the skills and competencies needed to achieve results . we also noted that training and development programs help an agency achieve its mission and meet its goals by improving individual and ultimately organizational performance . in the same 2004 report , we identified key principles that could help federal agencies produce a strategic approach to their training and development efforts . sba has taken steps to incorporate these principles but has only partly incorporated them ( see table 3 ) . planning . sba officials told us that sba had conducted a training needs assessment in the summer of 2014 , which helped the agency identify a list of top training courses for its employees . sba also developed a fiscal years 2014-2015 training plan that outlines sba's major training programs and activities . however , the plan does not fully establish a strategic approach to training that would help achieve agency results . first , it does not establish training goals and related performance measures to help sba determine whether its training and development programs are achieving their intended results . sba officials told us that they had not developed these goals and measures because the employees developing the plan had left the agency , but that they planned to develop them for the next iteration of the training plan . however , as of june 2015 , sba did not have an expected completion date for the revised plan . second , as previously discussed , sba has not conducted a competency and skill gap assessment since 2006 . third , sba officials told us that the training plan incorporated input from supervisors but did not directly incorporate employee development goals because the agency was not required to have individual development plans for its staff . however , while sba is not required to have individual development plans , it could choose to require them or to obtain employee development goals through other means . design and development . sba has also taken steps to identify specific training and development initiatives .