disciplinary systems . a disciplinary system is part of providing appropriate incentives to perform in accordance with the ethics and compliance program and further demonstrates appropriate follow - through in investigating , disciplining , and correcting ethics violations . as shown in table 9 , 53 of the 57 contractors report including a disciplinary system in their ethics programs , with consequences ranging from warning to termination practices . to ensure that prompt corrective measures are carried out when violations are substantiated , 35 of the contractors reported such practices as having specific offices or individuals , while 12 reported having committees , responsible for coordinating and tracking that appropriate discipline is administered . site visits with 4 contractors confirmed that all 4 kept extensive records for management to track and oversee disciplinary actions by category of conduct violation , employee category , and business unit . since the far rule mandating timely disclosure of contractors' credible evidence of violations was not yet in effect at the time of our survey , we asked contractors about policies for voluntarily disclosing to dod conduct in connection with defense contracts that may violate applicable requirements of law or regulation . of the 57 contractors responding to the survey , 39 indicated that they had self - reporting policies . of these , 34 said that their policy was to voluntarily disclose or self - report violations to government officials , such as dod ig , contracting officers , dcma , and dcaa . fifteen of these contractors provided copies of their self - reporting policies . of the 18 that indicated that they did not have self - reporting policies , 10 said it was their practice to self - report or voluntarily disclose , or to encourage the practice of self - reporting , violations to government officials . in addition , some of the contractors that had self - reporting policies reported that the types of contract - related violations subject to their self - disclosure policies and practices included violations of law and instances of significant employee misconduct , instances where there may have been overbilling caused by employee mischarging and other instances of misconduct , violation of the anti - kickback act of 1986 , compromise of product integrity , violations of federal procurement law , violations that added costs to the government , cost accounting violations , and suspected fraud . notably , in site visits with four contractors following the november 2008 publication of the far's mandatory rule for timely disclosure of certain contract - connected violations , senior ethics program managers provided us information showing that all organizations were changing their voluntary disclosure policies to implement this new far requirement . in response to the new far rules , dod has made changes in two key areas that could improve oversight of contractor ethics programs . specifically , dcaa revised its contract audit guidance to cover the new far ethics requirements . in addition , dod ig established the new contractor disclosure program to implement the new mandatory disclosure requirement . however , additional opportunities exist to improve dod's oversight in two other key areas .