iii. ) congress appropriates a fixed amount of funding each year to fund refugee assistance programs . orr distributes this funding among seven budget activities — each with a specific purpose . ( see table 2. ) orr's largest budget activity , transitional and medical services , primarily supports refugees' cash and medical assistance offered through the publicly administered , wilson / fish , and public private partnership programs as well as the federal contribution to the matching grant program . orr is authorized to fully reimburse program providers for the cash and medical assistance they provide to refugees enrolled in the publicly administered , wilson / fish , and public private partnership programs,even if the costs of serving all eligible refugees exceed orr's annual appropriation in a given fiscal year . the social services that state and voluntary agencies provide to refugees enrolled in these programs , such as employment services and case management , are primarily funded through orr's social services budget activity . orr receives a fixed amount of social services funds each fiscal year and allocates these funds to states based on estimates of arriving refugees . these social services funds do not increase within a given year if the number of refugees served is greater than anticipated . together transitional and medical services and social services funding accounted for more than half of orr's total appropriations in fiscal year 2009 ( about $436 million , including unobligated funds ) . figure 5 shows the distribution of appropriations across orr's budget activities in fiscal year 2009 . the matching grant program features several design elements that distinguish it from assistance offered through the publicly administered , wilson / fish , and public private partnership programs . according to state officials and voluntary agency staff , matching grant providers select the refugees they want to participate in the program , and these refugees can opt to participate in the matching grant program or may choose to apply for and receive benefits from other programs if eligible . in contrast , providers of the publicly administered , wilson / fish , or public private partnership programs enroll any eligible refugee . in interviews with providers , we learned that refugees who find employment while participating in the matching grant program may keep their earnings in addition to their cash grant . however , refugees enrolled in orr's other programs have their cash assistance reduced or terminated as a result of their employment earnings . in addition , according to orr and providers , funding for the matching grant program is tied to refugees' success in finding employment while enrolled in the program — that is , providers of the matching grant program who do not demonstrate that refugees have achieved specific employment - related outcomes may have their funding reduced the following program year . in contrast , funding for the publicly administered , wilson / fish , or public private partnership programs is not affected by refugees' employment outcomes , according to orr officials . ( for more information on the matching grant program , see table 3. ) the extent to which each of the four orr programs allow state and voluntary agencies the flexibility to develop or use various service delivery approaches differs .