sixteen epa libraries have not changed . during the reorganization effort , each of the libraries in the network made its own decision on how it would manage its collection — some digitized , or have plans to digitize , some of their materials ; some dispersed their materials to epa and non - epa libraries ; and some disposed of their materials . after making these changes , epa has begun to develop a common set of agencywide policies and procedures for the library network . epa is waiting to complete these policies and procedures before lifting a moratorium on further change . the future of epa's library network — its configuration and its operations — are contingent on the final policies and procedures , on epa's response to directions accompanying its fiscal year 2008 appropriation , and on epa's 2008 library plan . due to the decentralized nature of the epa library network , each library decided on its own whether to close , reduce hours of operation , change the way that it provided library services , or make no changes in order to prepare for a proposed budget reduction . as table 1 shows , 4 libraries — as noted in epa's library plan — closed physical access to their libraries . furthermore , 1 additional library in the network closed , 4 reduced their hours of operation , and 1 changed the way that it provides library services . however , these changes were not noted in epa's library reorganization plan . sixteen libraries in the network did not institute any changes . epa's august 2006 library plan notes that three regional libraries — regions 5 ( chicago ) , 6 ( dallas ) , and 7 ( kansas city ) — and the headquarters library in washington , d.c. , would close physical access to their libraries . in addition , oppts officials decided to close the chemical library ; however , this closure was not noted in the plan . according to epa officials , the plan focused on the oei headquarters and regional office libraries , and they did not think it was necessary to reflect changes that were planned for other libraries . the focus of the plan , according to epa officials , was to set the framework on how library services would be provided electronically and not on what physical changes in the network were to occur . although no longer accessible to walk - in traffic from epa staff and the public , the closed regional and headquarters libraries continue to provide library services , such as interlibrary loans and research / reference requests , to epa staff through service agreements that the closed libraries established with libraries managed by oarm — located in cincinnati , ohio , or research triangle park , north carolina — or with the region 3 library located in philadelphia , pennsylvania . service agreements have been established between ( 1 ) the cincinnati library and region 5 , ( 2 ) the research triangle park library and headquarters as well as regions 6 and 7 , and ( 3 ) region 3 and region 7 .