iii. ) the igs appointed by the president are generally located in the largest departments and agencies of the government ; the dfes have smaller budgets and their igs have correspondingly smaller budgets and fewer staff . the presidentially appointed igs and the dfe igs reported to us total budget authority for fiscal year 2010 of about $2.2 billion with approximately 13,652 authorized full - time equivalent staff and 13,390 staff on board at the end of fiscal year 2010 . the presidentially appointed igs' budget authority constituted about 84 percent ( about $1.8 billion ) of the total , and they had about 86 percent ( 11,564 ) of the total staff on board . the budgets of the dfe igs made up about 16 percent ( about $352 million ) of the total budget authority for igs , and they had about 14 percent ( 1,826 ) of the total staff on board at the end of fiscal year 2010 . we addressed our reporting objectives through our summary of responses to a survey sent to the federal statutory igs established by the ig act regarding their activities for fiscal year 2010 , and additional analysis . the ig reform act of 2008 ( reform act ) amended the ig act by adding requirements related to ig independence and effectiveness . among other provisions , the reform act requires the rate of basic pay of the igs appointed by the president to be at a specified level , and for the dfe igs , at or above a majority of other senior - level executives at their entities . for our discussion of the independence of the igs , we summarized information from the responses to our survey questions about the implementation of selected provisions in the reform act , the ig act , and the dodd - frank act that are intended to enhance ig independence . the reform act also requires an ig to obtain legal advice from his or her own counsel or to obtain counsel from another ig's office or from the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency ( ig council ) . the ig act also provides protections to the independence of the igs while keeping both their agency heads and the congress fully and currently informed about particularly flagrant problems and deficiencies within their agencies through a 7-day process specified by the act . in addition , the dodd - frank act amended the ig act with provisions to enhance the independence of igs in dfes with boards or commissions . the performance management issues the dfe igs identified as management challenges included timely implementation of ig recommendations by the peace corps and expanding public access at the national archives and records administration . specifically , the dodd - frank act changed who would be considered the head of the dfe for purposes of ig appointment , general supervision , and reporting under the ig act . if the dfe has a board or commission the amendments would now require each of these igs to report organizationally to the entire board or commission as the head of the dfe rather than an individual chairman .