gao - 04-651 . washington , d.c.: june 1 , 2004 . ( see fig . managers can use performance information to identify problems in existing programs , to try to identify the causes of problems , and / or to develop corrective actions . they can also use program performance information to develop strategies , plan and budget , identify priorities , and make resource allocation decisions to affect programs in the future . agency managers can also use performance information to reward individuals or organizations who meet or exceed expectations . finally , managers can use performance information to identify more effective approaches to program implementation and share those approaches more widely across the agency . agencies can use performance information to identify problems or weaknesses in programs , to try to identify factors causing the problems , and to modify a service or process to try to address problems . we have reported that leading organizations that have progressed toward results - oriented management have used performance information to identify gaps in performance , improve organizational processes , and improve their performance . we found several examples where federal program managers used performance data to identify problems and corrective actions at the agencies we examined . officials in the office of participant assistance ( opa ) at the employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) in the department of labor ( dol ) told us that when data for a performance measure of customer satisfaction indicated a problem , they changed a process to try to improve performance . washington , d.c.: american society for public administration , 2002 . osborne , david and peter hutchinson . the price of government: getting the results we need in an age of permanent fiscal crisis . new york: basic books , 2004 . wholey , joseph s. overcoming the challenges in managing for results . washington , d.c.: ibm center for the business of government , 2004 . workforce investment act: states and local areas have developed strategies to assess performance , but labor could do more to help . results - oriented government: gpra has established a solid foundation for achieving greater results . gao - 04-38 . washington , d.c.: march 10 , 2004 . highlights of a gao forum: high performing organizations: metrics , means , and mechanisms for achieving high performance in the 21st century public management environment . gao - 04-343sp . washington , d.c.: february 13 , 2004 . human capital: key principles for effective strategic workforce planning . gao - 04-39 . washington , d.c.: december 11 , 2003 . results - oriented government: using gpra to address 21st century challenges . gao - 03-1166t . washington , d.c.: september 18 , 2003 . program evaluation: an evaluation culture and collaborative partnerships help build agency capacity . gao - 03-454 . washington , d.c.: may 2 , 2003 . results - oriented cultures: creating a clear linkage between individual performance and organizational success . gao - 03-488 . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2003 . human capital management: faa's reform effort requires a more strategic approach . gao - 03-156 . washington , d.c.: february 3 , 2003 . pension and welfare benefits administration: opportunities exist for improving management of the enforcement program .