a list of these reports is included in appendix ii . the scope and methodology of our work are described in appendix i . this is the second in a series of reports that addresses ammunition management issues . the military services annually determine their current and future munition procurement requirements in accordance with the defense planning guidance . historically , the defense planning guidance has directed the military services to arm a given force structure to win two nearly simultaneous major theaters of war . in recent years , the department of defense has engaged in a number of military operations that vary in size and circumstance from a major theater of war ; consequently , the current national military strategy and the defense planning guidance call for the services to prepare for a number of small - scale contingency operations in addition to the two major theaters of war . the conditions under which small - scale operations are fought may differ from conditions in a major theater war , which may increase the services' requirements for highly technical precision munitions designed to limit loss of life and expensive military assets . the increased use of precision munitions in recent conflicts reduced inventories and raised questions about whether adequate attention had been paid to the impact of small - scale contingencies on the ability of u.s. forces to respond and sustain operations for the two major theaters of war . of the approximately $4.2 billion of munitions the services are planning to procure in fiscal year 2001 , 46 percent ( or $1.9 billion ) will be used to procure precision munitions designed to reduce the number of conventional munitions needed to defeat enemy targets while at the same time limiting loss of expensive weapons systems and life . by fiscal year 2005 , the services are planning to increase their procurement of precision guided munitions by about 5 percent . in 1994 , to generate consistent munition requirements department - wide , and to ensure that the military services have both an adequate supply and the appropriate types of munitions to address changing mission needs , the department of defense standardized the process by which the services determine their munition requirements . in 1997 , the department of defense issued instruction 3000.4 , which sets forth policies , roles and responsibilities , time frames , and procedures to guide the services as they develop their munition requirements . this instruction is referred to as the capabilities - based munitions requirements process and is the responsibility of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics . the instruction describes a multiphased analytical process that begins when the under secretary of defense for policy develops , in consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , the military services , and the warfighting commanders in chief , policy on munition requirements for the defense planning guidance . the defense intelligence agency uses the defense planning guidance and its accompanying warfighting scenarios as well as other intelligence information to develop a threat assessment . this assessment contains estimates and facts about the potential threats that the united states and allied forces could expect to meet for each of the two major theaters of war scenarios .