we did not attempt to verify this information . the length of these wait lists varied considerably ; however , several of the centers we contacted had lengthy wait lists . for example , one grantee we contacted in texas , which serves approximately 4,260 children in 36 centers , had over 1,150 children on its wait list . another head start grantee told us that they average around 500 children on their wait list . a representative from one pennsylvania head start center we contacted stated that there were around 120 applicants on the center's wait list . furthermore , a review of media sources reveals that head start centers around the country face similar challenges meeting their communities' demand for services . we queried a news media search engine and found numerous reports of lengthy waiting lists to enroll in head start programs in many parts of the country . for example , according to one florida newspaper , the state of florida has 8,000 students on wait lists for head start programs . another newspaper in indiana , reported that a program in indiana that serves 380 students has 170 students on the wait list . it is important to note that we found a discrepancy in enrollment levels among the centers we called . while several grantees had lengthy wait lists , other grantees were eager to accept our fictitious , over - income children to fill their rolls . the center in new jersey that accepted our fictitious over - income family told us that it had more than 30 openings . another center in california , which did not accept our application , told us that it had 40 part - day openings . we contacted 21 families who at the time of interview were on wait lists for head start programs . we received a list of 1,600 wait list applicants from a head start grantee in texas — of these we were able to speak to 11 applicants . we also received a wait list of 30 applicants for services in pennsylvania — of these we were able to speak to 10 applicants . our investigation of allegations related to these two cases is ongoing . we plan to issue a final report once the investigation is complete . to conduct undercover testing , we created fictitious identities and bogus documents , including pay stubs and birth certificates , in order to attempt to register over - income or otherwise potentially ineligible families and their children at 13 head start centers located in california , maryland , new jersey , pennsylvania , texas , wisconsin and the washington , d.c. metropolitan area . we also attempted to register two eligible families and their children to determine if centers would count these children toward reported enrollment numbers . we chose these centers for two reasons: they indicated that they had openings for new enrollees ; and they were located either in states with a significant proportion of head start funding , the same geographic area as a gao office , or in the same geographic area as the two programs accused of committing fraud . we created 15 fictitious scenarios and used fabricated documentation during our in - person applications .