i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . dhs is one of the many agencies that respond to foia requests . dhs continues to receive and process the largest number of these requests of any federal department or agency — annually receiving and processing over 40 percent of all requests within the federal government . in 2014 and 2018 , we issued reports that discussed key aspects of foia at dhs . our work examined , among other things , the department's implementation of selected foia requirements ; dhs's methods to reduce backlogged requests ; and duplication in the department's processing of foia requests . at your request , my testimony for this hearing summarizes the results discussed in our prior reports on foia implementation at dhs . detailed information about our objectives , scope , and methodology for that work can be found in the issued reports . in addition , we reviewed information that dhs provided to us on the current status of its efforts to implement recommendations from those reports and its current foia workload and backlog . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony include neela lakhmani and anjalique lawrence ( assistant directors ) , kara epperson , christopher businsky , nancy glover , and scott pettis . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . in responding to requests , foia authorizes agencies to use nine exemptions to withhold portions of records , or the entire record . these nine exemptions can be applied by agencies to withhold various types of information , such as information concerning foreign relations , trade secrets , and matters of personal privacy . foia allows a requester to challenge an agency's final decision on a request through an administrative appeal or a lawsuit . agencies generally have 20 working days to respond to an administrative appeal . created in 2003 , dhs assumed control of about 209,000 civilian and military positions from 22 agencies and offices that specialize in one or more aspects of homeland security . by the nature of its mission and operations , the department creates and has responsibility for vast and varied amounts of information covering , for example , immigration , border crossings , law enforcement , natural disasters , maritime accidents , and agency management . according to its 2018 chief foia officer report , dhs's organizational structure consists of 24 offices , directorates , and components . foia requests are split between the department's privacy office , which acts as its central foia office , and foia offices in the department's component agencies . three of the major operational components of dhs are: u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) promotes an awareness and understanding of citizenship , and ensures the integrity of the nation's immigration system . various amendments have been enacted and guidance issued to help improve agencies' processing of foia requests .