its safety and effectiveness . class i includes devices with the lowest risk ( eg , tongue depressors , reading glasses , forceps ) , while class iii includes devices with the highest risk ( eg , breast implants , coronary stents ) . almost all class i devices and some class ii devices ( eg , mercury thermometers , certain adjustable hospital beds ) are exempt from premarket notification requirements . most class iii device types are required to obtain fda approval through the pma process , the most stringent of fda's medical device review processes . the remaining device types are required to obtain fda clearance or approval through either the 510 ( k ) or pma processes . if eligible , a 510 ( k ) is filed when a manufacturer seeks a determination that a new device is substantially equivalent to a legally marketed device known as a predicate device . in order to be deemed substantially equivalent ( i.e. , cleared by fda for marketing ) , a new device must have the same technological characteristics and intended use as the predicate device , or have the same intended use and different technological characteristics but still be demonstrated to be as safe and effective as the predicate device without raising new questions of safety and effectiveness . most device submissions filed each year are 510 ( k ) s. for example , of the more than 13,600 device submissions received by fda in fys 2008 through 2010 , 88 percent were 510 ( k ) s. the medical device performance goals were phased in during the period covered by mdufma ( the fys 2003 through 2007 cohorts ) and were updated for mdufa . under mdufa , fda's goal is to complete the review process for 90 percent of the 510 ( k ) s in a cohort within 90 days of submission ( known as the tier 1 goal ) and to complete the review process for 98 percent of the cohort within 150 days ( the tier 2 goal ) . ( see table 1 for the 510 ( k ) performance goals for the fys 2003 through 2011 cohorts ) . fda may take any of the following actions on a 510 ( k ) after completing its review: issue an order declaring the device substantially equivalent ; issue an order declaring the device not substantially equivalent ; or advise the submitter that the 510 ( k ) is not required ( i.e. , the product is not regulated as a device or the device is exempt from premarket notification requirements ) . each of these actions ends the review process for a submission . a sponsor's withdrawal of a submission also ends the review process . alternatively , fda may “stop the clock” on a 510 ( k ) review by sending a letter asking the sponsor to submit additional information ( known as an ai letter ) . this completes a review cycle but does not end the review process . the clock will resume ( and a new review cycle will begin ) when fda receives a response from the sponsor .