ii ) . because the collection and estimation process takes place over several years ( see fig . 3 ) , the data used to calculate the formula are 2 years old . for example , the data used to apportion funding to states in fiscal year 2009 were based on estimated collections attributable to each state in fiscal year 2007 . by the early 1980s , construction of the interstate highway system was nearing completion , and a larger portion of the funds from the highway trust fund were being authorized for non - interstate programs . the surface transportation assistance act of 1982 provided , for the first time , that each state would for certain programs receive a “minimum allocation” of 85 percent of its share of estimated tax payments to the highway account of the highway trust fund . this approach was largely retained when congress reauthorized the program in 1987 . the intermodal surface and transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ) raised the minimum allocation to 90 percent . the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) of 1997 guaranteed each state a specific share of the total program ( defined as all apportioned programs plus high priority projects ) , a minimum 90.5 percent share of contributions . it also introduced rate - of - return considerations into funds states received for the interstate maintenance , national highway system , and surface transportation programs . in 2005 , congress implemented through safetea - lu the equity bonus program that was designed to bring all states up to a guaranteed rate of return of 92 percent by fiscal year 2008 . for the time period for which final data are available , fiscal years 2005 through 2008 , our analysis shows that every state but one received more funding for highway programs than users contributed to the highway account ( see fig . the only exception , texas , received about $1.00 ( 99.7 cents ) for each dollar contributed . among other states , this ranged from a low of $1.02 for both arizona and indiana to a high of $5.63 for the district of columbia . in addition , all states , including texas , received more in funding than their highway users contributed during both fiscal years 2007 and 2008 . in effect , almost every state was a donee state during the first 4 years of safetea - lu . this occurred because overall , more funding was authorized and apportioned than was collected from highway users . the account was supplemented by general funds from the treasury . our rate - of - return analysis has two notable features: it compares funding states received from the highway trust fund highway account with the dollars estimated to be have been collected in each state and contributed by each state's highway users into the highway account in that same year . for example , for fiscal year 2008 , it compares the highway funds states received in fiscal year 2008 with the amount collected and contributed in that fiscal year — data that did not become available until december 2009 . because of the 2-year lag ( see fig .