the other owner is a nonprofit with several properties . according to a representative of the owner , the rents paid by the residents of all of the properties were a larger part of the nonprofit's revenue than the hud subsidy , so the nonprofit was not negatively affected by an occasional delay in housing assistance payments . hud allows owners to borrow from their reserve accounts to help mitigate the effects of delayed housing assistance payments , but some owners either do not have reserves or their reserves are not sufficient to cover the period of the delay . we analyzed trends in timeliness over the 10-year period as well as the most recent 3-year period ( fiscal years 2002 through 2004 ) for a more current picture of payment timeliness . timeliness varied considerably by state as well . overall , from fiscal years 1995 through 2004 , hud disbursed by the due date 75 percent of the 3.2 million monthly housing assistance payments on all types of contracts ( see fig . however , 8 percent of payments , averaging 25,000 per year , were significantly late — that is , they were delayed by 2 weeks or more and therefore could have negative effects on owners who relied on hud's subsidy to pay their mortgages . during this period , 6 percent of the total payments ( averaging 18,000 per year ) were 4 weeks or more late , including about 10,000 payments per year that were 8 weeks or more late . hud does not have an overall timeliness standard by which it makes payments to owners or its contract administrators , based in statute , regulation , or hud guidance . however , hud contractually requires the pbcas ( which administer the majority of contracts ) to pay owners no later than the 1st business day of the month . hud officials said that they also use this standard informally to determine the timeliness of payments on hud - administered and traditionally administered contracts . we also analyzed data to examine the timeliness of contract renewals with the various types of rent adjustments that owners may seek . to determine the extent to which hud renewed or adjusted its contracts with property owners within the 120-day time frame that the agency has established , we used data from hud's real estate management system covering fiscal years 2002 through 2004 . therefore , we considered payments to be timely if they were disbursed by the 1st business day of the month . based on our discussions with project owners who reported that they relied on hud's assistance to pay their mortgages before they incurred late fees ( generally , after the 15th day of the month ) , we determined that a payment delay of 2 weeks or more was significant . the timeliness of housing assistance payments over the 10-year period ( fiscal years 1995 through 2004 ) has shown some variation ( see fig . the percentage of payments that were significantly late increased in 1998 , which hud and pbca officials indicated likely had to do with hud's initial implementation of mahra and new contract renewal procedures and processing requirements for project owners .