risk management . identifying potential problems before they occur so that they can be mitigated to minimize any adverse impact . ( app . iii provides a detailed description of the pre - entry , entry , status , exit , and analysis processes. ) collecting , maintaining , and sharing information on certain foreign nationals who enter and exit the united states ; identifying foreign nationals who ( 1 ) have overstayed or violated the terms of their admission ; ( 2 ) may be eligible to receive , extend , or adjust their immigration status ; or ( 3 ) should be apprehended or detained by law enforcement officials ; detecting fraudulent travel documents , verifying traveler identity , and determining traveler admissibility through the use of biometrics ; and facilitating information sharing and coordination within the immigration and border management community . in july 2003 , dhs established a program office with responsibility for managing the acquisition , deployment , operation , and sustainment of the us - visit system and its associated supporting people ( eg , customs and border protection ( cbp ) officers ) , processes ( eg , entry / exit policies and procedures ) , and facilities ( eg , inspection booths and lanes ) , in coordination with its stakeholders ( cbp and the department of state ) . as of october 2005 , about $1.4 billion has been appropriated for the program , and , according to program officials , about $962 million has been obligated . dhs plans to deliver us - visit capability in four increments , with increments 1 through 3 being interim , or temporary , solutions that fulfill legislative mandates to deploy an entry / exit system , and increment 4 being the implementation of a long - term vision that is to incorporate improved business processes , new technology , and information sharing to create an integrated border management system for the future . in increments 1 through 3 , the program is building interfaces among existing ( “legacy” ) systems ; enhancing the capabilities of these systems ; and deploying these capabilities to air , sea , and land poes . these increments are to be largely acquired and implemented through existing system contracts and task orders . in may 2004 , dhs awarded an indefinite - delivery / indefinite - quantity prime contract to accenture and its partners . according to the contract , the prime contractor will help support the integration and consolidation of processes , functionality , and data , and it will develop a strategy to build on the technology and capabilities already available to produce the strategic solution , while also assisting the program office in leveraging existing systems and contractors in deploying the interim solutions . dhs also stated that the i - 94 processing times vary by poe , and therefore they are not easily generalized from one port to another . further , the department commented that the number of workstations and officers available to operate those workstations to process applicants for a form i - 94 do not impact the time it takes to issue a form i - 94 .