gao - 17-279t . washington , d.c.: december 8 , 2016 . littoral combat ship and frigate: congress faced with critical acquisition decisions . gao - 17-262t . those prices have not been shown to be achievable . even if lcs prices offered once again appear favorable , the ships ultimately are intended to be frigates , and the upgrade cost — to be proposed by the shipyards later — is a significant unknown . a decision by congress to authorize the block buy of 12 frigates is effectively the final decision for the entire planned buy of 40 lcs and frigates . according to the navy's approved acquisition strategy , the frigates would still require annual appropriations and congress could thus conduct oversight of the program through that process ; however , it will likely be more difficult to make decisions to reduce or delay the program should that become warranted , as the navy may point to losses in favorable block buy prices , as has been done previously with lcs . we recognize that the navy had to revise its frigate acquisition plans based on the secretary of defense's direction to reduce quantities and select a single ship design . however , the direction did not necessitate an acceleration of the frigate procurement and the corresponding shift away from a planned approach that would have provided substantially improved cost , design , and capability information to inform the frigate acquisition decisions . reverting back to a frigate award in fiscal year 2019 would provide time to complete realistic cost estimates , build detail design knowledge , and make significant progress in understanding the operational capability and limitations of lcs , upon which the frigate design will be based . to ensure sound frigate procurement decisions , congress should consider not enacting authority pursuant to the navy's request for a block buy of 12 frigates in the fiscal year 2018 budget and consider delaying funding of the lead frigate until at least fiscal year 2019 when sufficient cost , design , and capability knowledge is expected to be available to inform decisions . to ensure the department and the shipbuilders have sufficient knowledge of the frigate's anticipated cost and design during the procurement process , the secretary of defense should direct the secretary of the navy to delay frigate procurement plans and the award of the lead frigate contract until at least fiscal year 2019 when cost estimates will be completed , detail design could be underway , and significant progress will have been made in demonstrating through testing the operational capabilities of lcs that are relevant to the frigate . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . its written comments are reprinted in appendix i of this report . dod partially concurred with our recommendation to delay procurement plans and the award of the lead frigate contract until sufficient cost , design , and capability knowledge is available to inform decisions . in its response , dod acknowledged that the navy's final contract decision includes risks , but stated that it believes the current plan offers an acceptable tradeoff between technical and affordability risks .