security . state , usaid , and dod have provided security - related assistance in the drc . state has facilitated a multinational forum , the tripartite plus commission , for the drc and nations on its troubled eastern border — uganda , rwanda , and burundi — to discuss regional security issues , including militias operating illegally in the eastern drc . usaid has launched programs to promote the reintegration of some former fighters into congolese society . state is refurbishing the drc's military officer training school and training multiple levels of the military , including brigade - and battalion - staff level officers , on military justice reform , civil - military relations , and other issues of concern . u.s. , ngo , and other officials and experts identified several major challenges that are impeding u.s. efforts to achieve the act's policy objectives . these challenges include ( 1 ) an unstable security environment , ( 2 ) weak governance and widespread corruption , ( 3 ) mismanagement of natural resources , and ( 4 ) lack of basic infrastructure . because these challenges are interrelated , they negatively impact progress in multiple areas . unstable security environment . the drc's weak and abusive security forces have been unable to quell continuing militia activities in the drc's eastern regions , where security worsened during 2007 . for example , the un reported that the drc army is responsible for 40 percent of recently reported human rights violations — including rapes , mass killings of civilians , and summary executions — and drc police and other security forces have killed and tortured civilians with total impunity . state reported that government and other armed forces in the drc have committed a wide range of human rights abuses , including forcing children into the security forces . governance . usaid and state have allocated funds for programs that support the act's governance objectives . usaid has allocated funds to organize itinerant court sessions intended to bring justice institutions closer to citizens , facilitate greater access to justice for vulnerable people , and provide quality legal assistance to the population in relatively inaccessible parts of the drc . usaid has supported an ngo's establishment of democracy resource centers to assist political party leaders , civic activists , elected local and national officials , and government institutions in promoting good governance and democracy . usaid , to promote judicial independence , supported an ngo's efforts by fostering improvements to the drc's legal framework , such as laws on sexual violence and the rights of women , and providing legal assistance activities for victims of sexual and gender - based violence . state allocated funds in 2006 for more than 30 programs by the national endowment for democracy , including programs aimed at informing women of their rights , addressing issues of abuse and corruption , and promoting political participation . further , the drc's unstable security situation has worsened the drc's humanitarian and social problems and impeded efforts to address these problems .