the initiatives are described in more detail below . in august 2014 , dod announced business process and systems reviews ( bpsr ) , which , according to bpsr implementation guidance , are intended to review business processes and the supporting information technology systems within selected organizations in osd and associated defense agencies and dod field activities . the purpose of these bpsrs is to provide senior officials with information to clarify whether their organizations are aimed at departmental outcomes , to identify resources allocated to outcomes and any obstacles to achieving those outcomes , and to identify activities that might be improved or eliminated . as of april 2016 , dod had completed bpsrs for five of nine organizations . in some cases , organizations have taken steps to implement potential improvement and savings opportunities identified by the bpsrs . for example , as a result of a review of the odcmo , the deputy secretary of defense approved the implementation of a single service provider for the pentagon's information technology operations in may 2015 . in other cases , it is unclear whether organizations have begun taking steps to implement the opportunities identified by the bpsr reviews . for example , the office of the assistant secretary of defense for energy , installations , and environment identified a potential opportunity to reduce military construction costs by up to 3 percent through revisions to antiterrorism standards for dod - owned buildings , but noted that this potential opportunity must first be subject to thorough analysis to fully appreciate its validity and return on investment . the department is currently working to complete bpsr reviews for four other organizations . according to odcmo officials , dod may conduct more bpsrs in the future but currently has no specific plans to do so once these four are completed . in july 2015 , dod announced an effort to reduce layers of management and staff — known as delayering — in the management structure of osd and associated defense agencies and dod field activities . according to osd officials and dod's fiscal year 2017 budget request , the department intends to use this review to help respond to certain provisions in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 , namely , the 25 percent reduction to the headquarters baseline amount by fiscal year 2020 and the $10 billion in cost savings from headquarters , administrative , and support activities by fiscal year 2019 . for this effort to reduce osd organizational layers , the odcmo has directed these organizations , with the support of an odcmo team , to rationalize organizational layers and supervisory spans of control , as well as to identify redundant and obsolete workload and capture potential cost savings . odcmo's guidance to the organizations conducting the delayering reviews recommends , among other things , that the number of organizational layers in osd should not be more than five , and that the capabilities and functional areas that have been historically assigned to an osd organization will remain within the same organization , unless a functional assessment allows an opportunity for cross - organizational partnership and shared work activities .