the board continues to reiterate these concerns in its reports . for example , in its most recent report to the congress and the secretary of energy , issued on january 24 , 2002 , the board concluded that , when doe's technical and scientific work is taken as a whole , the technical basis for doe's repository performance estimates is “weak to moderate” at this time . the board added that gaps in data and basic understanding cause important uncertainties in the concepts and assumptions on which doe's performance estimates are now based ; providing the board with limited confidence in current performance estimates generated by doe performance assessment model . as recently as may 2001 , doe projected that it could submit a license application to nrc in 2003 . it now appears , however , that doe may not complete all of the additional technical work that it has agreed to do to prepare an acceptable license application until january 2006 . in september 2001 , bechtel completed , at doe's direction , a detailed reassessment in an effort to reestablish a cost and schedule baseline . in part , doe's desire to meet the 2010 goal is linked to the court decisions that doe — under the nuclear waste policy act and as implemented by doe's contracts with owners of commercial spent fuel — is obligated to begin accepting spent fuel from contract holders not later than january 31 , 1998 , or be held liable for damages . courts are currently assessing the amount of damages that doe must pay to holders of spent fuel disposal contracts . estimates of potential damages for the estimated 12-year delay from 1998 to 2010 range widely from the department's estimate of about $2 billion to $3 billion to the nuclear industry's estimate of at least 50 billion . the damage estimates are based , in part , on the expectation that doe would begin accepting spent fuel from contract holders in 2010 . the actual damages could be higher or lower , depending on when doe begins accepting spent fuel . because of the uncertainty of achieving the 2010 goal for opening the yucca mountain repository , doe is examining alternative approaches that would permit it to meet the goal . for example , in a may 2001 report , doe examined approaches that might permit it to begin accepting wastes at the repository site in 2010 while spreading out the construction of repository facilities over a longer time period . the report recommended storing wastes on the surface until the capacity to move wastes into the repository has been increased . relatively modest - sized initial surface facilities to handle wastes could be expanded later to handle larger volumes of waste . bechtel estimated that doe could complete the outstanding technical work agreed to with nrc and submit a license application in january 2006 . this date , according to the contractor , was due to the cumulative effect of funding reductions in recent years that had produced a “…growing bow wave of incomplete work that is being pushed into the future.” moreover , the contractor's report said , the proposed schedule did not include any cost and schedule contingencies .