professionals . of the 20 meaningful use measures for professionals , 15 are mandatory . pub . 111-5 , div . a , tit . xiii , 123 stat . 115 , 226-279 and div . b , tit . iv , 123 stat . meaningful use of certified ehr technology . the largest of these activities , in terms of potential federal expenditures , are the medicare and medicaid ehr programs . these programs aim to increase the meaningful use of ehr technology by providing incentive payments and , later , penalties for providers — that is , certain hospitals and professionals , such as physicians and nurse practitioners , who participate in medicare or medicaid . to receive incentive payments under the ehr programs , providers must meet two types of requirements: ( 1 ) eligibility requirements that specify the types of providers eligible to participate in the programs and ( 2 ) reporting requirements that specify the information providers must report to the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , an agency within hhs , or the states to demonstrate that they have adopted or meaningfully used the ehr technology . for example , in 2011 , medicare professionals had to report 20 meaningful use measures to cms which encompass a variety of activities related to the delivery of health care and encourage providers to consistently capture information in their ehr systems , such as patient demographics and clinical conditions . in contrast , during the first year professionals participate in the medicaid ehr program , they need only report having adopted , implemented , or upgraded to a certified ehr system . however , in subsequent years , medicaid professionals will have to report on meaningful use measures . the congressional budget office estimated total spending for the medicare and medicaid ehr programs to be $30 billion from 2011 , the year incentive payments began , through 2019 . partial - year estimates for the 2011 program year show that 42,897 providers received approximately $3.1 billion in medicare and medicaid ehr incentive payments . cms is responsible for administering the medicare ehr program . these responsibilities include ensuring providers meet program eligibility and reporting requirements , issuing payments , and ensuring the integrity of those payments . the states and u.s. insular areas are responsible for administering and overseeing the medicaid ehr program , with additional oversight from and partial funding provided by cms . states are not required to offer the medicaid ehr program , although cms anticipates that the majority of states will eventually participate . the hitech act requires us to report on the effect , among other things , of its provisions on the adoption of ehrs by providers . as discussed with the committees of jurisdiction , our objectives for this report are to ( 1 ) examine efforts by cms and the states to verify whether providers meet program requirements and can , therefore , receive incentive payments under the medicare and medicaid ehr programs ; ( 2 ) examine information reported to cms by providers to demonstrate meaningful use in the first year of the medicare ehr program ; and ( 3 ) describe providers' experiences during the first year of the medicare and medicaid ehr programs .