these results suggest that the sector is currently in an operating deficit . our simulations show an operating balance measure well below the historical range and continuing to fall throughout the remainder of the simulation timeframe . since most state and local governments are required to balance their operating budgets , the declining fiscal conditions shown in our simulations suggest the fiscal pressures the sector faces and are a foreshadowing of the extent to which these governments will need to make substantial policy changes to avoid growing fiscal imbalances . that is , absent policy changes , state and local governments would face an increasing gap between receipts and expenditures in the coming years . one way of measuring the long - term challenges faced by the state and local sector is through a measure known as the “fiscal gap.” the fiscal gap is an estimate of the action needed today and maintained for each and every year to achieve fiscal balance over a certain period . we measured the gap as the amount of spending reduction or tax increase needed to maintain debt as a share of gdp at or below today's ratio . as shown in figure 2 , we calculated that closing the fiscal gap would require action today equal to a 7.6 percent reduction in state and local government current expenditures . closing the fiscal gap through revenue increases would require action of the same magnitude to increase state and local tax receipts . growth in health - related costs serves as the primary driver of the fiscal challenges facing the state and local sector over the long term . medicaid is a key component of their health - related costs . cbo's projections show federal medicaid grants to states per recipient rising substantially more than gdp per capita in the coming years . since medicaid is a federal and state program with federal medicaid grants based on a matching formula , these estimates indicate that expenditures for medicaid by state governments will rise quickly as well . we also estimated future expenditures for health insurance for state and local employees and retirees . specifically , we assumed that the excess cost factor — the growth in these health care costs per capita above gdp per capita — will average 2.0 percentage points per year through 2035 and then begin to decline , reaching 1.0 percent by 2050 . the result is a rapidly growing burden from health - related activities in state and local budgets . our simulations show that other types of state and local government expenditures — such as wages and salaries of state and local workers , pension contributions , and investments in infrastructure — are expected to grow slightly less than gdp . at the same time , most revenue growth is expected to be approximately flat as a percentage of gdp . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the projected rise in health - related costs is the root of the long - term fiscal difficulties these simulations suggest will occur . figure 3 shows our simulations for expenditure growth for state and local government health - related and other expenditures .