iii ) . of the top 25 surplus lines insurers as measured by total premiums written ( both admitted and surplus lines ) , 20 wrote over 98 percent of their premiums as surplus lines in 2012 , on average . only three wrote less than 95 percent . by comparison , the remaining smaller surplus lines insurers received on average 38.9 percent of their premiums from the surplus lines business during this period . the carriers are listed in order of descending surplus lines premiums written for 2012 . surplus lines premiums are concentrated in a few states ( see table 7 ) . about half of the surplus lines premiums are written in 4 states , and just under two - thirds of the premiums are written in 10 states . from 2010- 2012 , the 10 states with the most surplus lines premiums written in their states accounted for 62.8 percent , 63.3 percent , and 63.6 percent of the total premiums in 2010 , 2011 , and 2012 , respectively . from 2008 through 2012 , the 199 sl insurers that we examined had cash and invested assets from $152.7 billion to $233.1 billion , respectively , in several asset classes , and are mostly invested in bonds . an increasing percentage was invested in industrial bonds and decreasing percentages in government and other bonds . these insurers also invested somewhat heavily in cash and other short - term investments , but less so than in 2008 . they have also tended to increase their investments in common stock , but that amount remains under 7 percent of total cash and investments ( see table 8 ) . appendix iv: states' premium tax rates on surplus lines sales member of interstate compact slimpact ( when state is insured's home state ) member of interstate compact no ( when state is insured's home state ) . the potential for business to shift between admitted and surplus lines insurance companies owned by a given parent company depends in part on the extent to which that parent's subsidiaries offer the same coverages on both an admitted and surplus lines basis , and in the same markets . while we could not determine if the admitted and surplus lines insurance subsidiaries owned by the parent companies listed in table 10 sold the same coverages or in the same markets , we did examine whether there was a change in the proportion of a parent's subsidiaries business that was done in the surplus lines market . we also examined the surplus lines companies whose parents did not have other property and casualty ( p / c ) subsidiaries . as shown in table 10 , snl financial , inc. ( snl ) p / c groups ( a proxy for parents , including only p / c insurers ) with surplus lines insurer subsidiaries tend to have admitted subsidiaries whose premiums written exceed that of the surplus lines subsidiaries , often by a large percentage .