ii. ) earnings from work can be an important source of income for some households with a member aged 65 or older because , for example , a spouse younger than 65 may be working . yet many people aged 65 or older also work . in 2010 , 29.1 percent of people aged 65 to 69 worked at least part - time and 6.9 percent of people aged 75 or older were employed . what choices have retirees made for managing their pensions and financial assets for generating income ? what policy options are available to ensure income throughout retirement and what are their advantages and disadvantages for retirees ? to identify the strategies that experts recommend retirees employ to ensure income throughout retirement , we interviewed a judgmental sample of a range of financial planners and other financial experts from different academic and industry organizations and a retiree interest group , which were from different geographic areas of the country . ( see app . we focused our discussion on five households that we randomly selected from the health and retirement study ( hrs ) in the lowest , middle , and highest net wealth quintiles with different combinations of pension plans in the middle and highest quintiles . see financial and nonfinancial characteristics by quintile in appendix ii , and the selected households' summary financial data in appendix iii . we also reviewed company specific financial product documentation and studies of retirement income strategies such as those describing systematic withdrawals from retirement savings . to review the choices retirees have made for managing their pension and financial assets for generating income , we analyzed data from the hrs , reviewed others' research , and analyzed data from the social security administration ( ssa ) . we reviewed additional data from the employee benefit research institute ( ebri ) , the census bureau and the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) . to identify policy options that are available to ensure income throughout retirement , as well as their advantages and disadvantages , we reviewed information from a variety of academic , consumer , industry , and government sources . this included selected submissions in response to the labor and treasury rfi , other publications , and interviews with academic , consumer , industry , and government officials . what strategies do experts recommend retirees employ to ensure income throughout retirement ? we conducted this performance audit from january 2010 through june 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for more information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . while income in retirement varies widely by source , social security benefits are the foundation of income for nearly all retiree households .