details are as follows . the army forecasts a surplus of $800 million due to less than expected use of reservists in support of operation noble eagle and savings on costs to move soldiers from one home station to another . the air force forecasts a surplus of $112 million due to the deactivation of reservists . the navy forecasts a shortfall of $61 million resulting from factors including the increase in family separation allowances for personnel in iraq and kuwait . the navy has also activated 1,300 reservists . the marine corps forecasts a shortfall of $107 million . there are 26,500 marines in iraq , including 4,000-5,000 reservists , plus the deployment of two marine expeditionary units in support of gwot that were not anticipated when the marines' budget estimate was developed . to fund forecasted gwot shortfalls , the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) and the military services are planning to take a number of actions . these actions include taking steps to reduce costs , transferring funds from the iraqi freedom fund , transferring funds between appropriations accounts , and deferring planned peacetime activities to use those funds to support gwot . these potential shortfalls could require dod to move funds between or within appropriation accounts . dod uses “transfer authority” to shift funds between appropriation accounts , for example , between military personnel and operation and maintenance . transfer authority is granted by the congress to dod usually pursuant to specific provisions in authorization or appropriation acts . in the fiscal year 2004 national defense appropriation act , dod was given general transfer authority to shift $2.1 billion between appropriations accounts , as well as other transfer authorities that are more specific in nature . dod was also given transfer authority in the fiscal year 2004 emergency supplemental appropriation act to shift $3 billion of the funds appropriated in that act . in both cases , the secretary of defense must determine that this transfer is necessary in the national interest and that it would fund unforeseen and higher priority items than those originally funded , and he must notify the congress promptly of the transfer . the ability to shift funds within a specific appropriation account , like operation and maintenance , is referred to as “reprogramming.” in general , dod does not need statutory authority to reprogram funds within an account as long as the funds to be spent would be used for the same general purpose of the appropriation and the reprogramming does not violate any other specific statutory requirements or limitations . for example , dod could reprogram operation and maintenance funds originally appropriated for training to cover increased fuel costs because both uses meet the general purpose of the operation and maintenance account , as long as the shift does not violate any other specific congressional prohibition or limitation . according to a representative in the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , dod has sufficient funds within its overall appropriation to cover forecasted gwot shortfalls .