estimated costs . this figure generally compares the funding plan presented in the future years homeland security program report to congress for fiscal years 2017-2021 to the program's current annual total cost estimate based on its department - approved life - cycle cost estimate . we use this funding plan because the data are approved by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and office of management and budget , and was submitted to congress to inform the fiscal year 2017 budget process . as a result , the data does not account for other potential funding sources , such as carryover , cost - sharing agreements with other organizations , or fees . in addition , the program's current annual cost estimate accounts for total costs attributable to the program , regardless of funding source . program office staffing profile . this figure is generally based on the staffing assessments conducted by the office of program accountability and risk management , which identify the number of staff a program needs ( measured in full time equivalents ) including how many are considered critical positions ( measured in the number of people ) and how many staff the program actually has . this figure and any discussion of programs' efforts to address identified staffing gaps or critical vacancies do not reflect the january 2017 presidential order to freeze the hiring of federal civilian employees . schedule changes over time . this figure consists of two timelines . the first timeline is generally based on the initial acquisition program baseline ( apb ) dhs leadership approved after the department's current acquisition policy went into effect in november 2008 . because these apbs were approved at different times , the first as - of date varies across programs . the second timeline identifies when that program expected to reach its major milestones as of january 2017 . the second timeline also identifies any new major milestones that were introduced after the initial apb was approved , such as the date a new increment was scheduled to achieve initial operational capability , or the date the program was re - baselined . cost estimate changes over time . this figure generally compares the program's cost estimate in the initial apb approved after dhs's current acquisition policy went into effect to the program's expected costs as of january 2017 . this figure also identifies how much funding had been appropriated to the program through fiscal year 2016 and how it compares to future funding needs . these four figures are generally based on dhs headquarters - approved documentation and data , as identified above . however , in some cases , the figures are based on data the program office provided when it commented on a draft of the assessment if , for example , the data were more accurate or current . each program assessment also consists of a number of other sections depending on issues specific to each program . these sections may include: program governance , acquisition strategy , program execution , test activities , and other issues . lastly , each program's assessment also presents comments provided by the program office and identifies whether the program provided technical comments , and presents gao's response to these comments , as necessary .