workload . state inability to complete workload was , in part , an outgrowth of the workforce shortages and reliance on inexperienced surveyors . more than two - thirds of state agency directors reported on our questionnaire that staffing posed a problem for completing complaint surveys , and more than half reported that staffing posed a problem for completing standard or revisit surveys . in addition , 46 percent of state agency directors reported that time pressures always , frequently , or sometimes contributed to understatement in their states . in response to our questionnaire , 16 percent of surveyors nationwide reported that workload burden influenced the citation of deficiencies — including 14 states with 20 percent or more surveyors reporting the same . more than 50 percent of surveyors identified insufficient team size or time pressures as having an effect on the thoroughness of surveys . surveyors' comments reiterated these concerns — over 15 percent of surveyors who wrote comments complained about the amount of time allotted to complete surveys or survey paperwork , and 11 percent indicated that staffing was insufficient to complete surveys . one state agency director suggested to us that cms establish a national team of surveyors to augment states' when they fell behind on their workload or had staffing shortages . he thought the availability of national surveyors could assist states experiencing workforce shortages and help ensure state workloads were completed . this state had experience with a similar arrangement when it hired a national contractor to complete its surveys of intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded . surveyors , state agency directors , and state performance on federal observational surveys indicated that inadequacies in initial or ongoing training may compromise the accuracy of nursing home surveys and lead to the understatement of deficiencies . in addition , workload affected surveyors' ability to attend training . initial surveyor training . as noted earlier , even though cms has established specific training requirements , including coursework and the smqt certification test , states are responsible for preparing their new surveyors for the smqt . according to cms , 94 percent of new surveyors nationally passed the smqt test in 2008 and , on average , surveyors answered about 77 percent of the questions correctly . these results seem to support the state agency directors' assertions that initial training was insufficient and suggest that the bar for passing the test may be set too low . even though we cannot be certain whether the inadequacies are with the federal or state components of the training , reported differences among states in satisfaction with the initial surveyor training also could reflect gaps in state training programs . about 29 percent of surveyors in high - understatement states reported that initial training was not sufficient to cite appropriate scope and severity levels , compared with 16 percent of surveyors in low - understatement states ( see table 7 ) . similarly , 28 percent of surveyors in high - understatement states , compared with 20 percent of those in low - understatement states , indicated that initial training was not sufficient to identify deficiencies for nursing homes .