interior . interior's office of wildland fire officials said they allocated fuel reduction funds to the interior agencies based primarily on allocation levels from fiscal year 2017 . however , late in the third quarter of fiscal year 2018 , interior officials began testing an approach for reviewing each of the four interior agencies' planned fuel reduction projects for consistency with the secretary of the interior's priorities for the fiscal year . the agencies' plans for such projects were to be updated each quarter to keep interior officials informed on the implementation status for projects underway and of changes to planned projects , according to interior documents . bia . bia headquarters officials told us they allocated fuel reduction funds to their regional offices based on an allocation model that the agency adopted around fiscal year 2012 . the model analyzes wildfire hazard potential and agency staffing levels across bia regions , among other factors . blm headquarters officials said they allocated fuel reduction funds to their state offices based on the results of the 5-year allocation model the agency adopted in 2015 . the model analyzes the location of communities , critical infrastructure , and sagebrush habitat , among other factors , as well as wildfire fire hazard potential for the area covered by each blm state office . according to blm officials , the model provides a relative ranking for each blm state office based on acreage at risk , which helps determine the state offices' respective fuel reduction allocations . for example , blm state offices that manage more sage - grouse habitat that is at high risk for wildfire received larger allocations than offices in states without such habitat or where the sage - grouse habitat was at lower risk for wildfire . fws . fws headquarters officials said they allocated fuel reduction funds to their regional offices based on the results of an allocation system — the fuels management allocation and accountability system — that they have used since fiscal year 2016 . this system generates a risk profile for each fws region based on , for example , the location of infrastructure , population density , and how fuel conditions may affect wildfires that occur on fws - managed land . according to fws officials , this system provides a relative ranking for each fws region based on acreage at risk , which helps determine the regions' respective fuel reduction allocations . in general , the fws regions with the most acreage at risk receive the largest percentage of fws's fuel reduction funds . nps . nps headquarters officials told us that they allocated fuel reduction funds to their regions based primarily on historical allocation levels from fiscal year 2017 . headquarters officials said they are considering ways to improve their allocation process , such as potentially adopting a model developed in one of their regions . specifically , officials from the nps region in our review said that they had developed a model to help analyze the relative risk facing the field units in their region when making allocation decisions .