the 12th registered cert was no longer active . state officials in two of the four states we visited also said that the data on the number of registered programs might not be accurate . a state official responsible for the citizen corps council and cert programs in one state estimated that as little as 20 percent of the registered councils were active , and the state subsequently removed more than half of its 40 councils from the national web site . officials in another state said that the database is not accurate and they have begun to send e - mails to or call local councils to verify the accuracy of registrations in their state . these officials said that they plan to follow up with those councils that do not respond , but they were uncertain what they planned to do if the councils were no longer active . these results raise questions about the accuracy of fema's data on the number of councils across the nation , and the accuracy of fema's measure that registered councils cover 79 percent of the population nationwide . although changes in the number of active local programs can be expected based on factors , including changes in government leadership , voluntary participation by civic leaders , and financial support , a fema official responsible for the citizen corps program acknowledged that the current program registration lists need to be verified to determine whether they are accurate . the official said that fema has plans for improving the accuracy of the data as part of a new online registration process for citizen corps councils and certs in 2010 , which would involve reregistering local programs with the goal of reactivating inactive programs , although it is likely that some inactive programs would be removed from fema's registries . however , it is possible that registration data could continue to be inaccurate because , according to a fema official , the citizen corps program does not have the authority to require all local units to update information , particularly councils or certs that do not receive federal funding . furthermore , fema officials explained that the homeland security grant program guidance designates state officials as responsible for approving initial council and cert registrations and ensuring that the data are updated as needed and said that under the new registration process , state officials will continue to be responsible for ensuring that data are updated as needed . a citizen corps official told us that the community preparedness division does not monitor whether states are regularly updating local unit registration information as they do not have the staff or processes in place to monitor states' efforts and the division would look to regional staff to work with state officials . the official said that fema is considering the possibility of providing contract support to states that request assistance in contacting local programs as part of the re - registration effort . a key fema official told us that they recently drafted a new strategic approach and are considering developing and using outcome measures that are focused on the achievements of citizen corps programs as well as the number of programs , as is currently measured .