our estimate includes these costs . mbp provided less contingency funding than we did for a number of project components ( sequence 2 , the house connector tunnel , the east front interface with the cvc , and the house and senate expansion spaces ) . we believe that our larger allowance is warranted , given the complexity of the work , the cvc project's experience with changes , and our experience in monitoring other capitol hill construction projects . about $528.4 million has been provided for cvc construction , and an additional $7.7 million has been provided for cvc construction or operations . the $528.4 million consists of the 527.9 million we discussed during the subcommittee's october 18 cvc hearing and $500,000 that the department of defense ( dod ) originally provided to aoc for security enhancements for the east front of the capitol and that aoc now intends , with dod's approval , to use for security enhancements related to the cvc's air filtration system . according to aoc , it does not currently plan to use any of the $7.7 million for cvc construction . thus , our preliminary $542.9 million cost - to - complete - estimate indicates that aoc would need about $14.5 million more to complete the project , assuming it is completed in march 2007 . as noted , this estimate is preliminary and does not provide for contractor delay costs beyond the amount included in our november 2004 cost estimate . aoc does not believe that future changes will require as much funding as we do . we recognize that the total amount of funds that will be needed for contingencies , as well as for adjustments to contracts to offset the costs of delays , is unclear at this time and is subject to differing views . additional contingency funds . we believe that aoc will need significantly more contingency funds for the remainder of the project for three major reasons: first , the actual or estimated costs for changes in sequence 2 , the east front interface , and the preconstruction project components either exceed or account for the majority of the funds budgeted for unanticipated work , and available information indicates that additional changes in these areas are likely as the project progresses . for example , the actual and proposed sequence 2 changes to date are more numerous and more costly ( without any provision for risks and uncertainties ) than we , aoc , and mbp anticipated in late 2004 , and the actual and estimated value of the already identified changes greatly exceeds the budgeted contingency funding . moreover , according to aoc's construction management contractor , only about half the value of sequence 2 work is complete . given that about half the work remains and changes to the project have been frequent thus far , we believe that more changes are likely to require funding in the future . second , a number of issues that were not included in mbp's analysis , such as the need for temporary dehumidification , have arisen . proposed change orders for work to address these issues were not completed in time for the work to be included in mbp's report .