we disagree . each of our report findings and recommendations was based on a rigorous and systematic review of multiple sources of evidence , including procurement and budget data , site visits , previous audits , agency studies , economic literature , and testimonial evidence collected in both structured and unstructured formats . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have . should you have any questions about this testimony , please contact thomas melito , director , at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov . other major contributors to this testimony were phillip thomas ( assistant director ) , carol bray , ming chen , debbie chung , martin de alteriis , leah dewolf , mark dowling , etana finkler , kristy kennedy , joy labez , kendall schaefer , and mona sehgal . the united states has principally employed six programs to deliver food aid: public law ( p.l. ) 480 titles i , ii , and iii ; food for progress ; the mcgovern - dole food for education and child nutrition ; and section 416 ( b ) . table 1 provides a summary of these food aid programs . neither usda nor usaid was able to provide us with data on the revenues generated through monetization . these agencies told us that the information should be in the results reports , which are in individual hard copies and not available in any electronic database . various challenges to implementation , improving nutritional quality , and monitoring reduce the effectiveness of food aid programs in alleviating hunger . since u.s. food aid assists only about 11 percent of the estimated hungry population worldwide , it is critical that donors and implementers use it effectively by ensuring that it reaches the most vulnerable populations and does not cause negative market impact . however , challenging operating environments and resource constraints limit implementation efforts in terms of developing reliable estimates of food needs and responding to crises in a timely manner with sufficient food and complementary assistance . cargo preference requires that 75 percent of the gross tonnage of all government - generated cargo be transported on u.s. - flag vessels . dot , usaid , and usda — the three u.s. agencies to whom we direct our recommendations — provided comments on a draft of our report . a second transportation mandate , known as the great lakes set - aside , requires that up to 25 percent of title ii bagged food aid tonnage be allocated to great lakes ports each month . multiple challenges in logistics hinder the efficiency of u.s. food aid programs by reducing the amount , timeliness , and quality of food provided . while in some cases agencies have tried to expedite food aid delivery , most food aid program expenditures are for logistics , and the delivery of food from vendor to village is generally too time - consuming to be responsive in emergencies . factors that increase logistical costs and lengthen time frames include uncertain funding processes and inadequate planning , ocean transportation contracting practices , legal requirements , and inadequate coordination in tracking and responding to food delivery problems .