vol . “hope for whom ? financial aid for the middle class and its impact on college attendance.” national tax journal , vol . “loans , liquidity , and schooling decisions.” cambridge , mass . : harvard university , kennedy school of government and national bureau of economic research , 2002 . “does aid matter ? measuring the effect of student aid on college attendance and completion.” american economic review , vol . “state tuition policy and degree completion.” unpublished manuscript , kennedy school of government , harvard university , 2004 . hansen , w. lee . bill increase educational attainment for returning veterans ? ” journal of labor economics , vol . cameron , stephen v. and james j. heckman . “can tuition policy combat rising wage inequality ? ” in marvin h. kosters ( ed. ) financing college tuition: government policies and educational priorities . washington , d.c.: the aei press , 1999 . cornwell , christopher , david b. mustard , and deepa j. sridhar . “the enrollment effects of merit - based financial aid: evidence from georgia's hope scholarship.” unpublished manuscript , university of georgia , department of economics , 2004 . cronin , julie - anne . “the economic effects and beneficiaries of the administration's proposed higher education tax subsidies.” national tax journal , vol . dynarski , susan . “impact of student financial aid on access” in joseph froomkin ( ed. ) the crisis in higher education . new york , n.y.: academy of political science , 1983 . kane , thomas j . “rising public college tuition and college entry: how well do pubic subsidies promote access to college ? ” working paper no . cambridge , mass . : national bureau of economic research , 1995 . the price of admission: rethinking how americans pay for college . washington , d.c.: brookings institution press , 1999 . “a quasi - experimental estimate of the impact of financial aid on college going.” working paper no . cambridge , mass . : national bureau of economic research , 2002 . “evaluating the impact of the d.c . tuition assistance grant program.” working paper no . cambridge , mass . : national bureau of economic research , 2004 . kitmitto , sami . “the effects of pell grants on enrollment in higher education.” unpublished manuscript , department of economics , university of california — davis , 2004 . leslie , larry and paul brinkman . the economic value of higher education . phoenix , ariz.: american council of education and the oryx press , 1993 . li , judith ann . “estimating the effect of federal financial aid on higher education: a study of pell grants.” unpublished manuscript , department of economics , harvard university , 1993 . linsenmeier , david m. , harvey s. rosen , and cecilia elena rouse . “financial aid packages and college enrollment decisions: an econometric case study.” working paper no . cambridge , mass . : national bureau of economic research , 2002 . long , bridget terry . “how do financial aid policies affect colleges ? the institutional impact of the georgia hope scholarship.” journal of human resources , vol . “the impact of federal tax credits for higher education expenses.” working paper no . cambridge , mass .