we disagree . as stated in the report , collectively , about 16 percent , or 14,816 , of the 91,764 servicemembers who were separated for misconduct had been diagnosed with ptsd or tbi . as we explain in footnote 28 , this proportion is lower than the sum of the proportion diagnosed with ptsd ( 8 percent ) and the proportion diagnosed with tbi ( 11 percent ) because some servicemembers had been diagnosed with both conditions . however , in response to dod's concern , we made additional clarifications in the report . third , dod expressed concern about some of the conditions included in our group of conditions other than ptsd and tbi that could be associated with misconduct . as described in our methodology , we developed our list of conditions through conversations with dod and mental health professionals and reviews of relevant publications . we ultimately selected conditions that could potentially be caused or exacerbated by military service , or that could be misdiagnosed as ptsd or tbi . for example , one of the reasons we included depressive disorders was the discussion of major depressive disorder and depressive symptoms in a 2008 rand study . this study noted that depression could be linked to specific war experiences such as loss , and affects mood , thoughts , and behavior , but often goes unrecognized and unacknowledged . furthermore , because we understand that there can be conflicting evidence on these issues , in key parts of the report we separate discussions of ptsd and tbi data from the data on other health conditions . in response to dod's concern , we also included additional data on ptsd and tbi separately from the data related to other health conditions . finally , dod expressed concern that our use of the word “officials” to describe servicemembers' defense counsel implied that they represented the interests of the military services rather than the servicemembers . in response , we removed the word “officials” in describing defense counsel . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of veterans affairs , the secretaries of the air force , army , and navy , the commandant of the marine corps , the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . to determine the number of servicemembers — officers and enlisted — separated for misconduct in fiscal years 2011 – 2015 and diagnosed with post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , traumatic brain injury ( tbi ) , or certain other conditions , we obtained data from the department of defense's ( dod ) defense manpower data center ( dmdc ) and the defense health agency ( dha ) .