gao - 07-1156 . washington , d.c.: september 24 , 2007 . the corrections were not found to be material . the information contained in the pfs and pendat databases have limitations: 1 ) surveys , including pendat , are subject to several kinds of error such as the failure to include all members of the population in the sample , nonresponse error , and data processing error ; 2 ) the funding ratio and other funding indicators represent the financial status for the fiscal year with the most recent actuarial valuation , and thus do not all represent the same fiscal year's financial status ; 3 ) the plans included in the analysis are not necessarily representative of all state and local government pension plans nationwide ; and 4 ) data for every plan is not available in each year . to obtain information on the funded status of retiree health benefits , we interviewed experts on retiree health benefits funding from national organizations , bond rating agencies , and one local government retiree benefits system . we also reviewed studies conducted by various organizations estimating the funded status . these organizations each obtained information about retiree health benefits liabilities from a number of different state and local governments and then extrapolated these figures to generate a nationwide estimate of all state and local governments . we reviewed the following studies: credit suisse , you dropped a bomb on me , gasb , 2007 . limitations of this study include: only states in the analysis , not local jurisdictions , are included ; assumes that those government entities for which credit suisse was able to find estimates of future retiree health benefit obligations were representative of governments overall in terms of age distribution and funding levels ; and does not consider the variation in actuarial assumptions and methods between the different plans . cato institute , unfunded state and local health costs: $1.4 trillion , 2006 . limitations of this study include: includes states only in the analysis , not local jurisdictions ; assumes that those government entities for which cato was able to find estimates of future retiree health benefit obligations were representative of governments overall in terms of age distribution and funding levels ; does not consider the variation in actuarial assumptions and methods between the different plans ; it is not clear how many employees were covered by the sample because there were so many localities ; and figures on the percentage of employees covered by health care plans in state and local government jurisdictions may not be precise . opeb for public entities: gasb 45 and other challenges , jp morgan , 2005 . limitations of this study include: assumes that those government entities for which they were able to find estimates of future retiree health benefit obligations were representative of governments overall in terms of age distribution and funding levels ; and does not consider the variation in assumptions and methods between the different plans . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. ; new york ; and connecticut , from july 2006 to january 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .