providing shelter . local officials and representatives of voluntary organizations we spoke with said they provided or supported shelters for those affected by the disasters , including those with disabilities . in the three disaster areas we visited , local officials and representatives of voluntary organizations said shelter facilities were generally compliant with ada requirements or met other accessibility guidelines , as applicable . assisting with daily living activities . according to representatives of voluntary organizations , local officials , and fema regional staff in the three disaster areas we visited , voluntary organizations helped individuals with disabilities maintain independence with their daily living activities , such as by replacing durable medical equipment that was lost or damaged . for example , local officials and fema regional staff in texas said that voluntary organizations helped provide individuals with oxygen tanks , wheelchairs , walkers , motorized scooters , communication devices , glasses , and accommodated their needs for personal assistance services . state officials in the three disaster areas we visited said they supported local and voluntary organizations' response efforts with strategic initiatives designed to address the needs of individuals with disabilities . for example , state officials from texas told us that the state established a disability task force on emergency management . convened in 2011 , the task force helped produce guidance to assist local emergency managers and shelter planners in understanding certain requirements and best practices for assisting disaster survivors with disabilities . the guidance includes tips on interacting with and assisting people who use service dogs , canes , crutches , wheelchairs , or have mental illnesses . in recognition of the central role that localities , voluntary organizations , and states serve in disaster assistance activities , fema has developed guidance and training to increase their awareness of requirements and best practices for including individuals with disabilities in emergency planning . specifically , odic officials said that in 2013 fema began offering a key course — integrating access and functional needs into emergency planning — to state and local emergency managers and other stakeholders . participants can take the 2-day course free - of - charge at fema's emergency management institute in maryland or , as fema resources allow , from fema instructors from odic who travel to locations across the country to deliver the course . the course includes substantial information on incorporating the needs of people with disabilities in emergency planning , including information that could have helped address certain challenges we heard about from local officials . for instance , during the september 2015 wildfires in california , local officials said that staffing constraints and a lack of onsite clinical expertise prompted them to redirect individuals with disabilities from general population shelters to hospitals or other facilities where officials felt they could be more safely accommodated . one module of fema's training addresses the importance of accommodating individuals with disabilities in general population shelters unless they have acute medical needs . similarly , disability advocates caution against redirecting individuals with disabilities to medical facilities for shelter during disasters as this practice can have negative impacts on these individuals' personal independence .