we reviewed rmation . we discussed with federal agency officials the collection devices and systems that do not conform to their ability to collect comparable biometric ion , we reviewed key dod biometric documentation management practices related to the collection of ey officials from dod responsible for the ollection of biometrics . ( see above table 1 ) . from the office of management and budget and the project management institute's the standard for program management , we analyzed dod guidance on the collection of biometrics to determine whether any internal control or program management weakness may reduce its ability to collect biometric information and meet biometric mission objectives . to gather the perspective of dod biometric program management , we interviewed dod biometric stakeholders such as the military services , biometric identity management agency , and combatant commands . in addition , we interviewed agency officials from the fbi and dhs to gather their perspectives on dod's management practices related to the collection of biometrics . to determine the extent to which biometric information is shared and has the system capacity needed to facilitate biometric sharing across key federal agencies , including dod , we interviewed officials from dod , dhs , state , and the fbi on the policies , governance processes , and systems in place for sharing biometric information — dod's automated biome identification system ( abis ) , dhs's automated biometric identification system ( ident ) , and the fbi's integrated automated fingerprint identification system ( iafis ) . we analyzed the formal and draft agreements for sharing biometric information between agencies to better as any understand the scope of the biometric information shared , as well limitations , and the degree to which they help facilitate direct conne between the biometric systems to promote automated sharing . in ctivity addition , we collected and reviewed federal policies , guidance , and othe r documentation that covered the sharing of biometric information and the current and planned systems that support biometric information s haring . for example , we reviewed dhs's ident data response sharing policy , which reinforces the dhs agreement with state and doj / fbi on shar ing biometric information . we reviewed information provided by the fbi on iafis and their planned changes to the next generation identification system that would expand their biometric capabilities from fingerprints include the collection , matching , storage , and sharing of other biometrics to such as facial and iris images . in order to confirm information provided by agency officials in interviews on the three primary biometric systems , we developed a structured questionnaire that was pre - tested and provided to key agency officials responsible for each of the three biometric systems . we conducted this performance audit from december 2009 through 2011 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit t obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .