see table 1 . vha policy requires that facilities inspect multiple patient care areas and pharmacies on a monthly basis . these inspections are intended to help mitigate the risk of drug diversion . we found that from january 2015 through february 2016 , one of the four selected facilities we reviewed missed 43 percent of the required monthly inspections , and another facility missed 17 percent of these inspections . the other two va medical facilities we reviewed fully adhered to vha's requirement to conduct monthly inspections . at the va medical facility that missed 43 percent ( 131 of 308 ) of the required monthly inspections , we found that most ( about 95 percent ) of the facility's missed inspections were for the facility's patient care areas , while the remaining 5 percent of missed inspections at this facility were for the pharmacy . for example , we found that inspectors missed monthly inspections in the facility's patient care areas such as the operating room ( all 14 inspections missed ) , bronchoscopy laboratory ( all 14 inspections missed ) , and the intensive care units ( 7 of 14 inspections were missed ) . the facility's coordinator told us that the operating room was not inspected at all during our review period because the inspectors assigned to inspect the operating room needed to arrive before or after normal operating room hours to obtain access to the controlled substances and were unable to conduct the inspections due to their conflicting work schedules . the bronchoscopy laboratory was not inspected at all during our review period because it was not identified by the coordinator as an area having controlled substances . inspectors missed inspections in some patient care areas for 2 to 4 consecutive months . these areas included the intensive care units , cardiac catheter laboratory , and interventional radiology . inspectors also missed inspections of the facility's pharmacy for 3 consecutive months . at the va medical facility that missed 17 percent ( 118 of 702 ) of the required monthly inspections , we found that most ( about 95 percent ) of the missed inspections were for the facility's patient care areas , while the remaining 5 percent of missed inspections at this facility were for the pharmacy . for example , we found that inspectors missed monthly inspections in patient care areas such as the operating room ( 5 inspections missed ) , medical intensive care unit ( 4 inspections missed ) , and pain clinic ( 6 inspections missed ) . inspectors missed inspections of some patient care areas for 2 or 3 consecutive months . these areas included the operating room , pain clinic and inpatient psychiatry . inspectors also missed inspections of one of the facility's four pharmacies for 2 consecutive months . we found one factor that contributed to the missed inspections at the two selected va medical facilities was the lack of an additional control procedure to help prevent the medical facility from missing inspections , such as designating an alternate coordinator or appointing additional inspectors to fill in for the assigned inspector when needed . the coordinator and inspector roles are usually collateral duties .