pub . 96-193 , ยง104 , 94 stat . incompatible land uses and estimates of the population residing within those contours ) , and the location of noise sensitive public buildings , such as schools , as defined by faa regulations . for example , residential development within the dnl 65+ db contour is deemed incompatible , whereas commercial and manufacturing development is not because of the different impacts of noise on people . what is the likely future demand for aip noise grants ? to describe how airport noise exposure has changed over time , we reviewed available literature ; assessed the use of faa noise models ; interviewed industry , faa , and airport officials ; and , for illustrative purposes , performed geographic information system ( gis ) analysis of changes in the areas exposed to airport noise near several large airports . to assess how aip grants have been used by airports for noise mitigation projects and planning , we analyzed faa data in the system of airport reporting ( soar ) . this database includes detailed information about aip grantees , passenger facility charge ( pfc ) approvals , project types , and other information . the typical level of noise in a suburban residential neighborhood that is not near an airport is about dnl 50 db and an urban residential area is about dnl 60 db . we performed a data reliability assessment of soar that included electronic testing , review of faa documentation , and interviews with relevant faa officials . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . congress reserved a set - aside specifically for noise projects that is currently funded at no more than $300 million per year , but has also expanded over time to include other types of environmental projects including water projects at airports undertaken as a result of an environmental record of decision for an airport development project and certain types of air quality projects . capital projects in approved ncps that meet aip criteria are eligible for aip grants . to assess the likely future demand for aip noise grants we compiled and analyzed a range of data from different sources . sources included planned projects in the national plan of faa's main planning tool for integrated airport systems ( npias ) ,identifying future airport capital projects ; data on airports' noise compatibility programs ( ncps ) and noise exposure maps , both key documents for many aip noise grants ; and faa's estimates of the population exposed to significant airport noise . faa calculates these estimates with models that are broadly used and generally considered accurate for the purposes intended . we did not independently assess faa's models . to illustrate the results of our analysis and better understand the real world implementation and future of airport noise programs , we reviewed noise programs at seven judgmentally selected airports . these airports were selected to represent a range of sizes , geographical locations , and use of noise grants . information gathered from these reviews is not generalizable to all airports . we conducted this performance audit from october 2011 to september 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .