dhs agreed with our recommendation . the department's response is reprinted in appendix ii . dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in its response , dhs provided information about planned corrective action in response to our recommendation . dhs stated that border patrol is in the process of planning a training course for bcl agents who have yet to receive bcl training and sector program managers are soliciting and submitting names of those agents who require such training . to what extent does cbp take action to address private property damage suspected to have been caused by illegal border crossers and related enforcement activities ? to describe the types of private property damage landowners along the southwest border are experiencing potentially as a result of illegal border crossers and enforcement activities , we interviewed officials from border patrol headquarters and all nine southwest border sectors , as well as officials from five associations representing landowners along the southwest border , the texas department of public safety , and relevant local government officials . these officials were selected based on their jurisdiction and areas of responsibility related to our review . information we obtained from the associations , the texas department of public safety , and local government officials cannot be generalized , but provided us with perspectives on the types and frequency of private property damage occurring along the southwest border and the extent to which information is collected and maintained on such damage . however , we continue to believe that given the typical 1- to 2-year term lengths of agents serving in the bcl role , it will be important for border patrol to take steps to ensure bcl training is held in future years as well to help better ensure that all bcl agents have the necessary skills to meet the established goals of the bcl program , including facilitating information sharing between border patrol and the community on border security issues . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . in september 2014 , we conducted a visit to south texas — specifically the laredo and rio grande valley ( rgv ) border patrol sectors — where we interviewed 33 selected landowners living along the southwest border to obtain information on the types of property damage they have experienced . the landowners interviewed were identified by the south texans' property rights association and border patrol sector officials as having experienced private property damage . the information obtained during these interviews is not generalizable to all landowners living along the southwest border . we also toured ranches , farms , and other private property along the southwest border to view how such property could be damaged and to observe actual damage .