setminimumstandardsforuiearningsrequirements . the advisory council recommended that all states set their laws so that required base period earnings do not exceed 800 times the state's minimum wage . in its dialogue , the department of labor asked for comments on a proposal that would set the minimum earnings requirements to 400 times the minimum wage ( this figure was selected so that someone who had worked for 20 weeks for 20 hours at minimum wage would be eligible for benefits in every state ) . however , the final proposals from the stakeholder workgroup did not include any recommendation on this issue . donotdisqualifyclaimantsseekingpart - timework . both the advisory council and the stakeholder workgroup proposed that states should not reject claimants simply because they are looking for part - time , rather than full - time , work . donotdisqualifyclaimantswhoquitajobtocareforadependent . although neither group ultimately recommended this proposal , the department of labor originally offered it for comment . however , the employer requires that the worker change work hours to a night shift , and the worker quits because child care is unavailable during the night shift . question 7: the worker quits to care for a sick child ( physician certifies need ) . subsequently , the worker is available to resume work . the worker files for ui . questions 8 , 9 , and 10 dealt with the requirement that a worker be “able and available” for work . for each question , it is assumed that the worker's previous job was a stockroom clerk in a retail chain store , that the worker was laid off this job , and that the worker is otherwise eligible to receive ui . question 8: in her prior job , the worker was employed part - time , for 30 hours a week . when she applies for ui and is asked whether she is available for work , she indicates that she is looking for work with the same hours as those of her previous job and is not able to work more hours than previously . question 9: the worker is available to work full - time during the weekdays . however , she cannot work evenings or weekends because of the lack of affordable child care at that time . as a result , the worker is unable to take jobs that require that she work evenings or weekends . question 10: the worker is available to work full - time but always relies on public transportation to get to work . the worker is therefore unable to take jobs that require work during a night shift because public transportation is generally not available during night hours . in addition , michelle c. verbrugge , richard kelley , grant m. mallie , joan k. vogel , and andrew m. davenport made key contributions to this report . welfarereform:states'implementationandeffectsontheworkforce developmentsystem ( gao / t - hehs - 99-190 , sept. 9 , 1999 ) . welfarereform:states'implementationprogressandinformationon formerrecipients ( gao / t - hehs - 99-116 , may 27 , 1999 ) . welfarereform:informationonformerrecipients'status ( gao / hehs - 99- 48 , apr . welfarereform:states'experiencesinprovidingemploymentassistance totanfclients ( gao / hehs - 99-22 , feb. 26 , 1999 ) .