we are in the process of verifying the accuracy of this list . we also examined written guidance and other relevant documentation describing interior's process for reviewing gaming compacts and we interviewed agency officials about how this review process helps ensure compliance with igra . to determine how states and selected tribes regulate indian gaming , for our ongoing review of indian gaming oversight , we are in the process of contacting all 28 states that have indian gaming operations . we are collecting information about how each of the 28 states oversees indian gaming including information on the states' regulatory organizations , staffing , funding and expenditures , and the types of monitoring and enforcement activities conducted by state agencies . for our ongoing review , we are visiting 6 states — arizona , california , michigan , new york , oklahoma , and washington . we chose these states to provide geographic representation and because they are among the states with the greatest revenue generated from indian gaming . we have completed visits to arizona , california , and oklahoma , which have about 45 percent of all indian gaming operations . we are limiting the discussion of our site visits to these three states for our preliminary observations in this testimony . we are in the process of contacting the remaining 22 states by telephone . given that there are over 200 tribes that conduct gaming , we will not be able to obtain information that is representative of all gaming tribes . rather , for each of the 6 states that we visit , we are interviewing officials from at least one or two federally recognized tribes with gaming operations regarding their approaches to regulating indian gaming . our discussion today will focus on 7 tribes that we have already visited . to determine how the commission regulates and oversees indian gaming and how , if at all , recent organizational changes have affected its regulatory and oversight approach , for our ongoing review we are in the process of collecting information on the commission's policies and procedures related to its regulation and oversight of indian gaming . also , for fiscal years 2004 through 2013 , we plan to obtain and analyze data from the commission about ( 1 ) technical assistance and training provided to tribes , ( 2 ) monitoring activities and enforcement actions taken , and ( 3 ) tribal compliance rates . we are also obtaining information about the commission's recent consolidation of its enforcement and audit divisions into a compliance division , including impacts of this consolidation , if any , on the commission's regulatory and oversight approach . we are conducting our ongoing work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence we plan to obtain will provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we provided a draft of this statement to interior and the commission for their review . the commission provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate .