we agree . unless carriers retain the records they receive on pilots they hire , faa cannot monitor or enforce their compliance with pria's background check requirements . as the agency with exclusive responsibility for overseeing pria's implementation , faa has the authority and , we believe the obligation , to ensure that carriers have a system that will allow the carriers and faa to check compliance with all pria requirements , especially whether required pilot background checks have been completed for pilots hired . to assist faa in overseeing the implementation of pria and to enable faa to determine whether carriers have conducted the required background checks on pilots before making final hiring decisions on pilots , we recommend that the secretary of transportation direct the faa administrator to update faa's advisory circular on pria to ( 1 ) clarify which records to include in pria files that are forwarded to hiring carriers and which records to exclude and ( 2 ) have carriers put in place a system that will allow the carriers and faa to check compliance with all pria requirements , especially whether required pilot background checks have been completed for pilots hired ; incorporate information on pria's web site that informs pilots of their rights , including the right to review and correct their records under pria ; revise the air carrier and other records request form ( faa form 8060- 11 ) to conform with the law's provisions for notification , review , and correction of records by pilots ; and incorporate information on pria into the handbooks , inspection guidance , and training for faa's operations inspectors . we provided dot with a copy of our draft report for review and comment . in our draft report , we recommended that faa develop a regulation requiring that carriers maintain records of background checks on the pilots they hire for as long as the pilots remain in their employ . while faa agreed that carriers need to maintain the records for the agency to monitor and enforce their compliance with the law , faa proposed a change in its administrative guidance rather than a regulation to achieve this goal . we agreed that such a change could accomplish the intent of our initial recommendation and revised the recommendation accordingly . faa concurred with all other recommendations in our draft report and suggested technical changes that we incorporated in this report where appropriate . most carriers found pria records at least somewhat helpful , but they were divided on whether the records were worth the cost . the majority of the carriers favored changes that would make additional information available . nearly three - quarters of the part 121 carriers and about three - fifths of the part 135 carriers that had made at least one request to faa for pria information found pria records to be helpful in making their hiring decisions . both groups of carriers found information from other sources , such as the job interview , the carrier's flight evaluation of the pilot , and the results of the carrier's training program , more helpful .