this is a violation of the 1990 act . dod officials responsible for contract reconciliations told us that they have been using crs to perform reconciliations since 1995 and that redistribution of disbursement charges to the closed appropriation accounts was a routine practice . they also acknowledged that , in 1996 , they identified the crs control weakness that allowed them to make adjustments that charged disbursements to closed accounts . however , they could not tell us why they had not taken action to correct the problem — a problem ( 1 ) they estimated would have cost $24,460 to fix in 1996 and ( 2 ) that resulted in illegal and otherwise improper adjustments . after we identified the problem during our review and brought it to their attention , dod officials implemented the control in may 2001 . in regard to the other needed control that would prevent making adjustments that charge disbursements against appropriation accounts that had not yet been enacted when the disbursement was actually made , dod officials told us that they were not aware of this problem until we brought it to their attention during our audit . they told us they were reviewing the process to determine how to include this control in crs and planned to have it implemented by september 2001 . in an effort to address some of the control weaknesses we identified , dfas columbus required all reconciliation staff to attend a 3-day refresher course on the adjustment process . according to dfas columbus officials , all of the 235 dfas columbus employees involved in performing contract reconciliations had completed this course as of march 2001 . dfas columbus also issued interim guidance in january 2001 in response to our audit findings on the weaknesses in crs . the implementing memorandum noted that the current process using crs was flawed because it did not require that disbursements be compared with dates relevant to the use of appropriations before the adjustments were processed . it specifically noted that the current process allowed for the processing of an adjustment even if the date of the disbursement occurred after the date the funds canceled . to address these problems , the interim guidance provides detailed steps for staff to follow to ensure that the person preparing the adjustments performs the manual comparison of dates and that documentation is prepared to support the comparison process . dfas columbus' efforts are a step in the right direction . however , addressing adjustments that involve moving disbursement charges forward to appropriations that were not enacted at the time the disbursement occurred could enhance the interim guidance . dfas columbus officials agreed that the interim guidance should also address this issue and were in the process of determining what needs to be done . they did not provide us an estimated date for completing this guidance update . during our review of transactions , we noticed that dfas columbus personnel were relying on contract modifications or other contracting officers' informal instructions to justify adjustments that changed disbursements from charges against current or expired appropriations to charges against closed appropriation accounts .