usda did not have any comments . the president of ginnie mae wrote that ginnie mae is working towards implementing our recommendation for conducting sensitivity analyses relating to issuer risk and behavior , but neither agreed nor disagreed with our other specific recommendations that are also intended to better ensure that ginnie mae is developing the most accurate model for estimating costs and revenues . rather , ginnie mae noted that limited funding and resources constrained its ability to develop its model to forecast cash flows for the program consistent with our recommendations . however , as we also note , ginnie mae devoted significant resources to designing its models , but did not fully implement certain practices identified in fasab guidance when redesigning its model . more specifically , ginnie mae hired a contractor in 2009 to redesign its model over a 2-year period , which cost approximately $1.8 million . the expected additional cost for the subsequent 3-year period of the contract is $193,000 . ginnie mae agreed with a number of our findings . in particular , the president of ginnie mae noted that he agreed with the report's analysis that limited staff , substantial reliance on contractors , and the need for modernized information systems are operational risks that ginnie mae can face . in addition , ginnie mae agreed with our observation about the importance of completing ongoing and planned initiatives for enhancing its risk - management processes , as soon as practicable , to improve operations . finally , while ginnie mae agreed that its model could be further enhanced by incorporating some general fasab guidance , the president of ginnie mae stated some aspects of the guidance did not provide a relevant framework for the nature of ginnie mae's business . we recognize these differences , and as discussed in the report , our analysis focuses on particular aspects of fasab guidance that are specific to developing cost estimate models and we believe the guidance that we cite provides a relevant framework for ginnie mae . ginnie mae also discussed a number of other issues that were beyond the scope of this review . for example , ginnie mae stated that its negative credit subsidy calculation is overstated because omb currently does not allow ginnie mae to reduce the negative subsidy to reflect administrative costs . additionally , ginnie mae noted that fcra - type accounting presented a challenge because the agency could not use funds generated from previous fiscal years' negative subsidy payments to cover the cost of defaulted issuers . for this study , we did not assess the accounting that ginnie mae is required to perform . to achieve the objectives of this report , we reviewed ginnie mae's financial statements and their subsidy estimate and re - estimate to understand how ginnie mae's portfolio may affect financial exposure to the federal government and how well ginnie mae has been managing this exposure . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the report date .