house report no . 112-479 accompanying h.r . 4310 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 directed the commander of the space and missile systems center , u.s. air force , to provide a report to the congressional defense committees on lower - cost solutions for providing gps capability following the procurement of the gps iii satellites . the committee provided that the report should identify the system capability , possible implementation approaches , technical and programmatic risks , and the estimated costs of any solutions it recommends . the committee also mandated gao to review the report provided by the commander of the space and missile systems center , and to provide its recommendations to the congressional defense committees within 90 days after the air force report is received . to determine the extent to which the air force's report , lower cost solutions for providing global positioning system ( gps ) capability , met the requirements , and to identify additional information that could guide future investment decisions , we assessed the report and the approach , assumptions , and criteria the air force used to conduct the study . we then discussed the report and our preliminary analysis of the report with gps program and aerospace corporation officials responsible for the report to obtain their perspectives and clarify aspects of the report . we also reviewed other relevant high - level space strategic documents including the national space policy and the 2008 biennial gps report to congress . to identify the technological advances available to the air force and the readiness of those technologies , we interviewed officials from defense advanced research projects agency and the air force research laboratory . to identify additional or clarifying information that could help guide future investment decisions , we sent data collection instruments to ten subject matter experts from the positioning , navigation and timing stakeholder and advisory community to obtain their insights on gps options the air force identified , as well as information that could provide additional insights , and received responses from seven of them . these subject matter experts were advisors to the national space - based positioning , navigation , and timing executive committee or were identified by the national coordination office for space - based positioning , navigation , and timing as experts in the field , and who were also government officials . to assess the completeness of cost estimates cited in the report , we assessed the process used to develop the cost estimates in the study to determine the extent to which they followed gao's 12-step reliable process for developing cost estimates assessment tool . we conducted this performance audit from april 2013 to september 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . marie a. mak , ( 202 ) 512-2527 or makm@gao.gov .