, an undervote ) . in developing the standard test ballots , we did not consider all combinations of some other types of voter behavior that would have significantly increased the number of test cases without providing significant benefits . in most cases , such behavior are variants of the primary voter behavior that we examined . the following sections discuss these areas . in examining how the system allowed voters to make a selection in the florida - 13 race , we found at least 112 different ways a voter could make his or her selection and cast the ballot in the florida - 13 race , assuming that it was the only race on the ballot . specifically , a voter could ( 1 ) initially select either candidate or neither candidate ( i.e. , undervote ) , ( 2 ) change the vote on the initial screen , and ( 3 ) use a combination of features to change or verify his or her selection by using the page back and review screen options . accordingly , we tested these 112 ways to select a candidate on the early voting machine and on the election day machines ( 224 test ballots in total ) . the 112 standard test ballots cover all combinations of the following types of voter behavior: voter makes selection on the initial ballot screen and makes no changes or takes any other action to return to the contest to review or change selection . voter makes selection on the initial ballot screen and decides before leaving that screen to change the selection because of an error in selecting the candidate or for some other reason . voter makes selection on the initial ballot screen and then decides to use the page back option to review or change selection . voter makes selection on the initial ballot screen and continues to the review screen and then decides to use the review screen option to review or change selection . voter makes selection on the initial ballot screen and uses a combination of page back and review screen options to review or change selection . in each instance where a selection could be made , three choices were possible for the florida - 13 race: a selection for one of the two candidates , or no selection ( i.e. the following are examples of voter behavior that were not included in the standard test set in order to reduce the number of test cases to practicable levels: using a one - touch or two - touch method to make changes on a ballot page . varying the number of pages a voter may go back ( “page backs” ) to return to the page containing the florida - 13 race to change or review a selection . casting a ballot from the review screen selection . the vote button is not activated until the voter reaches the last review screen . however , once the vote button has been activated , a ballot may be cast from any screen . for example , a voter may activate the vote button and then return to a contest to review or change the selection using the review screen option .