, the entrance . the public at all levels are confused because the agencies apply the definitions differently — both between and among the agencies.” in commenting on a draft of this report , the park service acknowledged inconsistencies among park service fee demonstration sites that charge entrance and user fees . the agency stated that it was planning to implement recommendations from a recent consultant study that would reduce visitor confusion by using more consistent fees . to achieve the desired level of experimentation with different types of fees , improve the use of more up - to - date collection methods , and to foster more coordination among sites , management improvements are needed in three areas: performance expectations and measures , program evaluation and identification of best practices , and the resolution of interagency issues . improvements in each of these areas could enhance the effectiveness of the program and better position the agencies for full - scale implementation of the program if it becomes permanent . to ensure security and data integrity , we provided each manager with a password that would allow him or her to access and complete a questionnaire . to ensure the consistency and accuracy of our data , we conducted edits to verify that the appropriate questions on the questionnaire had been answered . because of the time and cost involved in doing so , we did not independently verify the data that the site managers provided . however , we did review the questionnaire responses from six of the sites we visited ( at least one in each agency ) to ensure they were consistent with the information we obtained on the fee demonstration program at the time of our visit . to determine what , if any , management improvements can be made to enhance program performance and results , we analyzed the questionnaire survey results relating to the implementation and management of the fee demonstration program and discussed these issues with officials at the four agencies' headquarters offices , and regional or state offices , as well as individual demonstration site managers . table 4 identifies the demonstration sites that we visited . we selected individual sites because they were ( 1 ) in a previous fee demonstration review and warranted follow - up , ( 2 ) identified by agency officials as potential sites to visit , ( 3 ) experimenting with new fees or fee collection practices , and / or ( 4 ) geographically dispersed . at each location we obtained , reviewed , and analyzed supporting documentation , such as laws , regulations , and reports , on the fee demonstration sites . we also discussed recreation fee pricing and related issues with officials of state park agencies in colorado , idaho , ohio , and washington state and the national association of state park directors . furthermore , to gain a better understanding of their perspectives on the fee demonstration program , we contacted the following natural resource / recreation interest groups: america outdoors , american recreation coalition , the mountaineers , the national parks conservation association , the national park foundation , and the natural resources defense council .