third party information reports . in march 2019 , irs updated form 14457 , voluntary disclosure practice preclearance request and application , to include a space specifically for taxpayers to disclose that they have unreported virtual currency income . irs's criminal investigation division ( ci ) reviews the forms irs receives to ensure they meet criteria of eligibility and timeliness , and that the disclosure does not apply to illegal sources of income . ci sends forms that meet the criteria to two of irs's civil operating divisions — large business & international ( lb&i ) and small business / self - employed ( sb / se ) — for review . according to irs officials , the addition of virtual currency to the form was made to assist irs employees in routing the forms to the correct subject matter experts in the civil operating divisions . according to officials with irs's research , applied analytics , and statistics ( raas ) division , raas had begun some virtual currency research projects to better understand virtual currency tax compliance . one project , which raas completed , was to develop compliance profiles for taxpayers that lb&i had identified through its compliance efforts as having virtual currency activity . raas officials also said that they are enhancing their use of a range of third - party information reporting , including reporting of virtual currency activity , to improve irs's ability to assess compliance risks . these efforts focus on use of data from multiple sources to better understand evolving risks and improve estimates of compliance risk . these projects support lb&i , sb / se , ci , and irs's broader research , analysis , and statistical reporting needs . virtual currency has not been included in past national research programs ( nrp ) — irs's detailed study of voluntary tax compliance used as the basis for tax gap estimates . the most recent nrp study of individual tax returns was tax years 2011-2013 , before virtual currencies became more widely used . raas officials said the time frame for the next nrp study of individual tax returns has not yet been determined , but virtual currency may be included in future nrp projects . however , as we have previously reported , cost basis reporting can be particularly valuable for tax compliance . irs officials told us that they are studying the issue of third - party information reporting , and it is included in irs's priority guidance plan as of october 2019 . we have reported that , in general , the extent to which taxpayers accurately report their income is closely aligned with the amount of income that third parties report to them and to irs . for example , according to irs data for tax years 2011-2013 , taxpayers misreported more than half of their income for types of income subject to little or no third - party information reporting ( see figure 4 ) . bitcoins are created through a process called mining . bitcoin miners download software to solve complex equations to verify the validity of transactions taking place on the network , and the first miner to solve a problem is awarded coins in return .