gao - 08-582 . washington , d.c.: may 28 , 2008 . ( see app . i for a list of u.s. agencies and other stakeholders we interviewed during the site visits. ) we also interviewed domestically based fda officials responsible for regulating products , conducting foreign inspections , and overseeing the importation of foreign products to learn about their interactions with the overseas offices . to determine the number of inspections that were conducted by fda officials overseas , we obtained information from fda's field accomplishments and compliance tracking system . to assess the reliability of these data we reviewed related documentation , interviewed knowledgeable agency officials , performed electronic data testing , and compared inspection counts to published data . we found counts of inspections sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . to examine the extent to which fda engaged in long - term strategic planning for the overseas offices , we reviewed fda's strategic planning documents . these included draft strategic plans developed by each overseas office and documents related to fda's plans for evaluating the performance of the offices . through the review of these documents and interviews with overseas and domestic officials , we examined the integration of strategic planning for the overseas offices with planning by other agency components . to examine the extent to which fda engaged in long - term workforce planning , we reviewed fda staffing requirements for the overseas offices and interviewed current overseas staff to learn about their experiences and challenges . we examined the status of fda's workforce planning for the overseas offices , including planning for staff reintegration into fda's domestic operations . to learn about how other agencies have approached the staffing of their overseas offices , we also interviewed officials from other federal agencies that have had overseas staff for several years , including the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and the foreign agricultural service . we also considered information in our previous reports on strategic planning , workforce planning , and the creation of overseas offices by other federal agencies to examine issues for fda to consider in future planning . we conducted this performance audit from january 2010 to september 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . fda is responsible for ensuring the safety of food and medical products marketed in the united states . fda has opened overseas offices to assist it in the oversight of products manufactured overseas . while fda's overseas offices have only recently opened , other federal agencies have long - standing overseas offices and , in previous work , we have identified strategic and workforce planning as important in managing these offices . fda is responsible for ensuring that products marketed in the united states meet the same statutory and regulatory requirements , whether they are produced in the united states or a foreign country .