usitc . according to an usitc ethics official , all employees separating from the usitc have one - on - one meetings with an ethics official to receive counseling and documentation on post - employment restrictions . senior officials receive specific information regarding the parts of the revolving door restrictions specific to them . all separating employees must sign a form to acknowledge receipt of a memorandum describing the post - employment restrictions . attached to the memorandum is oge guidance on post - employment restrictions , a copy of the revolving door law , and various other information regarding how ethics rules apply to former officials' post - employment activities . the packet also contains information on a rule specific to the usitc: no former officer or employee of the usitc who personally and substantially participated in a matter that was pending in any manner or form before the usitc during his or her employment shall be eligible to appear before the usitc as attorney or agent in connection with such matter . no former officer or employee of the usitc shall be eligible to appear as attorney or agent before the usitc in connection with any matter that was pending in any manner or form before the usitc during his or her employment , unless he or she first obtains written consent from the usitc . the memorandum also explains that the usitc's ethics counseling service is available to employees with any questions concerning post - employment activities . former government officials who violate the revolving door law may be subject to criminal and civil penalties . prohibited activity can be imprisoned for up to 1 year , or fined for each violation , or both . any person who willfully engages in conduct violating the provisions of the law may be imprisoned for up to 5 years , or fined for each violation , or both . in addition to criminal punishment , the attorney general is authorized to bring civil suits against anyone who violates the law . if found to have engaged in misconduct , the defendant can be subject to a civil penalty up to $50,000 for each violation , or the amount of compensation that he or she received or was offered for the prohibited conduct , whichever is greater . finally , the attorney general may also petition for injunctive relief in federal court to prevent the defendant from engaging in conduct that violates the law . our discussion on enforcement of the revolving door law refers only to enforcement of 18 u.s.c ยง 207 , the sections of the law related to post - employment activities of former federal employees . violations in conjunction with inspectors general . justice officials reported that the record of revolving door prosecutions is limited and that there are no prosecutions on record for violations by former ustr , ita , and usitc officials . through its annual conflict of interest prosecution survey , oge collects information from justice on all indictments , pleas , convictions , etc. , that deal with the conflict of interest laws . according to oge's prosecution surveys , there have been 26 reported cases for revolving door prosecutions from 1990 through 2008 .