est . fy 2003 it cost: $0 future plans: replacement by jbpds in fiscal year 2004 and full automation of real - time detection and identification of the full range of biological agents . early warning outbreak and response system ( ewors ) type of system: surveillance ewors aids in the collection of standardized medical data , particularly for making area - specific and regional comparisons for trend analysis of the data in order to target early warning outbreak recognition of infectious diseases . ewors provides for timely and accurate dissemination of outbreak information , leading to effective intervention measures , including investigative and containment activities . it establishes baseline measures for trend analysis that is used to differentiate outbreak from non - outbreak disease occurrence ; employs a syndromic approach in contrast to disease - specific reporting classifications ; and disseminates real - time information and key - function data analysis for instant and programmed interpretation . ewors integrates public health and hospital networks and was designed as a complementary system for conventional surveillance methodologies . future plans: establishment of the system in the americas and continued expansion in southeast asia . electronic surveillance system for the early notification of community - based epidemics ( essence ) type of system: surveillance essence is used in the early detection of infectious disease outbreaks and it provides epidemiological tools for improved investigation . it collects ambulatory data from hospitals and clinics in a central database on a daily basis . epidemiologists can track — in near real - time — the syndromes being reported in a region through a daily feed of reported data . essence uses the daily data downloads , along with traditional epidemiological analyses that using historical data for baseline comparisons and more cutting edge analytic methods such as geographic information system . analysts have implemented an alerting algorithm methodology to detect localized outbreaks and purely temporal methods for low - level , scattered threats . dod public health professionals use information from essence to make crucial decisions about potential health emergencies , based on verified and current data . est . fy 2003 it cost: $500,000 future plans: to improve the interface and find , analyze , and add new data sources . essence is being upgraded to incorporate the use of nontraditional civilian data sources ; it is currently operational in the greater washington , d.c. area . this expanded capability integrates both military and civilian health data with daily records of pharmacy sales , school absenteeism , and other sources , to allow for early warning of emerging infections . embedded common technical architecture ( ecta ) type of system: supporting technology ecta will provide military personnel with sensor connectivity , analysis , and warning and reporting capability for joint service combat platforms , command and control centers , and fixed sites . est . fy 2003 it cost: not available future plans: ecta will merge the current capabilities of the multipurpose integrated chemical agent alarm and the jwarn system and provide additional data processing , production of reports , and access to specific data to improve the efficiency of limited personnel assets . it will consist of the hardware and software required to provide sensor connectivity and analysis between detectors and service - specific systems .