ii. ) indexing the bendpoints and holding replacement factors constant prevents bracket creep and keeps the resulting earnings replacement rates relatively level across birth years . indexing the benefit formula in this way helps benefits for new retirees keep pace with wage growth , which reflects increases in the standard of living . figure 2 , which shows earnings replacement rates for successive groups of illustrative workers , illustrates the program's history with indexing initial benefits . replacement rates declined before the first benefit increases were enacted in 1950 and then rose sharply as a result of those increases . from 1950 until the early 1970s , replacement rates fluctuated noticeably more from year to year than over other periods ; this pattern reflects the ad hoc nature of benefit increases over that period . between 1974 and 1979 , replacement rates grew rapidly for new beneficiaries , reflecting the double indexing of the 1972 amendments . the 1977 amendments corrected for the unintended growth in benefits from double indexing , and replacement rates declined rapidly as a result . this pattern of increasing and then declining benefit levels is known as the notch . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 , if you have any questions about this report . other major contributors include charles jeszeck , michael collins , anna bonelli , charles ford , ken stockbridge , seyda wentworth , joseph applebaum , and roger thomas . genuine microsimulation of social security and accounts ( gemini ) is a microsimulation model developed by the policy simulation group ( psg ) . gemini simulates social security benefits and taxes for large representative samples of people born in the same year . gemini simulates all types of social security benefits , including retired worker , spouse , survivor , and disability benefits . it can be used to model a variety of social security reforms including the introduction of individual accounts . gemini uses inputs from two other psg models , the social security and accounts simulator ( ssasim ) , which has been used in numerous gao reports , and the pension simulator ( pensim ) , which has been developed for the department of labor . gemini relies on ssasim for economic and demographic projections and relies on pensim for simulated life histories of large representative samples of people born in the same year and their spouses . life histories include educational attainment , labor force participation , earnings , job mobility , marriage , disability , childbirth , retirement , and death . life histories are validated against data from the survey of income and program participation , the current population survey , modeling income in the near term ( mint3 ) , and the panel study of income dynamics . additionally , any projected statistics ( such as life expectancy , employment patterns , and marital status at age 60 ) are , where possible , consistent with intermediate cost projections from social security administration's office of the chief actuary ( ocact ) . at their best , such models can provide only very rough estimates of future incomes . however , these estimates may be useful for comparing future incomes across alternative policy scenarios and over time .