we are not making any recommendations in this report . we also interviewed 8 former iaea , and 10 former u.s. government and national laboratory officials , and representatives of 10 expert organizations — research institutions and nongovernmental organizations with knowledge in the areas of nuclear verification , monitoring , and safeguards . we selected these experts by first identifying organizations that had previously served as sources of iaea subject matter experts for gao . to ensure a wide range of viewpoints , we supplemented our initial selection with individuals and organizations identified through a literature search and by recommendations from our initial set of expert organizations . we requested interviews from all the identified experts and suggested contacts and interviewed all who agreed to participate ( two experts provided written responses in lieu of in - person interviews ) . such activities include containment and surveillance measures . containment and surveillance measures include using video cameras to detect movement of nuclear material and tampering with agency equipment as well as seals that indicate whether the state has tampered with installed iaea safeguards systems . further , under the jcpoa , iran agreed to provisionally apply , and seek ratification of the additional protocol , which gives the agency's inspectors access to an expanded range of declared activities and locations , including buildings at nuclear sites , and locations where undeclared activities may be suspected . under the jcpoa , iran also agreed to fully implement “modified code 3.1” of the subsidiary arrangement to its csa . according to iaea , the text of the modified code 3.1 in iran's subsidiary arrangement is based on model language under which a country is generally required to provide preliminary design information for new nuclear facilities “as soon as the decision to construct , or to authorize construction , of such a facility has been taken , whichever is earlier.” in addition , iran made commitments under the jcpoa to cooperate with iaea and facilitate its safeguards activities . for example , iran agreed to make arrangements to allow for the long - term presence of iaea inspectors by issuing long - term visas , among other things . iran also agreed to permit the use of modern technologies such as online enrichment monitors to increase the efficiency of monitoring activities . the jcpoa includes a mechanism in which its participants commit to resolve an access request from the agency within 24 days after the request is made . the jcpoa also describes a dispute resolution mechanism through which a participant in the agreement can bring a complaint if it feels that commitments are not being met and that allows the participant to cease performance of its commitments in certain cases if dispute resolution fails to resolve the participant's concerns . iran has also agreed to import enumerated nuclear - related and nuclear - related dual - use materials and equipment exclusively through a new “procurement channel” established under the jcpoa . the jcpoa details the establishment of a joint commission comprised of representatives of participants in the agreement , whose “procurement working group” will provide information to iaea on these proposed imports . under the jcpoa , iaea may access the locations of intended use of such nuclear - related imports .