gao - 03-145 . washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2003 . va health care: va has not sufficiently explored alternatives for optimizing third - party collections . gao - 01-1157t . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2001 . this schedule allows va to more accurately bill for the care provided . consequently , va cannot determine how effectively it supplements its medical care appropriation with third - party collections . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks . i will be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . the plan seeks increased collections through standardization of policy and processes in the context of decentralized management , in which va's 21 network directors and their respective medical center directors have responsibility for the collections process . since management is decentralized , collections procedures can vary across sites . for example , sites' procedures can specify a different number of days waited until first contacting insurers about unpaid bills and can vary on whether to contact by letter , telephone , or both . in addition , a may 2001 change in the reasonable - charges fee schedule for medical evaluations allowed separate bills for facility charges and professional service charges , a change that contributed to the higher volume of bills in fiscal year 2002 . studies have suggested that operational problems — missed billing opportunities , billing backlogs , and inadequate pursuit of accounts receivable — limited va's collections in the years following the implementation of reasonable charges . for example , a study completed last year estimated that 23.8 percent of va patients in fiscal year 2001 had billable care , but va actually billed for the care of only 18.3 percent of patients . the patient intake process involves gathering insurance information and verifying that information with the insurer . the medical documentation process involves properly documenting the health care provided to patients by physicians and other health care providers . the coding process involves assigning correct codes for the diagnoses and medical procedures based on the documentation . another study , examining only professional - service charges in a single network , estimated that $4.1 million out of $4.7 million of potential collections was unbilled for fiscal year 2001 . of that unbilled amount , 63 percent was estimated to be unbillable primarily because of insufficient documentation . in addition , the study found that coders often missed services that should have been coded for billing . according to a cbo official , va could increase collections by working on operational problems . these problems included unpaid accounts receivable and missed billing opportunities due to insufficient identification of insured patients , inadequate documentation to support billing , and coding problems that result in unidentified care . from april through june 2002 , three network revenue managers told us about backlogs and processing issues that persisted into fiscal year 2002 . for example , although network 9 ( nashville ) had above average increases in collections for both inpatient and outpatient care , it still had coding backlogs in four of six medical centers .