iii. ) the original job simulations were developed following a content - oriented validation strategy consistent with the uniform guidelines on employee selection procedures and the principles for validation and use of personnel selection procedures . this was done by detailing special agents' job tasks and the knowledge and abilities required to perform those tasks , establishing linkages between job tasks and the knowledge and abilities required , and demonstrating linkages between the required knowledge and abilities and selection procedures . the 2001 sapp report noted that there is extensive literature documenting the validity of job simulations for predicting supervisory and managerial performance and that simulation measures are viewed as having a potentially high degree of content validity , thereby reducing the possibility of discrimination . dea special agents trained by the contractor serve as assessors . to minimize the degree of candidate / assessor familiarity and partiality when assigning candidates to assessors , the assessment centers director collects familiarity and partiality ratings from assessors to determine the extent to which assessors know a promotion candidate and how impartially the assessors believe they could evaluate the candidate . another way of fostering fairness is through the representation of minorities and women among the assessors . overall , during the 1997-2001 period , the proportion of minority and women assessors for both the gs - 14 and gs - 15 assessment centers exceeded the proportion of minorities and women participating in the gs - 14 and gs - 15 sapps . as a check on how assessors carry out exercises and developed scores , the assessment centers director reviews videotapes of exercises , evaluates assessors' notes , and independently scores candidates' performances . in addition , the director surveys candidates and prepares a report on the results of each assessment center . the report analyzes overall scores for each assessment center and scores by competency and exercise , comparing the scores of african americans and whites and , to a lesser extent , hispanics and whites , to identify competencies in which larger and smaller race / national origin effects were observed and suggest possible areas for concentrating test improvement , training , and developmental efforts . in this regard , the contractor made a number of revisions each year from 1997 through 2001 to the assessment centers exercises in an attempt to reduce differences . the working group plays an integral role in the assessment centers . working group members said that they oversee the development of the exercises , approve the design of the annual assessment centers , monitor the proceedings , and review and approve the overall results . as part of their oversight , they said that they meet with participants to get their feedback and review videotapes of the role - play exercises to determine if they were conducted fairly and properly . they described the assessment centers as first - class operations that meet standards for fair treatment and valid procedures . the november 2002 change to increase the number of sacs serving as rotating members was made to address this concern . another concern the minority special agents expressed was about the board's racial , ethnic , and gender representation .