( see app . i for a detailed discussion of how we carried out our work. ) each year , between 1.3 million and 1.5 million households have commercial moving firms move their household goods to another state , according to industry estimates . there are approximately 2,900 motor carriers registered with the department of transportation that are active in transporting household goods across state lines . these 2,900 carriers represent a small percentage of the approximately 654,000 commercial motor carriers engaged in all aspects of interstate commerce ( and registered with the department ) . available information indicates that consumer complaints in the household goods industry are increasing . in addition , there was widespread agreement among the government , industry , and consumer organizations we contacted that the department's lack of action has contributed to the growth of problems . the department defends its limited actions by stating that safety activities are the primary focus of its motor carrier efforts . however , the department has not taken steps to understand the nature and extent of problems in the industry — and therefore to determine whether its limited approach to oversight and enforcement is appropriate . nor has it made more than minimal efforts to provide information to consumers that would assist them in making more informed choices . consumer education as a preventative tool takes on increased importance if the motor carrier administration is to pursue its course of limited oversight and enforcement . the motor carrier administration has recently recognized the need to be more active in this area and has outlined plans to increase its involvement . we are making recommendations for actions to better ensure that these actions are fully implemented and achieve the intended results . we recommend that the secretary of transportation direct the administrator of the federal motor carrier safety administration to undertake activities that would help it better oversee the industry . these actions should include undertaking and completing the study of alternative dispute mechanisms required by the icc termination act of 1995 and ensuring that the motor carrier administration's division offices collect and maintain information on consumer complaints consistently and that the information be shared across division offices and with headquarters . we further recommend that the secretary direct the administrator to determine the adequacy of its enforcement efforts . these actions should include assessing whether enforcement activities against household goods carriers are effective and sufficient and , if not , increase enforcement actions against interstate household goods carriers , as outlined in the motor carrier administration's plans , and determining whether legislative changes are needed to supplement the department's efforts , including ( 1 ) authorizing the states to enforce federal statutes and regulations and ( 2 ) changing the federal statute limiting carriers' liability with respect to interstate shipments of household goods . if such changes are needed , the department should submit them to the congress . this determination should be made after the other recommendations in this report have been implemented and sufficient time has passed to assess the effects of the department's actions .