such attention is important . while few cases of improper conduct have been publicly identified , there are also few safeguards in place to identify whether personal conflicts of interest even exist . the new far requirements making it mandatory for certain contractors to set and follow written codes of business ethics and conduct will not assure that the advice and assistance received from contractor employees is not tainted by personal conflicts of interest . the officials in most offices we reviewed that operate within this environment believe that the risk to the government is considerable enough to warrant safeguards when contractors are involved in source selection ; at least some believe that risk extends to contractors that are involved in other activities that feed into spending decisions . arguments that no change is needed focus on costs , which may be calculable . yet , costs of contractor employees constructing options for their personal gain — an outcome increasingly likely based on sheer numbers — would likely never be known , let alone calculable as long as there is no transparency . changes to current policy and practices that are targeted , tailored and implemented at the lowest practicable level are a way to minimize the cost of addressing personal conflicts of interest among contractor employees and to maximize the value of any additional safeguards . several program offices have already demonstrated this is possible through the use of contract clauses and processes to identify potential conflicts and at least one small company has adopted similar safeguards on its own . we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense ( acquisitions , technology , and logistics ) , to develop and implement policy that requires personal conflict of interest contract clause safeguards for defense contractor employees that are similar to those required of dod's federal employees . in developing its policy , dod should include requirements for contractor companies to identify and prevent personal conflicts of interest for certain of their contractor employees who are performing contracted services that provide inputs to dod's decision - making in such mission - critical areas as the development , award , and administration of government contracts and other advisory and assistance functions .