state had no comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the secretaries of defense and state . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7331 or johnsoncm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . workforce management . dod officials indicated that workforce challenges , particularly related to turnover and staffing levels , inhibit effective project design , program implementation , and oversight . they noted that workforce turnover within the policy oversight office was systemic and that program oversight responsibilities historically entail more work than available personnel can manage . dod officials indicated that they increased office staff by three permanent positions in fiscal year 2015 . according to so / lic officials , as of february 2016 , the policy oversight office had six permanent employees — four civilians and two military — who provide oversight of global train and equip and other dod counterterrorism partnership program activities . in addition , other non - permanent staff and temporary detailees are sometimes assigned to help oversee the program's key functions . in addition , dod officials indicated that , for several projects , the associated embassy's security cooperation office responsible for implementing projects in - country had staffing limitations that affected their ability to supervise project delivery and implementation , maintain equipment delivery records , and gauge the recipient units' implementation of the projects . further , a u.s. africa command official stated that combatant command and policy oversight office staffing challenges inhibit effective proposal development , implementation , oversight , and sustainment of projects . building partner capacity is a central focus of the u.s. counterterrorism strategy , as underscored by the allocation of $675 million for global train and equip program activities in fiscal year 2015 — a sharp increase compared to the $275 million annual average in the preceding 6 years . although dod has established a methodical interagency process to develop and select security assistance project proposals that considers key security sector assistance planning elements , it did not require documentation of recipient unit absorptive capacity or fully document support for consideration of other key elements in planning fiscal year 2015 projects . fully documenting the basis of project approval decisions could enhance transparency , provide additional assurance that resources are efficiently allocated , and help to ensure the long - term benefits of projects and careful use of scarce u.s. and partner nation resources . in addition , dod has not consistently fulfilled its congressional reporting requirements for the program in a timely manner . dod's fiscal year 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 assessment reports were late . without dod's timely fulfillment of its assessment reporting requirements , congress may not have comprehensive and current information about past successes and failures that could help ensure that u.s. resources are effectively used to build partner capacity to combat terrorists .