gao - 13-11 . washington , d.c.: october 25 , 2012 . critical infrastructure protection: summary of dhs actions to better manage its chemical security program . gao - 12-1044t . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2012 . we identified three limitations that should be considered when using our results . iscd has made various revisions to its security plan review process . under the cfats rule , once a facility is assigned a final tier , it is to submit a site security plan to describe security measures to be taken and how they will address applicable risk - based performance standards . the november 2011 internal memorandum that discussed various challenges facing the program noted that iscd had not approved any security plans and stated that the process was overly complicated , did not leverage iscd's resources , and created bottlenecks . in addition , the memorandum stated that revising the process was a top program priority because the initial security plan reviews were conducted in a manner inconsistent with the spirit and intent of the cfats authorizing legislation — that is , plan reviewers used the risk - based standards as prescriptive criteria rather than as standards for developing an overall facility security strategy . according to iscd , the initial reviews were conducted using the 18 risk - based standards as prescriptive criteria because iscd had not developed guidance for reviewers of facility plans to use when considering the merits of those plans . iscd officials told us that they had been working on a solution prior to the internal memorandum being finalized in november 2011 . however , three factors could affect program operations as iscd moves forward: the first factor is a risk assessment approach that is not yet complete because it does not consider all of the elements of risk called for by the nipp and the cfats rule . iscd has begun to take some actions to develop a more robust risk assessment approach , but iscd would be better positioned to assess risk if it developed an overall plan , with milestones and time frames , incorporating the results of the various efforts to more fully address each of the three components of risk — consequence , threat , and vulnerability — and take actions to enhance the current risk assessment approach . iscd has commissioned an expert panel to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the current risk assessment approach and the results of the panel's work could help iscd identify issues for further review and recommendations for improvements . this effort and the results from it represent one component of the various efforts iscd will have to consider moving forward to ensure that the risk assessment approach is complete per the nipp and the cfats rule . after iscd has developed and completed its efforts to enhance its risk assessment approach by using the results of the current expert panel's efforts as well as incorporating the issues we identified along with the sandia national laboratories' work on economic consequences , an independent peer review would provide better assurance that iscd can appropriately identify and tier chemical facilities , better inform cfats planning and resource decisions ; and provide the greatest return on investment consistent with the nipp and cfats rule .