gao - 11-744 . washington , d.c.: august 26 , 2011 . ( see fig . federal agencies , states , and stakeholders have investigated and prosecuted operators , prevented illicit shipments of pharmaceuticals from entering the united states , and blocked rogue internet pharmacies' ability to market and sell their products . despite facing substantial challenges , several federal agencies — including fda , ice , and uspis — have investigated and prosecuted rogue internet pharmacy operators that have violated federal laws . ( see fig . 2 for a screenshot of a rogue internet pharmacy that fda recently investigated , which led to a conviction in 2011. ) agencies have investigated rogue internet pharmacies independently and conducted collaborative investigations with other federal agencies through ice's national intellectual property rights coordination center . in certain instances , agencies have collaborated with international law enforcement agencies . agency investigations have resulted in the conviction of operators , fines , and asset seizures . specifically , according to agency officials , from fiscal years 2010 through 2012 , fda opened 227 rogue internet pharmacy investigations and its investigations led to the conviction of 219 individuals and more than $76 million in fines and restitution ; ice initiated 138 investigations and its investigations led to 56 convictions and the seizure of nearly $7 million ; uspis worked on 392 investigations and arrested 560 individuals ; irs conducted 22 investigations and its investigations led to the conviction of 5 individuals ; and dea conducted 49 investigations into rogue internet pharmacies and seized more than $1 million . in addition to investigating rogue internet pharmacy operators , federal agencies have investigated companies for providing services to rogue internet pharmacies . in 2011 , a doj and fda investigation led to a settlement under which google agreed to forfeit $500 million for allowing certain rogue internet pharmacies to place sponsored advertisements in its search engine results from calendar years 2003 through 2009 . in march 2013 , a doj investigation led to a settlement under which ups agreed to forfeit $40 million for transporting and distributing prescription drugs , including controlled substances , from certain rogue internet pharmacies to u.s. consumers from calendar years 2003 through 2010 . as part of their settlements with doj , both companies noted that they will stop serving rogue internet pharmacies and create compliance programs to identify rogue actors , in exchange for not being prosecuted by the u.s. government for crimes related to this activity . in addition , according to fedex documents , doj is investigating the company for potentially violating federal law by shipping prescription drugs from internet pharmacies . federal agencies have also taken steps to shut down rogue internet pharmacy websites . for example , fda and other federal agencies have participated in operation pangea , an annual worldwide , week - long initiative in which regulatory and law enforcement agencies from around the world work together to combat rogue internet pharmacies . in 2013 , fda took action against 1,677 rogue internet pharmacy websites during operation pangea .