review of parcels . parcels nominated for lease are evaluated by blm field staff to determine whether the proposed land is available to be leased and whether it conforms with blm policies , regulations , and land use plans . if the parcel is determined to be available , the potential impacts of oil and gas leasing on the environment are then evaluated as required under nepa . they also said they lacked information from blm as to whether deferred parcels would be offered at a future sale or to what extent their concerns would be factored into blm's future decision making on those parcels . in may 2010 , the secretary of the interior announced several agencywide leasing reforms that are to take place at blm . some of these reforms may address some concerns raised by protester groups , by providing the public with earlier and more consistent data about which parcels may become available for leasing . blm field offices are to provide a new 30-day public review - and - comment period that precedes the 30-day protest period . doing so will potentially give stakeholders longer to review parcels and decide whether to file a protest and , if so , longer to prepare the protest . the reforms also require blm state offices to make available on their web sites their responses to protest letters filed during the protest period after a notice of lease sale . according to blm , among other goals , the intent of these changes ( which we have not evaluated ) is to provide meaningful public involvement , as well as more predictability and certainty , in the leasing process . most parcels identified in blm lease sale notices from fiscal year 2007 through fiscal year 2009 in colorado , new mexico , utah , and wyoming were protested ; protests came from a diverse group of entities , including nongovernmental organizations representing environmental and hunting interests , state and local governments , businesses , and private individuals . these groups and individuals listed a wide variety of reasons for their protests , including concerns that oil and gas activity would ( 1 ) impair fish and wildlife habitats or air and water quality or ( 2 ) adversely affect recreational or agricultural uses of the land . overall , we found that 74 percent of parcels whose leases were competitively sold in the 53 lease sales that took place in the four state offices from fiscal years 2007 to 2009 were protested , although this percentage varied considerably by state ( see table 2 ) . similarly , in our review of a sample of lease sales , we found that most parcels were protested . to gain a further understanding of the extent of protests beyond those parcels competitively sold ( in other words , to capture parcels deferred before lease sale and those that did not sell competitively ) , we examined protest information for our random sample of 12 of the 53 lease sales .