transparency . a comprehensible and predictable system that employees , management , and taxpayers can understand . flexibility . the ease and ability to modify the system to meet agency - specific needs and mission requirements , including modifying rates of pay for certain occupations to attract a qualified workforce , within the framework of a uniform government - wide system . adaptability . the ease and ability to conduct a periodic , fundamental review of the entire classification system that enables the system to evolve as the workforce and workplace changes . simplicity . a system that enables interagency mobility and comparisons with a rational number of occupations and clear career ladders with meaningful differences in skills and performance , as well as a system that can be cost - effectively maintained and managed . rank - in - position . a classification of positions based on mission needs and then hiring individuals with those qualifications . rank - in - person . a classification of employees based on their unique skills and abilities . the values policymakers and stakeholders emphasize could have large implications for pay , the ability to recruit and retain mission critical employees , and other aspects of personnel management . this is one reason why — despite past proposals — changes to the current system have been few , as finding the optimal mix of attributes that is acceptable to all stakeholders is difficult . for example , on the one hand a rank - in - person system classifies individuals based on individual qualifications such as performance , education , and seniority . this approach is used by the military and senior executive service . on the other hand , a rank - in - position system classifies positions based on factors such as the duties , responsibilities , and qualifications the position requires and is widely used across the federal government . the extent to which the design and implementation of the gs classification system balances the attributes of a modern , effective classification system varies . there are two main design features of the gs system: ( 1 ) a set of standardized occupations , and ( 2 ) statutorily defined grade levels and steps . we found , in concept , these features incorporate several of the key attributes including internal and external equity , transparency , simplicity , and rank - in - position . however , as agencies implement the gs system the attributes of transparency , internal equity , simplicity , flexibility , and adaptability are reduced . this occurs , in part , because as discussed earlier in this report , some attributes are at odds with one another , so fully achieving one attribute comes at the expense of another . opm publishes and defines a set of occupational standards that describe and differentiate all of the different types of work performed across the government , which agencies then use to develop position descriptions . providing standard government - wide occupational standards is an example of how transparency and internal equity are built into the system . for example , the occupational standard for an information technology specialist clearly describes the routine duties and tasks , and experience required for the position .