liquidity . liquid markets have many buyers and sellers willing to trade and have sufficient shares to execute trades quickly without markedly affecting share prices . generally , the more liquid the overall market or markets for particular stocks are , the lower the market impact of any individual orders . small orders for very liquid stocks will have minimal market impact and lower trading costs . however , larger orders , particularly for less liquid stocks , can affect prices more and thus have greater market impact and higher trading costs . transparency . when markets are transparent , the number and prices of available shares are readily disclosed to all market participants , and prices and volumes of executed trades are promptly disseminated . a key factor that can affect market participants' perceptions of market transparency is the volume of shares publicly displayed as available at the best quoted bid and ask prices , as well as at points around these prices — known as market depth . markets with small numbers of shares displayed in comparison to the size of investors' typical orders seem less transparent to investors because they have less information that can help them specify the price and size of their own orders so as to execute trades with minimal trading costs . price volatility . price volatility is a measure of the frequency of price changes as well as a measure of the amount by which prices change over a period of time . highly volatile markets typically disadvantage investors that execute trades with less certainty of the prices they will receive . conversely , market intermediaries , such as broker - dealers , can benefit from highly volatile markets because they may be able to earn more revenue from trading more frequently as prices rise and fall . the trading that occurs on u.s. securities markets is facilitated by broker - dealers that act as market intermediaries . these intermediaries perform different functions depending on the type of trading that occurs in each market . on markets that use centrally located trading floors to conduct trading , such as the new york stock exchange ( nyse ) , trading occurs primarily through certain broker - dealer firms that have been designated as specialists for particular stocks . these specialists are obligated to maintain fair and orderly markets by buying shares from or selling shares to the other broker - dealers who present orders from customers on the trading floor or through the electronic order routing systems used by the exchange . interacting with the specialists on the trading floor are employees from large broker - dealer firms that receive orders routed from these firms' offices around the country . at the same time that decimal pricing was being implemented , other changes were also occurring in the marketplace . for example , in 1997 , sec enacted new rules regarding how market makers and specialists must handle the orders they received from their customers , including requiring firms to display these orders to the market when their prices are better than those currently offered by that broker .