we disagree . the get well plan has two stated goals: to staff 100 percent of the positions for ( 1 ) instructors at the uas pilot school ; and ( 2 ) combat uas pilots , and does not address the three issues we discuss in this recommendation . we continue to believe that the air force needs to take action to help ensure that its strategy is fully tailored to address the challenges we identified and that the air force acknowledged existed . dod also partially concurred with our recommendation that the air force monitor the extent to which achieving the human capital goals in its strategy helps the air force achieve its programmatic goals . dod stated that it agrees that continuous monitoring of the air force get well plan is critical and noted that the air force provides regular updates to the senior leadership of the department on the goals and status of the get well plan . dod also stated that based on those updates , the office of the secretary of defense will provide additional direction as necessary and appropriate . as we noted in the report , the air force does not measure how achieving goals in its get well plan helps it to achieve its three programmatic goals: ( 1 ) meeting combat demand , ( 2 ) staffing enough personnel to uas units to allow uas pilots time to train and take part in development activities , and ( 3 ) providing surge uas combat capabilities when needed . for example , the air force's current monitoring does not address how achieving goals in the get well plan will help the air force provide uas pilots time to train or help the air force provide surge uas capabilities . we continue to believe that until the air force develops such an approach and begins monitoring the extent to which achieving the human capital goals in its strategy helps the air force achieve its programmatic goals , the air force will not know whether its strategies are having the intended effect on its program goals . dod partially concurred with our recommendation that the air force explore the potential use of additional flexibilities to enable it to increase the number of uas pilots in its workforce to meet future needs . dod stated that the air force is exploring additional measures with the potential to increase the number of pilots in the uas pilot workforce . it stated that , as needed , the air force will engage with the office of the secretary of defense to secure authorities necessary to implement desired measures relating to the workforce , but that further direction from the secretary of defense is not necessary at this time . as we stated in the report , the air force has taken some steps to incorporate two flexibilities — providing “dwell time” and retention bonuses — into its strategy to address uas pilot shortages . we continue to believe that exploring the use of additional flexibilities to increase the number of uas pilots is important given that current air force requirements for the number of uas pilots it needs may underrepresent those needs , and air force leadership expects demand for uas pilots to grow .