according to u.s . the tracking and inventorying of containers in the centcom area of responsibility is addressed in the aforementioned centcom container management letter of instruction , initially issued in 2006 according to u.s. transportation command officials and periodically updated thereafter , most recently in january 2014 . in this letter , centcom emphasizes the necessity for the timely entry of data for all containers moving into , within , or out of the centcom area of responsibility ; stresses the importance of maintaining accurate theater - wide container inventories through a robust inventory management program ; and details the roles and responsibilities of the various dod organizations that constitute the theater container - management structure . according to centcom officials , the centcom container management letter of instruction and its periodic updates address concerns raised by army audit agency reports from 2005 and 2009 and the joint logistics board's report of 2012 that recommended enhancing and clarifying the authority of the theater container - management structure ; conducting physical inventories of containers in order to better track them ; and completing property - management functions for containers purchased in the centcom area of responsibility . notwithstanding dod's efforts to improve container management in the centcom area of responsibility by either updating existing or developing new policy and guidance in response to recommendations made by dod and other organizations , dod cannot ensure recommendations have been addressed in policy and guidance as appropriate . this is because , according to dod officials , no single office or entity within the department has comprehensively identified all of the reports and recommendations the various dod and other organizations have made to improve container management in the centcom area of responsibility . standards for internal control in the federal government call for an organization's internal control processes to ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are promptly resolved . when we asked key officials from dod organizations that play some role in or have some responsibility for container management to identify what , if any , steps had been taken to address recommendations that have been made by dod and other organizations , the officials responded that this information was not easily available without extensive work to compile . because dod could not provide us with a comprehensive list of reports and their associated recommendations addressing container - management challenges in the centcom area of responsibility , we conducted our own literature search and subsequently compiled a list of 25 reports and reviews issued by dod and other organizations from 2003 through 2013 . included in these reviews and reports are 95 recommendations aimed at improving container management in the centcom area of responsibility ( see table 1 ) . although this list may not be comprehensive because our search was limited to the period 2003 through 2013 , and dod had no source or means to corroborate or verify what we identified , when we requested that dod provide us information on the steps taken to address the recommendations we did identify , dod provided information on steps taken to address 55 of the 95 recommendations that we identified . however , dod did not provide answers for the remaining 40 recommendations .