wisconsin . wisconsin's charter school performance data were incomplete . the designated contact reported results for the charter schools authorized by the state agency , a small proportion of the state's 128 charter schools . to determine education's role in charter school flexibility and accountability , we conducted interviews with representatives of the charter school program , title i , the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , selected other formula and discretionary grant programs , the grant administration and payment system ( gaps ) financial information system , the office of inspector general , and education's research offices . we also interviewed charter school experts , including bryan hassel , public impact ; katrina bulkley , rutgers university ; mark cannon , national association of charter school authorizers ; louann bierlein - palmer , western michigan university ; and anna varghese , center for education reform . we identified grant programs for inclusion in our assessment on the basis of program size and nomination by education officials , and we asked education officials to identify grant programs in which charter schools were likely to participate . we also reviewed documentation for the grant programs , the performance - based data management initiative ( pbdmi ) , gaps , and the charter school impact study design . we also used findings from the interviews and document review to determine the implications of nclba for charter schools . to examine education's role in sponsoring charter school research , we reviewed existing studies of charter school accountability for school performance and financial integrity . this review was designed to identify the research sponsored by education and other policy research organizations that assessed some aspect of charter school accountability . we framed our search for existing research broadly enough to identify studies that focused on the oversight relationship between authorizers and charter schools . we included research sponsored by education and other organizations to identify the range and quality of research evidence on charter school accountability available to charter school state agencies and authorizers . to identify a potential population of studies , we consulted with knowledgeable education officials and conducted a search of automated bibliographic data bases for studies of charter schools focused , in whole or in part , on any aspect of charter school accountability for school performance and financial integrity . we gave priority to studies that covered all or multiple states with operating charter schools or had highly salient findings . appendix iii lists the studies identified . appendix ii: selected data tables from survey education ( doe ) education ( boe ) agencies ( leas ) choice is restricted to some locations or circumstances . did not respond . law changed april 2003 to further expand choices available . the respondent from texas chose not to answer this question . however , the respondent acknowledged that when the legislation was passed , the intent was to have both state and lea authorizers . employed annual surveys of all charter schools , operating in school years 1995-96 to 1998-99 .