as such , we made no changes to our report . the sentence referred to in this comment was not intended to criticize the implementation of demand bidding . for both types of emergency programs , we noted that enrollment is typically voluntary . however , customers participating in contractual programs sign agreements that might entail financial penalties if a participant does not reduce demand as required by the program . we agree with ferc that these programs within the nyiso are important . in responding to our fourth objective , we discussed the reasons for the success of these programs , citing them as examples that might be applied in other areas . for these reasons , no changes in response to this comment were included in our report . figure 2 illustrates this system . the programmable thermostat receives and displays information about the current electricity price period ( eg , peak prices ) and allows customers to preprogram demand reductions for up to four appliances based on time - of - day or in response to changes in prices , or both . the switches are automatically triggered if the preprogrammed criteria are met such as if high critical peak prices are in effect . for example , customers can choose to shut off the heat pump , air conditioner , pool pump , or hot water heater if prices reach a certain point or other events occur . by automating demand reduction , this program allows customers to avoid consuming costly electricity , even if they are not actually present to monitor or turn off the equipment . however , this system also allows the consumer to override the preset programming if desired ; for example to operate the air - conditioning if they are home during the day . the data on electricity usage is sent periodically via an integrated telephone line . utility officials noted that installing meters and related equipment for their programs costs , on average , $600 to $700 per customer . in addition , because gulf power was able to demonstrate to regulators that the program provided benefits to nonparticipants , it was possible to have some of the cost of the equipment paid for by a state mechanism used to fund energy efficiency and other similar programs . the cost - sharing required participants to pay 60 percent and all ratepayers to pay 40 percent of the costs . these technologies had the added benefit of making participation easy , a consideration that was important to customers . gulf power also overcame the barrier of limited customer awareness through advertising and providing additional services that customers valued , such as whole house surge suppression and power outage notification , for a fee of $4.95 per month . this charge also enables the utility to recoup some of its expenses . gulf power utilized mass marketing techniques to make consumers aware of the program and to provide basic information about the advantages available to participants . further , the utility provided a detailed information package to interested customers and actively followed up with telephone and other contacts .