some of these challenges are crosscutting issues . fewer erroneous payments to contractors . as agreed , using the selected outcomes for dod as a framework , we ( 1 ) assessed the progress dod has made in achieving these outcomes and the strategies dod has in place to achieve unmet performance goals and ( 2 ) compared dod's fiscal year 2000 performance report with the department's prior year performance report for these outcomes to identify improvements made . additionally , we agreed to analyze how dod addressed its major management challenges , including the governmentwide high - risk areas of strategic human capital management and information security that we and the dod inspector general had identified . appendix i provides detailed information on how dod addressed these challenges . appendix ii contains dod's comments on a draft of our report . gpra is intended to shift the focus of government decisionmaking , management , and accountability from activities and processes to the results and outcomes achieved by federal programs . new and valuable information on the plans , goals , and strategies of federal agencies has been provided since federal agencies began implementing gpra . under gpra , annual performance plans are to clearly inform the congress and the public of ( 1 ) the annual performance goals for agencies' major programs and activities , ( 2 ) the measures that will be used to gauge performance , ( 3 ) the strategies and resources required to achieve the performance goals , and ( 4 ) the procedures that will be used to verify and validate performance information . these annual plans , issued soon after transmittal of the president's budget , provide a direct linkage between an agency's longer - term goals and mission and day - to - day activities . annual performance reports are to subsequently report on the degree to which performance goals were met . the issuance of the agencies' performance reports , due by march 31 , represents a new and potentially more substantive phase in the implementation of gpra — the opportunity to assess federal agencies' actual performance for the prior fiscal year and to consider what steps are needed to improve performance and reduce costs in the future . the mission of the department of defense is to support and defend the constitution of the united states ; provide for the common defense of the nation , its citizens , and its allies ; and protect and advance u.s. interests around the world . defense operations involve over $1 trillion in assets , budget authority of about $310 billion annually , and about 3 million military and civilian employees . directing these operations represents one of the largest management challenges within the federal government . this section discusses our analysis of dod's progress in achieving outcomes and the strategies that dod has in place , particularly human capital and information technology , for accomplishing these outcomes . in discussing these outcomes , we have also provided information drawn from our prior work on the extent to which dod provided assurance that the performance information it is reporting is credible . in general , the extent to which dod has made progress in achieving the six outcomes is unclear .