gao . immigration enforcement: benefits and limitations to using earnings data to identify unauthorized work . gao - 06-814r . washington , d.c.: july 11 , 2006 . gao . immigration enforcement: weaknesses hinder employment verification and worksite enforcement efforts . ( 2 ) what are selected countries' efforts to limit the employment of unauthorized foreign workers , and what are the reported advantages and disadvantages of these efforts ? ( 3 ) what are selected countries' programs for providing unauthorized immigrants with an opportunity to obtain legal status , referred to as regularization , and what are the reported advantages and disadvantages of these programs ? in addition , this report provides information on selected countries' foreign worker programs , worksite enforcement efforts , and regularization programs in appendixes ii through x . to answer these questions , we obtained government agency reports and other documents and interviewed officials during site visits to belgium , canada , france , germany , spain , switzerland , and the united kingdom . we also interviewed officials and obtained documents from , but did not visit , australia . in addition , we sent four questionnaires to government agencies in 13 countries and received responses from argentina , austria , the netherlands , new zealand , portugal , and singapore . we selected the countries for our review based on their net immigration rate , size of population , membership in the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) or world bank classification as high income , range of immigration policies , and geographic location . in the 7 countries we visited and australia , we interviewed officials from the labor ministries , interior ministries , finance ministries , treasury departments , social security agencies , immigration agencies , law enforcement agencies , and local government agencies . we analyzed information and documents , such as agency annual reports , manuals , and briefing materials , from these countries to determine the characteristics , functions , resources , and outputs of the countries' programs to admit foreign workers , enforce laws that prohibit the employment of unauthorized foreign workers , and regularize unauthorized immigrants . our questionnaires included general questions about the characteristics , functions , outputs , and agency views on the advantages and disadvantages of these programs in the surveyed countries . we did not independently examine countries' laws and regulations , but rather based characterizations of countries' programs on information provided by countries in response to the questionnaires or in interviews as of july 2006 . in addition , we interviewed officials and analyzed reports from the international labour organization ( ilo ) , the international organization for migration ( iom ) , oecd , and the european union ( eu ) . we also examined reports and studies from research organizations and immigration experts , including reports from the migration policy institute ; the center on migration , policy and society at oxford university ; and the center for comparative immigration studies .