gao - 03-936t . to view the full product , click on the link above . for more information , contact linda koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or koontzl@gao.gov . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i appreciate the opportunity to participate in the subcommittee's hearing on the challenges of records management in an electronic era . as you know , agencies are increasingly moving to an operational environment in which electronic — rather than paper — records are used to document their activities and business processes . this migration to an increasingly electronic environment is likely to accelerate in light of the e - government act of 2002 , which encourages the expansion of electronic government . master copies of electronic records in nara's archives www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? this transformation is leading to improvements in the way federal agencies work and interact with each other and with the public , but it has also led to the generation of vast and rapidly growing volumes of electronic records . these records need to be properly managed , as they provide documentation and information that are necessary for essential government functions and for protecting government and citizen interests . also , a small percentage of documents and other records are sufficiently significant that they must be preserved in archives for the historical record . overall responsibility for the government's electronic records lies with the national archives and records administration ( nara ) , whose mission is twofold: ( 1 ) oversight of records management , which governs the life cycle of records ( creation , maintenance and use , and disposition ) , and ( 2 ) archiving , which is the permanent preservation of documents and other records of historical interest . in carrying out these missions , nara and agencies use a process known as scheduling to assess the value of records and determine their disposition . as requested , in my remarks today , i will begin by providing some perspective on records management and its importance to the government in today's environment . in addition , i will describe the challenges that the government faces in managing and summarize the results of our june 2002 report on electronic records management issues , provide information on nara's actions since we issued our report and assess its progress in responding to the recommendations we made to improve governmentwide records management , and assess nara's efforts to acquire an advanced electronic record archive ( era ) , intended to preserve and provide access to electronic records . our evaluation of records management challenges and issues is based on our june 2002 report , entitled information management: challenges in managing and preserving electronic records . to update nara actions since our report , we analyzed key documents and plans , and we interviewed appropriate agency officials . our assessment of nara's efforts to acquire era reflects the results of ongoing work , the results of which will be reported in august 2003 . we performed our update work from june to july 2003 in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards . nara's mission is to ensure “ready access to essential evidence” for the public , the president , the congress , and the courts .