cleared contractors . dss officials said that dss in transition will require contractors to identify assets in a greater level of detail than what was previously expected of them . in order to develop a security plan unique to the facility , the contractor's facility security officers will need to understand these assets and why adversaries would want to target them in order to develop and implement specific security measures . since dss officials cannot be onsite every day , they have to rely on the contractor's facility security officer or other key management personnel at cleared facilities to identify and report potential problems . however , dss officials noted that convincing facility staff to spend more time on security - related matters may be difficult at facilities where one employee may serve as the contractor's facility security officer in addition to having other responsibilities . in addition , dss officials stated that contractors' security costs are typically not profit - generators and realize that dss in transition may require the contractor to expend more time , money , and energy to address vulnerabilities or enact policies to safeguard against adversaries . dss recognizes the need to keep industry informed and its implementation plans for dss in transition need to address what level of communication and coordination is required . for example , dss currently uses a rating system to indicate how well a contractor is meeting the requirements of the operating manual as a metric for how it is protecting classified information . as dss moves toward developing customized security plans that are unique to each facility's threats and assets , it needs to formalize new approaches to communicate with contractors how well they are protecting classified information . in addition to piloting dss in transition , dss is reassuming responsibility for conducting background and security investigations for the department of defense , which could potentially magnify its workload challenges . other government agencies . dss relies on collaborating with other cognizant security agencies to develop a complete picture of the threats to contractors . in addition to the department of defense , there are four other federal agencies that have authority to inspect and monitor facilities to ensure the protection of classified information . dss may only conduct security reviews for facilities performing contracts awarded by these agencies if the department of defense is the cognizant security agency for that facility . contracts where another agency is the cognizant security agency may involve information coveted by adversaries , but dss industrial security representatives have acknowledged that they may not know why the information is coveted or that it exists . given the new approach to develop a complete picture of threats to a facility , dss will need additional information from other cognizant security agencies that it may not have sought in the past . as a result , dss needs to establish how best to collaborate with other agencies , such as identifying appropriate points of contacts and specific time frames to conduct outreach , to effectively implement dss's new approach to monitor contractors . dss previously held these responsibilities but they were transitioned to the office of personnel management in 2005 .