other targets are unclear . for example , one measure for both goal 1 , objective 3 , initiative 1 ( tasks and capabilities for the ncr ) and goal 1 , objective 3 , initiative 2 ( gap analysis , recommendations , and appropriate actions ) is the progress toward closing the gap between baseline and target capabilities . the target is “what we think we need to accomplish in hspd 7 / 8.” any targets such as this would require clarification if progress toward results is to be assessed . a future ncr strategic plan could also be strengthened by including more complete time frames for initiative accomplishment , including specific milestones . in some cases , the time frame description is missing or is inconsistent with timeframes provided within performance measure descriptions that generally cover activities or tasks . for example , goal 3 , objective 1 , initiative 1 ( region prevention and mitigation framework ) has a time frame for fall 2006 , but measures include targets in 2007 . in several instances , measures of tasks or activities include milestones , but an overall time frame is not indicated . for example , goal 3 , objective 3 , initiative 1 ( critical infrastructure and high - risk targets risk assessments ) and goal 4 , objective 1 , initiative 1 ( corrective action program for gaps ) do not have timeframes identified , but measures have dates extending into 2007 and 2009 respectively . time frames should also match the initiative . in some cases , it is unclear if the initiative description should be expanded to encompass activities that appear outside the scope of the initiative as written , but result in the time frame for the overall initiative . for example , goal 3 , objective 1 , initiative 3 ( health surveillance , detection , and mitigation functions plan ) has an overall time frame of december 2010 , but the 2010 date reflects implementation of a patient tracking system . in the list of measures , the plan itself is targeted for december 2008 . either the initiative description could be changed to include the system or the patient tracking system measure could be removed or revised . a future ncr strategic plan could provide fuller information on the resources and investments associated with each initiative . for example , each initiative in the november 18 powerpoint presentation has a section for cost and cost factors . however , there is not an explanation in the document as to what cost categories of high , medium , or low mean in terms of dollar ranges . oncrc officials told us that these descriptions should be considered more notional in nature , with a low usually meaning well under $1 million and those rated high in the tens of millions . in many cases , the categorization of cost for an initiative is missing from the november 18 powerpoint presentation initiative sections . more specific cost information by initiative , such as the funded and unfunded grant information that is provided in a summary format , would facilitate decision making in comparing trade - offs as options are considered .