iii . describing the status and challenges to the development of a technology . table 2 provides example questions , design approaches , and gao tas , for design objectives related to describing the status and challenges to the development of a technology . questions may address , for example , what the current state of the technology is , and may involve identifying and describing the status of the technology , which gao tas have done using a variety of methods . does the design address the needs of the congressional requester ? will the design yield a quality , independent , balanced , thorough , and objective product ? will the design likely yield information that will be useful to stakeholders ? will the design likely yield valid conclusions on the basis of sufficient and credible evidence ? will the design yield results in the desired time frame ? will the design likely yield results within the constraints of the resources available ? how will policy options be identified and assessed , if applicable ? figure 1 outlines three phases and seven considerations for ta design . while figure 1 presents ta design as a series of phases , actual execution is highly iterative and nonlinear . teams may need to be prepared to re - visit design decisions as information is gathered or circumstances change . below are some considerations for the team to think about while designing a ta and throughout the process of performing the ta . this list is not exhaustive , and some of the considerations may not be unique to tas . of the technology ) and context of the technology ( such as social , political , legal , and economic factors ) circumstances change and new information comes to light , it may be necessary to revisit scope and design . the initial situational analysis may also be used to: inform the goal ( s ) , purpose , and objectives ( also known as researchable questions ) challenges to design and implementation of the ta , such as: ( 1 ) possible changes in operating environment ; ( 2 ) characterizing or quantifying anticipatory factors , uncertainty , and future condition ( s ) ; and ( 3 ) lack of or limitations with data . see chapter 3 for more specific examples . communication strategy: consider potential users of the product ( s ) and how information regarding the ta will be communicated . how results are communicated can affect how they are used , so it is important for ta teams to discuss communication options . statement . ta teams will need to think about whether the initial policy options are appropriate to the size and scope of the ta , as well as whether they are in line with the policy goal and the overall ta purpose and objectives . in keeping with the iterative nature of ta design and execution , any initial policy option list will be revisited , modified , or refined , as needed , as the work progresses and more information is gained . ta teams may also need to plan to include policy analysis and exploration of the ramifications of each policy option during subsequent design and implementation phases .