most reported having clients from all states . however , 16 private firm officials told us that because of new state laws that restrict their operations , they would not accept clients who live in particular states . examples of such restrictions include requiring private firms to obtain a license , requiring firms to be bonded , or limiting the percentage of fees that firms can charge . table 2 summarizes four characteristics of the 24 firms that participated in our structured telephone interviews . these firms are the focus of this report . we reviewed 138 randomly selected applications at one private firm and analyzed the answers to the question , “why seek the services of a private firm ? if checked , you are required to provide a copy of this form to your employee . if your employee works in a state that is different from the state that issued this order , a copy must be provided to your employee even if the box is not checked . we appreciate the voluntary compliance of federally recognized indian tribes , tribally - owned businesses , and indian - owned businesses located on a reservation that choose to withhold in accordance with this notice . priority: withholding under this order / notice has priority over any other legal process under state law against the same income . federal tax levies in effect before receipt of this order have priority.if there are federal tax levies in effect , please contact the state child support enforcement agency or party listed in number 12 below . combining payments: you can combine withheld amounts from more than one employee's / obligor's income in a single payment to each agency / party requesting withholding . you must , however , separately identify the portion of the single payment that is attributable to each employee / obligor . reporting the paydate / date of withholding: you must report the paydate / date of withholding when sending the payment . the paydate / date of withholding is the date on which the amount was withheld from the employee's wages . you must comply with the law of the state of employee's / obligor's principal place of employment with respect to the time periods within which you must implement the withholding order and forward the support payments . employee / obligor with multiple support withholdings: if there is more than one order / notice to withhold income for child support against this employee / obligor and you are unable to honor all support order / notices due to federal or state withholding limits , you must follow the law of the state of employee's / obligor's principal place of employment . you must honor all order / notices to the greatest extent possible . ( see #10 below. ) termination notification: you must promptly notify the child support enforcement agency or payee when the employee / obligor no longer works for you . please provide the information requested and return a complete copy of this order / notice to the child support enforcement agency or payee .