gao - 06-389 . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2006 . dod had no written comments on our report . doe , dod , and state provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in its comments , doe wrote that it does not believe that our report adequately reflects the department's efforts to maintain handheld radiation detection equipment provided by state and other agencies because doe has a process in place to identify and replace handheld equipment used at sites where doe maintains radiation portal monitors installed by state and other agencies . however , we believe that the extent of doe's program is fairly presented because this effort does not cover all handheld equipment previously provided by state and other agencies — only equipment at the selected sites visited by doe's maintenance teams is maintained . further , the current operational status of the vast majority of handheld radiation detection equipment previously deployed by state and other agencies cannot be determined , in large part , because state has not maintained a comprehensive list of such equipment . in its comments , state disagreed with our lack of emphasis on the “informal coordination role played by the department's front - line country program officers.” state considers informal consultations between these officials and their interagency counterparts to be the “primary means of coordination of its efforts concerning radiation detection equipment provisions.” state believes that such informal coordination is “much more important than coordination through the interagency working group or with state's in - country advisors.” we have added language to our report noting the role of informal coordination in these programs . however , state's emphasis on them as its primary means of coordinating radiation detection assistance programs conflicts with its own planning documents . in its strategic plan for interagency coordination of u.s. government nuclear detection assistance overseas , state claims that “a standing sub - working group , the international nuclear detection interagency working group , will routinely coordinate nuclear detection , interdiction , and investigation assistance provided by u.s. government agencies.” state's plan emphasizes the role of the interagency working group and states that such coordination is “vital to the overall success of u.s. nuclear detection assistance efforts.” state's plan does not , however , emphasize or even mention informal coordination mechanisms as a method for state's coordination of u.s. radiation detection assistance programs . state also believes that its in - country advisors are unfairly criticized for not maintaining comprehensive lists of radiation detection equipment in countries where they are responsible . state cited competing claims on the advisors' time , their many responsibilities within the exbs program , and the limited resources at their disposal .