rfs . rfs may increase costs for some refiners depending on the percentages of renewable fuels required by epa and on other factors . as discussed previously , costs for some refiners to comply with rfs rose in 2013 , which some of the stakeholders we contacted attributed to concerns about the blend wall . the blend wall may remain a concern into the future because statutory renewable fuel blending requirements continue to increase — they more than double from 2012 to 2022 — while the consumption of petroleum products is expected to increase only slightly . several stakeholders told us that the effect of the rfs depends in particular on how epa addresses the blend wall in the annual standards it issues in the future . furthermore , epa's timeliness in issuing the standards could also affect costs to the extent that delays affect the supply of renewable fuels , rin prices , and refiners' ability to plan and budget effectively for compliance . several representatives of refiners told us that future delays would contribute to investment uncertainty and higher costs for refiners . epa officials said that they did not believe delays have affected market participants , and that the market for rfs credits has provided flexibility to refiners and other obligated parties . the extent to which the rfs increases costs in the future could also be affected by the outcome of any relevant litigation and of legislative proposals to change the rfs or how epa implements it . tier 3 . according to epa , to meet the tier 3 fuel sulfur standards , refiners would need to install or upgrade hydrotreating capacity or take other steps to reduce the sulfur content in fuels , which will likely increase industry - wide costs . epa projected that 67 out of 108 refineries would modify or purchase some equipment , and the capital costs of installing this equipment and operating costs to run it would average about $0.0065 per gallon , and total $804 million in 2017 . an industry study of the tier 3 proposal estimated that the regulation would increase costs by up to $0.09 per gallon for the highest - cost refinery , and several refinery representatives told us that tier 3 would increase their costs . the extent to which the refining industry will be affected by tier 3 standards would have been greater had epa decreased the per - gallon maximum allowable sulfur levels in gasoline — known as caps . in the final standards , epa maintained the current 80 ppm cap , but had sought comment on whether it should decrease the cap to as low as 20 ppm . a stakeholder told us that tier 3 would be manageable if epa maintained the current caps , but far more difficult if the caps were lowered . one study we reviewed estimated that industry could incur additional capital expenses to achieve lower sulfur caps , ranging from $2 billion to over $6 billion dollars depending on the sulfur cap level in the final standards . stationary source ghg requirements . several of the refining industry representatives we contacted expressed concerns that stationary source ghg requirements could become more stringent in the future .