the complaint was not substantiated . the coroner's investigation of the resident's death 5 months later resulted in a referral based on seven serious pressure sores on the decedent's feet , lower back , and hips , a problem that was not noted during the hospitalization . we revised our analysis to include 1 of the 22 cases because the coroner confirmed that he had indeed made the referral . thus , we adjusted the number of coroner referrals from 85 in the draft report to 86 in the final report . we also revised the number of referrals the state survey agency said it received from 35 to 36 . we confirmed that this additional referral was not received or investigated by the mfcu . for 7 cases , we determined that the allegations in the non - coroner complaints were similar to the concerns raised by the coroner's investigations and have added footnotes in the appropriate sections of the report , depending on whether the investigations substantiated ( 2 complaints ) or did not substantiate ( 5 complaints ) the complainants' allegations . for the remaining 5 cases , we made no changes in the report . in one case , the survey agency's complaint investigation focused on an issue different from the suspected neglect identified by the coroner . in four other cases , the agency included the decedents' records in its resident samples during standard surveys . the decedents were not included in any deficiencies cited during these surveys and , importantly , the surveyors lacked the coroner's photos of pressure sores , which would have been particularly useful in raising questions about the care provided as documented in the decedents' medical records . both cms and the state survey agency questioned the relevance of survey predictability to complaint investigations resulting from coroner referrals and suggested we delete this analysis from the final report . iv. ) our evaluation of cms , survey agency , and coroner comments covers the following six areas: cms's past noncompliance policy , shortcomings in state survey agency investigations , lessons from implementing the arkansas law , the number of coroner referrals and survey agency investigations , survey predictability and methodology redesign , and the impact of the arkansas law . cms agreed with our recommendations to revise its past noncompliance policy . we found that some nursing homes were not held accountable for serious deficiencies , even though some coroner referrals were substantiated , because of flaws in cms's policy governing past noncompliance . following a planned review of the policy , cms indicated that it would ( 1 ) clarify expectations for the manner in which state survey agencies should address past deficiencies that have only recently come to light , ( 2 ) further define important terms , particularly egregious , ( 3 ) ensure that the specific nature of the care problems was identified in oscar , and ( 4 ) strengthen criteria for determining whether a nursing home had actually taken steps to address deficiencies that contributed to past noncompliance .