i for a list of the standards ) . for example , the standards require suppliers to have a physical facility on an appropriate site that is accessible to beneficiaries and to cms , with stated business hours clearly posted . the following are the most pertinent standards for the purposes of this report: standard 1: operate business and furnish medicare - covered items in compliance with all applicable federal and state licensure and regulatory requirements . standard 4: fill orders for equipment or supplies using its own inventory or by contracting with other companies . if the supplier contracts with other companies , it must provide copies of the contracts upon request . standard 7: maintain a physical facility that contains space for storing business records including the supplier's delivery , maintenance , and beneficiary communication records . standard 8: permit cms to conduct on - site inspections . in addition , the supplier's location must be accessible during reasonable business hours to beneficiaries and to cms , and must maintain a visible sign and posted hours of operation . standard 9: maintain a primary business telephone listed under the name of the business locally or toll - free for beneficiaries . standard 10: have a comprehensive liability insurance policy in the amount of at least $300,000 that covers both the supplier's place of business and all customers and employees of the supplier . failure to maintain required insurance at all times will result in revocation of the supplier's billing privileges retroactive to the date the insurance lapsed . standard 14: must maintain and replace at no charge or repair directly , or through a service contract with another company , medicare - covered items it has rented to beneficiaries . description of what a supplier must do must agree not to contact a beneficiary by telephone when supplying a medicare - covered item unless one of the following applies: ( i ) the individual has given written permission to the supplier to contact them by telephone concerning the furnishing of a medicare - covered item that is to be rented or purchased . ( ii ) the supplier has furnished a medicare - covered item to the individual and the supplier is contacting the individual to coordinate the delivery of the item . we corrected all these discrepancies by august 30 , 2007 . nsc's representative , the same individual who inspected our maryland office , inspected the site on september 18 , 2007 . as with the maryland office , this individual used a simple checklist to conduct the inspection and asked for the same documentation , including licenses , insurance policy , complaint protocols , rental agreement , and instructions for beneficiary use of the supplies . this time , the undercover investigator immediately provided almost all the information requested . the representative provided a site acknowledgment form with just one missing item checked off: written instructions on beneficiary use / maintenance of supplies . we sent these instructions to nsc on september 20 , 2007 . during the course of its investigation , hhs discovered that the owner had opened another fraudulent dmepos company .