champva . champva provides health care coverage for spouses and children of veterans who are permanently and totally disabled from a service - connected disability . champva functions similarly to traditional health insurance — most care within champva is delivered using non - va community providers . therefore , developing estimates of the resources needed for champva requires factoring in utilization patterns and cost inflation that are generally outside of va's control . budget estimates for champva are developed using a formula that computes the predicted number of users and costs per - member per - year . va works with its actuarial consultant to generate projections of champva users that incorporate changes related to the population of disabled veterans and projections of expected increases and decreases in the champva - eligible population . in addition , the actuarial consultant projects the costs per - member per - year , which is calculated by dividing the most current fiscal year data on total champva expenditures by the number of actual users . trends are then incorporated to predict the future costs per - member per - year , which is multiplied by projections of the number of champva users to develop champva budget estimates . using its enrollee health care projection model ( ehcpm ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) developed estimates for 79 health care services — available in va medical facilities or through community care — for the fiscal year 2019 president's budget request . as shown in table 7 , va developed separate estimates for the 43 services that were available through community care . some of these 43 services were only available through community care . these services were primarily long - term care , including nursing home care provided at community nursing homes , home hospice care , home respite care , homemaker or home health aid programs , and purchased skilled nursing care . the department of veterans affairs ( va ) and its actuarial consultant use the enrollee health care projection model ( ehcpm ) to develop most of the department's budget estimate to meet the expected demand for va's health care services . this estimate includes the services that va purchases from non - va community providers through its various community care programs , including the veterans choice program ( choice program ) . based on our interviews with various va officials , va's office of enrollment and forecasting provided utilization and cost data from fiscal year 2016 community care claims from four different sources for use in the 2017 ehcpm , which was used to project the fiscal year 2019 budget estimate . ( see fig . specifically , the office of enrollment and forecasting — which is responsible for compiling the claims data used in the ehcpm — obtained community care claims data , including choice program claims , from va's fee basis claims system . in addition , the office of enrollment and forecasting worked with va's allocation resource center to gather additional utilization and cost data from choice program claims processed outside the fee basis claims system , and other data needed for the 2017 ehcpm . specifically , the allocation resource center compiled claims data for those choice program claims paid through expedited payments .