this concludes my testimony . i would be happy to answer any questions you may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact katherine v. schinasi at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or schinasik@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . key contributors were michele mackin , sylvia schatz , and tatiana winger . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . these changes were not coordinated with sba . we reported in 2006 that sba had not tailored its policies and practices to account for ancs' unique status and growth in the 8 ( a ) program , even though officials recognize that anc firms enter into more complex business relationships than other 8 ( a ) participants . sba officials told us that they have faced a challenge in overseeing the activity of the 8 ( a ) anc firms because ancs' charter under the alaska native claims settlement act is not always consistent with the business development intent of the 8 ( a ) program . the officials noted that the goal of ancs — economic development for alaska natives from a community standpoint — can be in conflict with the primary purpose of the 8 ( a ) program , which is business development for individual small , disadvantaged businesses . sba's oversight fell short in that it did not: track the primary business industries in which anc subsidiaries had 8 ( a ) contracts to ensure that more than one subsidiary of the same anc was not generating the majority of its revenue under the same primary industry code ; consistently determine whether other small businesses were losing contracting opportunities when large sole - source contracts were awarded to 8 ( a ) anc firms ; adhere to a statutory and regulatory requirement to ascertain whether 8 ( a ) anc firms , when entering the 8 ( a ) program or for each contract award , had , or were likely to obtain , a substantial unfair competitive advantage within an industry ; ensure that partnerships between 8 ( a ) anc firms and large firms were functioning in the way they were intended under the 8 ( a ) program ; and maintain information on anc 8 ( a ) activity . sba officials from the alaska district office had reported to headquarters that the makeup of their 8 ( a ) portfolio was challenging and required more contracting knowledge and business savvy than usual because the majority of the firms they oversee are owned by ancs and tribal entities . the officials commented that these firms tend to pursue complex business relationships and tend to be awarded large and often complex contracts .