5 and app . ii , table 5 ) . as an example , the total number of planned and in - service units ranged from a low of 24 units in washington county , alabama , to a high of 8,636 in orleans parish , louisiana . in most counties , from 1 to 150 units were either planned or in service as of april 2008 . in other go zone counties , no go zone lihtc - funded units are planned . our analysis focuses on go zone lihtc - funded units , and it is important to note that other programs can also be used to fund affordable rental housing , such as hud programs and other state and local programs . according to statewide hud data , over 82,000 rental housing units in louisiana and over 20,000 rental housing units in mississippi had major or severe damage . of these units , nearly 80,000 were in eight louisiana parishes and about 19,200 were in three mississippi counties ( see fig . in louisiana and mississippi , the number of rental units with major or severe damage ranged from a low of 468 in vermilion parish , louisiana , to a high of nearly 52,000 units in orleans parish , louisiana . comparing the number of planned and in - service go zone lihtc - funded units to the number of rental housing units with major or severe damage shows that about 17 percent of the rental housing units with major or severe damage in the state of louisiana , and 45 percent of the similarly damaged units in the state of mississippi , will be addressed by go zone lihtc units . as of mid - june 2008 , alabama had issued 65 bonds and approved an additional 19 advance refundings , totaling $599 million , or about 53 percent of its allocation authority . in contrast , louisiana has issued 9 advance refundings , totaling $483 million , or about 11 percent of its allocation authority , and mississippi has only issued 6 advance refundings , totaling $169 million , or about 8 percent of its allocation authority . appendix iii lists the additional advance refunding bonds issued in alabama , louisiana , and mississippi . similar to the case of other tax incentives such as private activity bonds and tax credit bonds , the states faced certain challenges in issuing additional advance refundings . according to state officials in louisiana and mississippi , some bonds for which the state may have been able to approve an additional advance refunding still had both the original bond awaiting its call date and the first advance refunding bond outstanding . under the go zone act of 2005 , such bonds are ineligible for an additional advance refunding . also , according to officials in louisiana , some debt had already been refunded before the hurricanes at lower interest rates than those available after the 2005 hurricanes . we provided state officials in alabama , florida , louisiana , mississippi , and texas with portions of the draft report that addressed aspects of go zone tax incentive allocation and use in their jurisdictions . we incorporated their technical comments as appropriate .