does the acquisition plan satisfy this need ? does the program have the required knowledge about needed quantities and capabilities and resources ( mature technologies , design knowledge , time , and money ) to develop a reliable business case at this time ? does dod have the right acquisition strategy to develop and produce a jsf that will maximize its return on the more than $220 billion investment that remains in this program ? while the jsf program started off with a higher - risk approach by starting system development with immature technologies , now is the time to implement an evolutionary and knowledge - based acquisition strategy to manage the system development phase and stabilize the design before making large investments in tooling , labor , and facilities to test and manufacture the aircraft . the jsf is relatively early in its system development and demonstration phase and has an opportunity to learn from the f / a - 22 program experience . it must take the time needed now to gather knowledge needed to resolve key issues that could ultimately result in additional cost increases , delays , and performance problems . our f / a - 22 and jsf reports planned to be issued on march 15 , 2005 , will include recommendations that dod answer some of these questions before significant additional investments are made . mr. chairman , this concludes our prepared statement . we would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . if you have future questions about our work on the f / a - 22 or jsf , please call allen li at ( 202 ) 512-4841 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . deliver of its ultimate capability or replacing aging aircraft with an initial capability ? it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . will planned investments in tactical aircraft allow dod to achieve these capabilities and overall transformational goals ? where disconnects exist between goals and expected investment outcomes , what are the impacts and how will dod compensate to minimize future security and investment risks ? if dod fails to answer these questions and continues with its current modernization strategy , it will likely arrive in the future with needs similar to those that exist today but with fewer options and resources to resolve those needs . as dod evaluates its tactical aircraft investment alternatives , knowledge at the program level is needed to understand how the f / a - 22 and jsf can help achieve overall tactical aircraft modernization goals . more specific questions need to be answered for these programs including: is the f / a - 22 the most cost - effective alternative to fill gaps in ground attack and intelligence gathering requirements ?