site visits . officials from psas central office told us that they have begun to conduct site visits to review psas operations in a number of vamcs . specifically , psas officials told us that they are conducting site visits to identify staffing or other problems that lead to poor performance and to make recommendations that should lead to faster and more consistent prosthetic services for veterans at these facilities . for the initial visits , psas selected vamcs and visns that performed poorly on psas's performance measures , such as its consults pending measure . as of june 2010 , psas staff had conducted 42 site visits , and psas officials said they plan to conduct reviews in all 153 vamcs . clinical practice recommendations . psas has developed 40 clinical practice recommendations , which are guidance documents to help va clinical staff make appropriate decisions about prosthetic prescriptions . these include prescribing recommendations for orthotic devices , home oxygen equipment , pacemakers , and hip and knee joint replacements . according to psas officials , these recommendations help ensure that prosthetic items are provided to veterans in a more consistent manner across the country . accreditation and certification . psas has implemented an initiative to provide additional assurance that va is providing high - quality prosthetic services and to develop the technical and management skills of psas staff . in fiscal year 2007 , psas established a policy to obtain accreditation for its orthotic and prosthetic laboratories , and certification for all clinical personnel . according to psas officials , as of september 2010 , psas had obtained accreditation , or the accreditation was pending , for nearly all of its 77 orthotic and prosthetic service locations , and certification for 165 of its 172 orthotists , prosthetists , and fitters . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . this appendix provides the results of our analysis of data from the national prosthetic patient database ( nppd ) — an internal database used by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) to administer its provision of prosthetic items that contains information on prosthetic items furnished to veterans . this appendix presents the total costs and number of prosthetic items provided to veterans in fiscal years 2005 through 2009 . table 3 shows the total costs and number of prosthetic items provided to veterans by type of prosthetic item . for fiscal year 2009 , the total cost for various types of prosthetic items ranged from about $93 million for orthoses to about $439 million for surgical implants . table 4 shows the total costs and number of prosthetic items provided to veterans by veterans integrated service network ( visn ) . for fiscal year 2009 , the total costs for prosthetic items for visns ranged from about $34 million in visn 5 ( capitol health care network ) to about $164 million in visn 8 ( va sunshine healthcare network ) . national contracts . psas uses national contracts that , according to psas officials , provide prosthetic items to veterans across the country in a more consistent , timely , and cost - efficient manner .