ii , fig . ( see app . 29 , for a list of the completed enterprise projects for which we obtained information. ) in light of the mixed success that eda - funded enterprise projects experienced , tribes may find obtaining eda funding in the future more difficult because of the changes in the agency's criteria for awarding grants . since fiscal year 2002 , eda's criteria for approving grant applications requires its staff to seek to fund projects that create jobs requiring greater skills and paying higher wages . their criteria also emphasize projects more likely to attract private sector investment . in meeting these criteria , eda officials informed us that tribes have to compete with other entities such as state and local governments and nonprofit organizations for eda grants . as a result , tribes in rural areas , in particular , find it difficult to propose projects that are likely to attract private sector investment or result in jobs that pay high wages . for example , eda officials we spoke to in one eda region noted that communities closer to urban areas were more likely to be able to propose projects , such as industrial parks , that were likely to attract high technology firms than were the more rurally - located tribes in their region . from 1993 through 2002 , eda also awarded grants to tribes to be used for loan funds , business development , and training . grants for these purposes totaled $4.9 million , comprising 4 percent of the total $112 million that eda provided to tribes during that 10-year period . about $2.2 million of the eda grants were to support rlfs . these rlfs are pools of money loaned out for revenue - generating enterprises . the repayment of loan principal and interest replenish the rlf , creating a revolving source of capital to finance additional loans and further develop the local economy . of the $2.2 million eda awarded for rlfs between 1993 and 2002 , $950,000 was to provide the initial capital — seed money — to get three new rlfs started and about $1.3 million was used to support business development and training programs associated with two existing rlfs ( see app . ii for details ) . tribal officials reported that these rlfs eda has supported have successfully funded both tribal enterprises and small businesses started by individual tribal members . for example , a tribe in northern california has administered one of these rlfs since 1977 , when eda originally provided initial capital of $1.5 million to finance loans relating to the tribe's forest industries . since 1994 , eda provided $285,000 to fund a business training program to assist applicants seeking funding from this rlf with instruction on preparing business plans , contract agreements , credit applications , and on the use of computers and other office equipment . according to documents provided by fund officials , over the years , this rlf has made 356 loans to businesses resulting in 658 new jobs and attracted $7.8 million in private sector investment .