9 in app . our estimated rates for the full population of filers for tax year 2010 are generally lower than the estimates presented in earlier studies while our estimated rates for other years are generally higher . as noted above , it can be difficult to compare financial statements with tax returns because entities included under each type of reporting can differ . irs developed schedule m - 3 part i to help delineate book - tax differences related to consolidation and to standardize the definition of the financial , or book , income of the tax consolidated group . as shown in figure 6 , for tax year 2010 schedule m - 3 filers reported that they earned a total of $1.3 trillion from u.s. and foreign entities that were included in their consolidated financial statement but not in their consolidated tax returns ( which , therefore , had to be subtracted out on the schedule m - 3 ) . they also reported $420 billion in losses from such entities . ( these losses also had to be subtracted out , meaning that net income increased by $420 billion. ) in contrast , they reported less than $10 billion in either income or losses from entities that are included in their tax returns but not in their financial statements . these corporations also reported $762 billion in positive adjustments and $20 billion in negative adjustments relating to transactions between excluded and included entities . the corporations must also report several other types of adjustments , such as for any difference between the time period covered by their financial statements and the period covered by their tax years , that they make in order to arrive at a final amount that represents the net book income or loss of all of their entities that are included in their tax returns . for tax year 2010 , this population of schedule m - 3 filers reported a total of $1.1 trillion in net book income for entities included in their tax returns and a total of $300 billion in losses for such entities . schedule m - 3 parts ii and iii report book - tax differences related to income and expenses , respectively , for the tax consolidated group only . the largest category of differences for both income and expense items was “other.” irs officials told us that their reviews of the detailed documentation that filers are required to submit along with their schedules m - 3 indicate three broad subtypes of reporting in these other categories: 1 . some common income and expense categories have no line of their own on the m - 3 , so they have to be reported as other . this was the case for research and development expenses prior to 2010 ; those expenses now have their own line . taxpayers report miscellaneous items in these categories but do not provide details on what they include . taxpayers record items in these categories that clearly should have been reported on more specific lines of the m - 3 . the officials suggested some taxpayers do this because they do not take the time or trouble to fill out the form properly ; others may be trying to hide details from the irs .