we agree with this assessment . furthermore , placing data on a website does not constitute the monitoring of crop insurance costs . we continue to believe rma can and should do more to monitor and report on crop insurance costs in higher risk areas , where we found government costs to be substantially higher than in other areas . as we said in this report , without additional information from rma on the government's crop insurance costs in higher risk areas , congress may not have all the information it needs to make future assessments of the crop insurance program's design and costs . in addition , rma commented on our analysis of the government's cost of the crop insurance program in higher risk areas . rma said it has developed a definition of high - risk land , mapped out these areas , and applied significant premium surcharges . rma said our definition of what we deem to be “higher risk areas” is much broader . rma defines “high - risk land” as acreage with identifiable physical limitations , such as floodplains and high sand content soils . our identification of higher risk areas ( i.e. , the 20 percent of counties that had the highest weighted average county target premium rates ) enabled us to broadly assess crop insurance costs , and we believe this approach , which we discussed with rma officials , was consistent with our purpose . in its comment letter , rma said our use of crop insurance costs ( or benefits to farmers ) per dollar of expected crop value “appears to exaggerate the difference in program costs in higher - risk areas versus other areas , or at least masks some important details.” to present another perspective , rma compared corn premium subsidies per acre for two states that had a large number of higher risk counties with two states that had no higher risk counties and stated that the premium subsidies per acre were similar amounts . we believe our use of a dollar - based measure ( i.e. , premium subsidies per dollar of expected crop value ) is more appropriate than a physical measure ( i.e. , acres ) for comparisons between costs and farmer benefits in higher risk areas and other areas . this is consistent with the methodology of a 2013 article by agricultural economists from the ohio state university and the university of illinois that compared net farm insurance payments using a dollar - based measure . moreover , the use of a dollar - based measure is consistent with property insurance methods , which are based on the value of the property being insured . rma stated that coverage levels were another offsetting effect , noting that growers in higher risk areas tend to choose lower coverage levels than in other areas , because higher premium rates make higher coverage less affordable . rma appears to be suggesting that our analysis overlooks this difference , which is not true . as explained in our report , one of the reasons that we expressed estimated government costs in relation to expected crop value was to control for variations in farmers' purchase decisions . farmers' decisions in selecting coverage levels vary between higher risk areas and other areas .