gao - 04-735r . washington , d.c.: may 5 , 2004 . who sets the pay rate ? the worker's opportunities for profit and loss examples: did the worker make any investments such as insurance or bonding ? can the worker earn a profit by performing the job more efficiently or exercising managerial skill or suffer a loss of capital investment ? the amount of initiative , judgment , or foresight in open market competition with others required for the success of the claimed independent contractor examples: does the worker perform routine tasks requiring little training ? does the worker advertise independently through the yellow pages or business cards ? does the worker have a separate business site ? in some cases , employers misclassify workers as independent contractors when they should be classified as employees . under flsa , the courts have examined the issue of misclassification by applying the economic realities test and making case - by - case determinations as to whether the workers are employees and thereby covered by the act . for example , a federal district court recently determined that over 500 delivery workers for supermarket and drugstore chains had been misclassified as independent contractors . the court ruled that the companies that had hired these workers to make deliveries controlled their placement and pay , provided them with delivery carts to rent and uniforms to purchase , required little skill to perform the job , and that the work performed constituted an integral part of the companies' business . therefore , the court ruled that they were employees and entitled to overtime wages under flsa . in another case , dol brought suit on behalf of cable installers against cable television providers and cable installation companies for overtime compensation under flsa . in this case , the court ruled that the employer did not exhibit the type of control needed to characterize the relationship as employee - employer , that the workers provided their own van and other equipment , and that the job required skilled labor . on the basis of these factors , the court denied the claim and held that the cable installers were properly classified as independent contractors and not entitled to protection under flsa . the complexity of issues involving joint employment and misclassification of employees is illustrated by litigation involving the microsoft corporation . in the late 1980s , microsoft began to hire what the company classified as independent contractors to fill many of its full - time employment vacancies . after the internal revenue service ( irs ) determined that these workers were common law employees in 1989 and 1990 , microsoft terminated the employment relationship , set up an employment agency , and converted these workers into temporary agency employees . the workers sued microsoft , and in 1996 the court ruled that they were employees of the company rather than independent contractors or temporary agency employees . the court then considered whether or not the employees were eligible for the employer's saving and stock purchase plan benefits under erisa . the determining factor was the language included in microsoft's plan , which expressly made any common law employee on the u.s. payroll eligible for benefits .