iii ) . the president agreed with our recommendation and stated that kennedy center staff will plan to implement it immediately . kennedy center officials also provided technical comments that have been incorporated throughout the report , as appropriate . the letter also emphasized that the comprehensive building plan is primarily a management tool and that other reports are the vehicles for keeping congress informed of the center's progress in its renovation program . as part of our work , we reviewed the reports to the operations committee and a monthly report to omb . while some of the information we are recommending be included in the comprehensive building plan is provided in these reports , other recommended project information is not . for example , neither report provides information on project prioritization or projects planned for the future . the project information that is provided is not presented in a format that allows stakeholders to easily track the overall progress of the kennedy center renovations or specific capital projects from the building plan . it also appears that this information is not being conveyed to all congressional stakeholders . we believe that having project specific information available in one document that is provided to the stakeholders annually , as described in our recommendation , will help congressional decision makers and other stakeholders oversee the capital projects at the kennedy center . in addition , the letter did not agree with how we counted the projects identified in the comprehensive building plan . however , it stated that the comprehensive building plan has not been consistent in how it has identified projects and that the most recent plan lists design and implementation as two separate projects , while the earlier plans listed them as one project . as we noted in our report , the comprehensive building plan does not clearly explain how projects are restructured or reported in different updates . since our objective was to compare the actual projects undertaken with those reported in the comprehensive building plan , we have identified and numbered the projects as listed in the plan and its updates to the plan . we understand the kennedy center's concern that how the projects are counted can change the reported percentage of projects completed . thus , we have deleted the reference to the percentage of projects completed as an indication of the kennedy center's progress in implementing the comprehensive building plan and only report actual numbers of projects . we believe that if the kennedy center implements our recommendation and provides more clear project information , this type of analysis should be possible in the future . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 5 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the chairman of the kennedy center board of trustees , and the president of the kennedy center . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .