iii ) . the irs generally agreed with our findings . ird is a case in point . without additional data , it is impossible to know whether ird is succeeding in having its intended impact . furthermore , with more than 100 programs on indian economic development , the potential exists for ird overlap with these programs . as we found with the bonus depreciation provision described in this report , overlap from other tax expenditures could interfere with ird as an incentive . gathering and analyzing data that identifies ird users and the location of ird property likely would increase administrative costs — perhaps substantially , according to irs — for irs , as additional forms and processing procedures would be needed . however , precedents exist for irs collecting this kind of information on other tax provisions , such as depreciation of rental property and the low - income housing tax credit . in cases where the right data exist , economic analysis is possible , although still challenging . our review also raises questions about irs's ability to ensure compliance with the ird provision , a potentially key shortcoming given that depreciation is one of the most misreported items by individuals with businesses . without the ability for auditors to identify ird users from tax forms , noncompliant taxpayers could more easily go undetected . improved information and instructions on the recovery periods taxpayers use to calculate their depreciation deductions on form 4562 — a concern given the mistakes listing recovery periods we observed on taxpayers' returns — could help irs auditors better ensure compliance not only of ird but also of all depreciation deductions . given the lack of information on ird users and where property claimed under ird is placed in service , congress should consider requiring irs to collect information identifying which taxpayers use ird and the reservation and / or address where they have placed the property into service . in deliberating additional requirements , congress should weigh the need for more ird information with the associated costs of collecting and analyzing the information as well as the effects on irs's other priorities . we recommend that the commissioner of internal revenue change the instructions on the directions for form 4562 so that it is clear that taxpayers depreciating ird property should use different recovery periods . the updated directions also should include an example of how to fill out form 4562 properly . we requested written comments from the commission of internal revenue and received a letter from the irs on june 16 , 2008 ( see app . its letter emphasized that compiling data on ird would add burden to irs administration of its processing functions and increase taxpayer burden . irs also said it would review its publications and instructions on depreciation and determine where additional information about ird would be beneficial . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly release the contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies to interested congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of internal revenue , and other interested parties .