ii ) . to further improve the demonstration projects' planning and methodological rigor , ssa has used external research professionals to work with the agency on the design , implementation , or evaluation of 12 of the 14 projects . ssa officials have acknowledged the need for additional expertise to design and implement methodologically rigorous demonstration projects . thus , ssa has awarded , or planned to award , contracts and cooperative agreements to research consultants and universities with such expertise to evaluate 12 of its 14 projects ( see app . iii ) . in nine cases , these researchers also worked on the design or implementation of the projects . for example , for the accelerated benefits demonstration project , an ssa research contractor also designed how and where the project would be conducted and managed its implementation so that the data needed for the evaluation it plans to conduct will be available . we also found that ssa and most of these researchers communicated regularly when collaborating on these projects and researchers submitted monthly or quarterly progress reports to ssa , which included information on expenditures , progress , and areas of concern that needed to be addressed . ssa also appointed new program management in 2007 . since that time , the new management team has conducted an internal review of the 10 demonstration projects that were under way at the time of their appointment . ssa officials told us that all projects underwent a thorough review that was conducted by the acting associate commissioner for program development and research and others with appropriate expertise . documents we obtained indicate that the review identified the projects' strengths , weaknesses , and whether they were likely to yield reliable , useful results . aucd partially implemented the project in 2006 and 2007 . ssa cancelled the project in 2008 before aucd completed the implementation or evaluation . projects jointly authorized under di and ssi authorities virginia commonwealth university ( vcu ) ( prime contractor ) mathematica policy research ( subcontractor ) ssa awarded multiple contracts to vcu starting in 1998 to provide technical assistance to the states that were implementing the project and to conduct an evaluation . vcu completed its evaluation in 2006 . ssa awarded three contracts executed by vcu's subcontractor , mathematica: one in 1998 to provide technical assistance to the states that were implementing the project , another in 1999 to design the evaluation , and one in 2003 to conduct the evaluation . mathematica completed its evaluation in 2005 . mathematica policy research ( prime contractor ) mdrc ( subcontractor ) ssa originally designed and implemented the project in 2003 , but due to methodological limitations , ssa awarded a contract to mathematica in 2005 to redesign , implement , and evaluate the project . mathematica began implementing the new design in 2006 . implementation will continue until 2013 . mathematica will complete its evaluation in 2014 . in addition to the individual named above , key contributions to this report were made by michael collins , assistant director ; jason holsclaw and anne welch , analysts - in - charge ; dana hopings ; annamarie lopata ; jean mcsween .