ied benefits . this official and other local officials we interviewed , however , said that some sponsored noncitizens who may qualify for benefits through the indigence exception ultimately withdraw their application when they are told that their names and those of their sponsors must be reported to the federal government , as required by law . administering agency officials reported that additional federal assistance on accessing dhs information needed to determine who is sponsored would also help them implement sponsor deeming policies . specifically , state or local officials in each of the five states we visited reported difficulties accessing dhs information needed to determine whether a noncitizen applicant has a sponsor , and 65 percent of agencies administering these benefits nationwide reported that more specific policies on using save in determining sponsorship would be useful . agencies' difficulties in using save could leave them vulnerable to fraud or improper payments because save is a key mechanism for verifying eligibility and sponsorship status . dhs officials stated that the agency provided save users with technical assistance focused on using the automated system to obtain sponsorship information when this feature became available in 2005 , and it continues to offer save technical assistance through user - directed online tools and instructor - led seminars or webinars upon request . however , 30 to 40 percent of administering agencies for tanf , medicaid , and snap reported that they had not received any technical assistance or communication from dhs on determining if a noncitizen applicant has a sponsor . as a result , benefit agencies report that staff commonly use save to verify noncitizen information , but not all staff are aware of how to use save to obtain sponsorship information . we believe adding this clarification to the tanf guidance would help address the inconsistencies among states and prevent unintended harm to noncitizens who lack the support of their sponsors . dhs concurred with both our recommendations to help benefit administering agencies access information on sponsored noncitizens and indicated that it plans to take actions to address these in the coming months . hhs , usda , and dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . ( see fig . although most administering agencies have established sponsor deeming policies , agency officials reported that additional guidance in certain areas would be helpful . specifically , between 60 and 70 percent of state administering agencies with sponsor deeming policies for tanf , medicaid , or snap expressed some desire for more guidance on various aspects of deeming ( see fig . for example , about 70 percent reported that clarification on how to handle cases where information on the sponsor's income is determined to be unobtainable would be moderately , extremely , or very useful . in addition , many reported that additional federal guidance on areas related to the indigence exception to deeming would be useful . guidance in these areas is particularly important because how administering agencies handle applicants who are unable to obtain sponsor income information can have implications for how agencies apply the indigence exception , as well as whether these applicants are determined to be eligible for benefits .