both va and dod have formulary systems . va's national formulary consists of about 1,200 pharmacy items , including over 1,000 drugs , and each of va's 21 regional veterans integrated service networks can augment the national formulary . dod's basic core formulary consists of about 165 drugs , and an mtf can add other drugs based on the clinical services and scope of care provided by that facility . both agencies also have approval processes for prescribers to obtain nonformulary drugs for their patients when medically necessary . as part of their ordering systems , some va and dod facilities have also developed electronic decision - making support related to their formularies , such as prompts to remind physicians to order specific laboratory tests prior to administering certain drugs or alerts related to the safe use of certain drugs . cpoe systems can reduce medication errors by eliminating legibility problems of handwritten orders and providing clinical decision - making support by sending alerts and instantaneous reminders directly to providers as orders are being placed . for instance , as providers enter a medication order , they can be given a potential range of doses for medications ordered , alerted to relevant laboratory results , and prompted to verify which medication is being ordered when the drug sounds or looks like another drug on the formulary . studies have shown computerized provider ordering reduced medication errors by 55 percent to 86 percent . computerized provider ordering of medications increases safety by assisting with medication decisions , providing alerts for drug interactions and allergies , and obviating handwriting legibility and transcription problems . however , prescriptions for shared patients are less likely to be ordered electronically by providers . although both va and dod providers have outpatient electronic ordering capabilities when prescriptions are dispensed at their own pharmacies , patients referred from one agency to the other for care are typically expected to return to their home pharmacy to get prescriptions filled . with the exception of dod providers in hawaii , none of the joint venture sites have the capability for providers to electronically order medications through their own computer systems for drugs that are to be dispensed by the other agency's pharmacy , nor do they typically have access to the other agency's electronic ordering systems to issue medication orders . consequently , providers either handwrite medication orders for shared patients or give them printed copies that must be retyped into the patients' home agency's pharmacy system . both situations introduce risks unique to shared patients . we also found situations where providers had the capability to avoid handwriting prescriptions but continued to handwrite them . in key west , for example , where all drugs are dispensed from the dod pharmacy , va providers have access to dod's electronic ordering system , chcs ; but , for the most part , they handwrite prescriptions . these providers record patient care and medications in va's cprs , and if they were to electronically order medications , it would necessitate entry into a second system . providers at a few facilities have broader access .