geographical concentration of awards . in 1999 , in response to congressional concerns about the geographical concentration of sbir awards , we reported that companies in a small number of states , especially california and massachusetts , had submitted the most proposals and won the majority of awards . the distribution of awards generally followed the pattern of distribution of non - sbir expenditures for r&d , venture capital investments , and academic research funds . we reported that some agencies had undertaken efforts to broaden the geographic distribution of awards . in the 2000 reauthorization of the program , the congress directed the sba administrator to establish the federal and state technology ( fast ) partnership program to help strengthen the technological competitiveness of small businesses , especially in those states that receive fewer sbir grants . the fast program was not reauthorized when it expired in 2005 . in 2006 when we looked at the geographical concentration of awards made by dod and nih , we found that while a firm in every state received at least one sbir award from both agencies , sbir awards continued to be concentrated in a handful of states and about one third of awards had been made to firms in california and massachusetts . clarification on commercialization and other sbir goals . finally , in 2000 , the congress directed the sba administrator to require companies applying for a phase ii award to include a commercialization plan with their sbir proposals . this addressed our continuing concern that clarification was needed on the relative emphasis that agencies should give to a company's commercialization record and sbir's other goals when evaluating proposals . in addition , in 2001 , sba initiated efforts to develop standard criteria for measuring commercial and other outcomes of the sbir program and incorporate these criteria into its tech - net database . providing effective outreach . sbir agencies consistently reach out to foster participation by women - owned or socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses by participating in regional small business conferences and workshops targeting these types of small businesses . increasing successful commercialization . at various points in the life of the program we have reported that sbir has succeeded in increasing private sector commercialization of innovations . helping to serve mission needs . sbir has helped serve agencies' missions and r&d needs , although we found that agencies differ in the emphasis they place on funding research to support their mission versus more generalized research . our reviews of the sbir program during that time have also identified a number of areas of weakness that , over time , have been either fully or partially addressed by the congress in reauthorizing the program or by the agencies themselves . for example , duplicate funding . in 1995 , we identified duplicate funding for similar , or even identical , research projects by more than one agency . a few companies received funding for the same proposals two , three , and even five times before agencies became aware of the duplication .