august 2004 . national saving: answers to key questions . gao - 01-591sp . june 2001 . see also http: / / www.gao.gov / special.pubs / longterm / for information on gao's most recent long - term simulations and http: / / www.gao.gov / special.pubs / longterm / longtermproducts.html a bibliography of gao's issued work on the long - term fiscal outlook . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . february 2005 . highlights of a gao forum: the federal government's role in improving financial literacy . gao - 05-93sp . federal debt: answers to frequently asked questions , an update . gao - 04-485sp . this is because more and better investments were made . each dollar saved bought more investment goods , and a greater share of saving was invested in highly productive information technology . also , as discussed earlier , the united states was able to invest more than it saved by borrowing from abroad . however , we cannot let our recent good fortune lull us into complacency . while the u.s. has benefited from high levels of foreign investment in recent years , this is not a viable strategy for the long run . many of the nations currently financing investment in the united states face aging populations and their own retirement financing challenges that may reduce foreign saving available for u.s. domestic investment . if the net inflow of foreign investment were to diminish , so too would domestic investment and potentially economic growth if that saving is not offset by saving here in the u.s. also , our nation faces daunting fiscal and demographic challenges , which may be even more of a reason to address our nation's low saving rates . saving and economic growth will be key factors to prepare future generations to bear the burden of financing the retirement and health costs of an aging population . given our nation's long - term fiscal outlook , acting sooner rather than later to increase national saving is imperative . the federal government's current financial condition and long - term fiscal outlook present enormous challenges to future generations' levels of well - being . no one can forecast with any precision what the next 75 years will look like — that would require the ability to predict changes in the economy and future legislation . however , there is a fair amount of certainty in one major driver of our long - term outlook — demographics . as life expectancy rises and the baby boom generation retires , the u.s. population will age , and fewer workers will support each retiree . over the next few decades , federal spending on retirement and health programs — social security , medicare , medicaid , and other federal pension , health , and disability programs — will grow dramatically .