dod concurred with all our recommendations . dod's written comments are reprinted in appendix ii . dod and the united states geological survey also provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate . dod concurred with our first two recommendations to the secretary of defense to direct the smpb to designate which rare earths , if any , are critical to national security and to analyze the effects of the unavailability of rare earths critical to national security . in dod's written response it identified that the smpb will convene a meeting with the purpose of accomplishing both these tasks before the end of fiscal year 2016 . dod also concurred with our recommendation to the secretary of defense to direct mibp to define reliable sources and secure supply for rare earths and provide metrics to determine the effectiveness of its actions . in response dod wrote that mibp addresses this recommendation by carrying out its responsibilities under 10 u.s.c . such an approach would better position dod to help ensure continued functionality in weapon system components should a disruption occur . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the secretary of defense . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or makm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the joint explanatory statement accompanying the carl levin and howard p. “buck” mckeon national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2015 included a provision for gao to review the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to identify and mitigate risks in its rare earth materials ( rare earths ) supply chain , including the defense logistics agency - strategic materials' ( dla - strategic materials ) stockpiling efforts . we assessed the extent that dod ( 1 ) determined which rare earths , if any , are critical to national security ; and ( 2 ) has identified and mitigated risks associated with rare earths , including the effects of a potential supply disruption . to determine the extent dod identified which rare earths , if any , were critical to national security , we reviewed dod reports from 2011 to 2015 to understand the analyses and criteria that dod conducted and used to determine critical rare earths . further , although dla - strategic materials' stockpiling efforts are proactive , according to dod officials , the department has never used the rare earths from the national defense stockpile and does not know the time and cost to establish the capability to process the stockpiled material into a usable form , a necessary step to implement mitigating actions . currently , there is a limited commercial capability in the united states for processing certain types of rare earths used in defense applications , according to government and industry officials .