defense did not have any comments on our draft report . homeland security provided technical comments , which are incorporated as appropriate throughout the report . the department of commerce generally agreed with the report's recommendations , and stated that the deemed export advisory committee will aid in this respect . however , commerce stated that student and exchange visitor information system ( sevis ) data are too general for use in identifying whether foreign students and scholars are subject to deemed export license requirements and that the collection of more specific visa application information is needed to assess vulnerabilities . state issues export licenses based on the u.s . munitions list , which identifies defense articles , services , and related technical data that are controlled for export . moreover , the regulations state that unless otherwise expressly exempted or excluded , an export license is required for the oral , visual , or documentary transmission of technical data by u.s. persons to foreign persons , by such means as in - person or telephone discussions and written correspondence including electronic messages , even when they are in the united states . munitions list contains 21 categories , covering items such as weapons , chemical and biological agents , missiles , and both commercial and military satellites . while some of the selected academic institutions fall within the top tiers across the selection criteria , their views stated in this report do not represent those of the entirety of the u.s. academic community . to assess commerce's and state's efforts to determine the risk of export violations in university research , we interviewed officials from the bureau of industry and security of the department of commerce and its related export offices: national security and technology transfer controls , exporter services , export administration , export enforcement . we also interviewed officials in the department of commerce's offices of general counsel and inspector general . at the department of state , we interviewed officials and reviewed data from the bureau of political - military affairs' directorate of defense trade controls , the bureaus of consular affairs and international security and nonproliferation , and the office of the inspector general . we obtained and analyzed regulations , guidance , and training documents from these departments . we also collected data and other documentation and met with officials from the office of defense procurement and acquisition policy of the department of defense and the department of homeland security's immigration policy directorate and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement . we conducted our work from march 2006 through november 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . john neumann , sharron candon , gregory harmon , arturo holguin , angela thomas , and sandra moore made key contributions to this report . other key contributors include marie ahearn and karen sloan . additional details on the scope and methodology of our review can be found in appendix i . we conducted our review from march through november 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .