reg . 49363 ) display of official sign ; permanent increase in standard maximum share ( 75 fed . reg . 53841 ) internal controls over financial reporting in exchange act periodic reports ( 75 fed . reg . requires sound risk management practices . oversight of forex counterparties and intermediaries . costs preparing and filing required disclosures . n / a = not applicable . the dodd - frank act provides the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) with greater authority to manage the deposit insurance fund ( dif ) , including where to set the designated reserve ratio ( drr ) . section 334 of the act sets the minimum drr at 1.35 percent ( from the former of 1.15 percent ) and removes the previous upper limit , which was set at 1.5 percent . section 334 of the act also requires the drr to reach 1.35 percent by september 30 , 2020 , and section 332 removes the requirement of fdic to pay dividends when the ratio is between 1.35 percent and 1.5 percent . pursuant to the requirements and authority within the dodd - frank act , fdic is adopting a drr of 2 percent . ultimately , fdic will maintain at least 2 percent in the fund , as the 2 percent fund goal is a long - range , minimum target . fdic also will adopt a progressively lower assessment rate schedule when the reserve ratio exceeds 2 percent and 2.5 percent . the progressively lower rates will essentially serve the function of dividend payments . identified problem to be addressed by regulation: fdic is increasing the drr to ensure dif is able to keep a positive balance during a future crisis of the magnitude of the 2007-2009 financial crisis . additionally , it sets rate schedules that are consistent and moderate throughout economic and credit cycles . consideration of alternatives reflecting the range of statutory fdic considered commenter positions encouraging a lower drr but determined a 2 percent drr at a minimum would allow the fund to survive the crisis of an economic downturn . pra: fdic did not conduct a pra analysis because no collection of information is required for this rule . rfa: fdic conducted an analysis and concluded that drr has no significant economic impact on small entities for purposes of rfa . were the benefits or costs monetized ? estimated impacts ( in millions ) qualitative description of the benefits or costs ? benefits prevent dif from becoming negative during a future financial crisis . reduce procyclicality in the existing risk - based assessment rates . costs loss of funds that could be used by the banking system . increased competitive imbalances between banking entities and credit unions . n / a = not applicable . number of days to comment: 30 number of comments received: 4 comments regarding regulatory analysis: commenters expressed concerns that fdic's analysis ignored historical over - reserving , to which fdic responded that its analysis encompassed reported contingent loss reserves , and emphasized the importance of public confidence as a reason that the fund be significantly positive and not just not negative . one commenter argued that the analysis failed to account for interest income from the reserve .