nsps does not include such a certification provision . congress should consider requiring opm to certify that the dod ses performance management system makes meaningful distinctions in performance and employs the other practices used by leading organizations to develop effective performance management systems that i mentioned earlier , before dod could increase the annual compensation limit for senior executives . the proposed defense transformation for the 21st century act includes provisions intended to ensure collaboration with employee representatives in the planning , development , and implementation of a human resources management system . for example , employee representatives are to be given the opportunity to review and make recommendations on the proposed nsps . should dod and / or other federal agencies be granted broad - based exemptions from existing law , and if so , on what basis ? in addition , congress and dod should carefully assess the degree to which dod has the institutional infrastructure in place to make effective use the new authorities it is seeking . our work has shown that while progress has been and is being made , additional efforts are needed by dod to integrate its human capital planning process with the department's program goals and mission . the practices that have been shown to be critical to the effective use of flexibilities provide a validated roadmap for dod and congress to consider . finally , as i have pointed out in several key areas , congress should consider , if the authorities are granted , establishing additional safeguards to ensure the fair , merit - based , transparent , and accountable implementation and application of nsps . in our view , congress should consider providing governmentwide broad banding and pay for performance authorities that dod and other federal agencies can use provided they can demonstrate that they have a performance management system in place that meets certain statutory standards , which can be certified to by a qualified and independent party , such as opm . congress should also consider establishing a governmentwide fund whereby agencies , based on a sound business case , could apply for funds to modernize their performance management systems and ensure that those systems have adequate safeguards to prevent abuse . this would serve as a positive step to promote high - performing organizations throughout the federal government while avoiding further fragmentation within the executive branch in the critical human capital area . this morning , i have offered some preliminary observations on some aspects of the proposal . however , these preliminary observations have not included some serious concerns i have with other sections of the proposed legislation that go beyond the civilian personnel proposal . my observations have included suggestions for how congress can help dod effectively address its human capital challenges and ensure that nsps is designed and implemented in an effective , efficient , and fair manner that meets the current and future needs of dod , its employees , and the american people . human capital reforms at dod obviously have important implications for national security and precedent - setting implications for governmentwide human capital management .