there are no easy choices . there will be disagreements about the merits of a given activity — reasonable people can disagree about federal priorities . there may also be disagreements about the appropriate response to program failure: should the program be modified or terminated ? would the program work better with more money or should funding be cut ? in the last decade congress and the administration put in place a set of laws designed to improve information about cost and performance . this information can help inform the debate about what the federal government should do . in addition , the budget debate can benefit from the kind of framework i discussed above . in previous testimony before this committee , i suggested that congress might equip itself to engage in this debate by developing a congressional performance resolution to target its oversight on certain governmentwide performance issues cutting across agencies and programs . along with caps , this and other measures might help ensure that congress becomes part of the debate over reprioritization and government performance . the dramatic shift in budget projections since last year has prompted discussion of shortening the budget window . this may well be a sensible approach to reducing uncertainty . however , such a change should be coupled with steps to provide a broader and longer - term fiscal horizon: goals and metrics to address the longer - term implications of today's choices . this does not mean that we should budget for a 20- or 30-year period . it does mean considering establishing indicators and targets that bring a long - term perspective to budget deliberations and a process that prompts attention to the long - term implications of today's decisions . periodic simulations along the lines we and cbo have developed can and should become a regular feature of budget debate . we would be the first to say that the simulations are not predictions of the future or point estimates , rather they serve as indicators — or warning lights — about the magnitude and direction of different policy profiles . these scenarios are particularly helpful in comparing long - term consequences of different fiscal paths or major reforms of entitlements using the same assumptions . as i said earlier , the demographic tidal wave that drives the long - term budget challenge is a known element with predictable consequences . some kind of fiscal targets may be helpful . as a way to frame the debate , targets can remind us that today's decisions are not only about current needs but also about how fiscal policy affects the choices over the longer term . other nations have found it useful to embrace broader targets such as debt - to - gdp ratios , or surpluses equal to a percent of gdp over the business cycle . to work over time targets should not be rigid — it is in the nature of things that they will sometimes be missed . it should be possible to make some sort of compelling argument for the target — and it should be relatively simple to explain . reaching a target is not a straight line but an iterative process .