becquerels . explosives are used to disperse radioactive material . previous incidents involving radiological sources provide a measure of understanding for what could happen in the case of a dirty bomb attack . for example , in 1987 , an accident involving an abandoned teletherapy machine , which is used to treat cancer by focusing a beam of radiation from a highly active radiological source at affected tissue , killed four people and injured more in central brazil . the radiological source in the teletherapy device contained about 1,400 curies of cesium - 137 . the accident and its aftermath caused about $36 million in damages to the region , according to an official from brazil's nuclear energy commission . the accident significantly contaminated 85 houses and created environmental and medical problems . the decontamination process required the demolition of homes and other buildings and generated 3,500 cubic meters of radioactive waste . furthermore , over 8,000 persons requested monitoring for contamination in order to obtain certificates stating they were not contaminated . concerns about thefts of radiological sources and the possible consequences of a dirty bomb attack persist . their potential vulnerability to theft was highlighted in december 2013 when a truck in mexico carrying a cobalt - 60 source formerly used in medical treatment was stolen . although the source was recovered 2 days later , officials from the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a separately organized semiautonomous agency within the department of energy ( doe ) , said that it was opened by the thieves , and they were uncertain whether the intended target of the theft was the truck or the source . furthermore , the mexico case is not unique . according to the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) , there have been 615 confirmed incidents involving theft or loss of nuclear and radioactive iaea's code of conduct on the materials around the world since 1993.safety and security of radioactive sources serves as a guide to define high - risk radiological sources that warrant enhanced security and protection beyond what was applied before september 11 , 2001 . this includes category 1 and category 2 quantities of 16 radionuclides listed in the code of conduct that pose the highest risk and thus warrant enhanced security and protection . the threat of an individual stealing a radiological source includes both an outsider and potential insider threat . according to the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi ) website , a company can often detect an outsider ( nonemployee ) and mitigate the threat of them stealing company property . however , the individual who is harder to detect is the insider — the employee with legitimate access . the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) is responsible for licensing the commercial use of and regulating the security of radiological sources in the united states , including at industrial facilities . as part of its security role , nrc also issues legally binding requirements in the form of orders and regulations governing , among other things , the security of radiological sources . these controls address the need to secure these materials from outsider and insider threats . nrc may take enforcement actions against licensees who are found to have violated its regulations .