gao 05-193sp . washington , d.c.: may 2 , 2005 . ( see app . i , table 1. ) on the other hand , we found that state provisions were not necessarily predictors of practice inside the polling place . for example , we found that half the polling places we visited provided voting instructions or sample ballots with large type even though only 3 of the 33 states whose polling places we visited had provisions to do so . conversely , none of the polling places we visited provided for braille ballots , even though 5 of the 33 states we visited had provisions for doing so . in addition to many states lacking provisions for voting room accommodations , in only 11 states did election officials , in response to our state survey , report financing improvements to accessibility by helping to fund new voting systems . our 2005 survey of states also revealed an increase in state provisions for accessible voting equipment , compared to what we found in our review of state provisions in 2000 . as of august 1 , 2005 , 41 states and the district of columbia reported having laws in place or having taken executive action ( through orders , directives , regulations , or policies ) to provide each polling location by january 1 , 2006 , with at least one electronic voting system or other voting system equipped for individuals with disabilities . five of the 9 remaining states reported plans to promulgate laws or executive action to provide each polling location with at least one voting system equipped for individuals with disabilities . this is an increase from 2000 , when 24 states had ( and 27 lacked ) provisions that voting systems must or should accommodate individuals with disabilities . in response to our survey of local election jurisdictions in 2005 , many jurisdictions reported having at least one accessible voting machine per polling place in the 2004 election , although this varied by jurisdiction size . we estimated that 29 percent of all jurisdictions provided at least one accessible voting machine at each polling place during the 2004 general elections . in addition , more large and medium local election jurisdictions reported using accessible voting machines than small jurisdictions . in 2005 , we estimated that 39 percent of large jurisdictions , 38 percent of medium jurisdictions , and 25 percent of small jurisdictions provided accessible voting machines at each polling place . these improvements may be the result of hava , which , as noted earlier , requires each polling place to have at least one voting system equipped for individuals with disabilities , including individuals who are blind or visually impaired . to facilitate the adoption of technology , hava authorized appropriations to provide funds to states to replace punch card and lever voting equipment with other voting methods . since hava's enactment , the general services administration ( gsa ) reported in 2003 the distribution of an estimated $300 million to 30 states for funds to replace old voting equipment and technology . in addition , states may receive other hava funds that could be used for multiple purposes , including replacement or upgrade of voting systems .