gao - 04-287 . washington , d.c.: january 20 , 2004 . in some programs this difference may be substantial . for example , in the offer - in - compromise program , according to unpublished data provided by irs , 58 percent of fiscal year 2003 offer - in - compromise cases were closed by compliance because the offer was not processable or was returned to the taxpayer . accordingly , the taxpayer did not have a basis for an appeal . eliminating these cases from the offer - in - compromise cases closed in 2003 would more than double the appeal rate from 13 percent to 31 percent . however , limited data are available to use other approaches for computing appeal rates . for example , about 30 percent of the cases closed in appeals' second largest workstream , exam / tege , originated from the earned income tax credit and the automated underreporter programs . data were not published on the proportion of these cases that were closed with recommended assessments . tax administration , planning for irs's enforcement process changes included many key steps but can be improved . tax administration , irs needs to further refine its tax filing season performance measures . gao - 03-143 . washington , d.c.: november 22 , 2002 . irs modernization: irs should enhance it's performance management system . gao - 01-234 . washington , d.c.: february 23 , 2001 . standards for internal control in the federal government . gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 . washington , d.c.: november 1999 . executive guide: measuring performance and demonstrating results of information technology investments . gao / aimd - 98-89 . washington , d.c.: march 1998 . executive guide: effectively implementing the government performance and results act . gao / ggd - 96-118 . we identified six principal reasons for those nonsustentions . as shown in table 1 , we estimate that appeals did not sustain compliance decisions in 52 percent of the cases not sustained ( 21,879 cases ) at least in part because appeals disagreed with compliance staff's application of tax law or irs regulations . providing feedback on such disagreements could help compliance managers improve case results by taking action to foster the proper and consistent application of tax laws and regulations . to determine how effectively the feedback project was being managed , we reviewed documents supplied by appeals and compliance program officials , such as meeting minutes for the advisory boards and strategic planning documents . we also interviewed these officials and reviewed our prior work on best practices for developing information that can be used to improve agency performance . to compute appeal rates , we compared compliance cases closed in fiscal year 2003 by worksteam to the appeals cases closed in fiscal year 2004 . since appeals typically required about a year to complete a case , the 2004 appeals closings were cases that were most likely closed by compliance programs during 2003 . further , irs uses a similar approach to compute audit rates . to identify the number of compliance cases by worksteam , we used data published in irs's fiscal year 2003 databook .