gao - 09-455 . most of the due dates listed were established by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) after the legislative due dates had passed . w - 13016 . firms serve several purposes . they provide the basis for setting insurance rates and identifying properties whose owners are required to purchase flood insurance . they also provide the basis for establishing floodplain building standards that communities must adopt and enforce as part of their nfip participation . while fima's risk analysis division is responsible for flood mapping activities and for flood mapping policy and guidance , stakeholders from all levels of government and the private sector participate in the mapping process . fema identifies flood hazards , assesses flood risks , and provides appropriate hazard and risk information to communities nationwide . fema relies on local governments to provide it with notice of changes in communities that can pose new or changed flood hazards and works with localities to collect the information needed to update flood maps . fema supports a variety of flood mitigation activities that are designed to reduce flood risk and thus nfip's financial exposure . these activities , which are implemented at the state and local levels , include hazard mitigation planning ; the adoption and enforcement of floodplain management regulations and building codes ; and the use of hazard control structures such as levees , dams , and floodwalls or natural protective features such as wetlands and dunes . additional coverage is available for contents owned by tenants . nfip differentiates two levels of coverage under the regular program — basic and additional . under risk map , fema also began reviewing 20 percent of the nation's flood maps annually . the funding from fees advances mapping while also paying for things like call centers , data management and archive , web presence , business functions , internal controls , and program management . at the individual property level , mitigation options include elevating a building to or above the area's bfe , relocating the building to an area with less flood risk , or purchasing and demolishing the building and turning the property into green space . in july 2012 , the president signed into law the biggert - waters act to help strengthen the financial soundness of nfip . the act mandated changes to several aspects of nfip's three programmatic areas — insurance , mapping , and mitigation — and also required a study on affordability ( see app . ii for a detailed chart of selected requirements from the biggert - waters act ) .