water users . water users have extensive familiarity with the day - to - day management of the projects and in some cases already handle many day - to - day operations and maintenance activities . for example , the crowheart water users association , a group of water users at the wind river irrigation project , have successfully assumed responsibility for most of the maintenance needs on their portion of the project . indian tribes . officials report that some of the tribes have staff with extensive knowledge of irrigation and water management , as well as technical training . some tribes stated that they have a vested interest in seeing their respective projects succeed , and they would like to assume direct responsibility for their reservation's irrigation project , assuming the deferred maintenance items are fixed before the turnover occurs . turning over some of the bia projects to indian tribes would be an option where tribes have the management and technical capability to assume responsibility for an irrigation project . in exchange for their efforts , bia refunds to the crowheart water users association 50 percent of their annual operation and maintenance fees . through this arrangement , the crowheart water users association believes it has been able to more effectively address maintenance needs and increase project efficiency . turning over some of the bia projects to water users would be an option where water users share similar interests and have positive working relationships , as well as the desire to organize an irrigation district or association . any successful alternative management option would have to consider the sometimes disparate interests and priorities among water users . in some cases , a combination of the various alternative management options may be beneficial and feasible . this type of arrangement is currently being considered for the flathead irrigation project , where bia is currently in the process of turning over the operation and management of the project to a collaborative management group that may include the tribe , individual indian water users , and non - indian water users . however , regardless of the alternative management option , water users and tribal officials repeatedly stated that they would not be willing or able to take over project operations and maintenance unless the deferred maintenance had already been addressed or adequate funding was available to address the deferred maintenance needs . since bia historically has not had adequate funds to operate and maintain the projects , the projects are in a serious state of disrepair . bia is in the process of implementing its plan to develop an accurate list and estimate of the deferred maintenance needs for each project . however , some of the projects also have day - to - day management shortcomings regarding technical support and stakeholder involvement that need to be addressed . bia's decentralized organizational structure combined with the difficulty in attracting and retaining highly qualified project managers at remote indian reservations led to some poor decisionmaking at some of the projects . ( see fig . 6 for an organizational chart showing the lines of authority for providing oversight of a typical bia irrigation project. )