we have referred these products to fda for its review . after reviewing test results with epa and fda officials , we also spoke with several of the manufacturers of supplements that had trace amounts of contaminants . the manufacturers we spoke with stated that they ensure that their products are tested for contamination , and that these tests have shown that their products do not contain contaminants in excess of regulatory standards . manufacturers also stated that they comply with all fda regulations and follow good manufacturing practices as defined by the agency . while the manufacturers we spoke with were concerned about finding any contaminants in their supplements , they noted that the levels identified were too low to raise any issues during their own internal product testing processes . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . these claims are unproven — no studies confirm that ginseng can prevent or cure any disease . in fact , nih recommends that breast and uterine cancer patients avoid ginseng . in addition , ginseng may adversely interact with cancer drugs . the product labeling claims do not differentiate between type 1 and type 2 diabetes . according to nih , ginseng's effect on patients with type 1 diabetes is not well studied . while ginseng may lower blood sugar levels in patients with type 2 diabetes , the long - term effects of such a treatment program are unclear , and it is not known what doses are safe or effective . nih specifically recommends that consumers with type 2 diabetes use proven therapies instead of this supplement . case 7: while our investigators posed as consumers purchasing dietary supplements , sales staff provided them with an informational booklet regarding an enzyme that claims to “ us against dementia and alzheimer's , exhibiting a truly miraculous capacity to optimize mental performance and fight off cognitive decline.” in fact , fda reviewed the scientific evidence for the active ingredient of this supplement and found that it was not adequate to make such a claim . specifically , all 37 supplements tested positive for trace amounts of lead . thirty - two also contained mercury , 28 contained cadmium , 21 contained arsenic , and 18 contained residues from at least one pesticide . see appendixes iii and iv for the complete results of these tests . the levels of contaminants found do not exceed any fda or epa regulations governing dietary supplements or their raw ingredients , and fda and epa officials did not express concern regarding any immediate negative health consequences from consuming these 40 supplements . however , because epa has not set pesticide tolerance limits for the main ingredients of the herbal dietary supplements we tested , the pesticide contaminants exceed fda advisory levels .