accreditation . gao - 18-5 . ( washington , d.c.: december . higher education: education should strengthen oversight of schools and accreditors . gao - 15-59 . washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2014 . joint professional military education: opportunities exist for greater oversight and coordination of associated research institutions . gao - 14-216 . washington , d.c.: march 10 , 2014 . joint military education: actions needed to implement dod recommendations for enhancing leadership development . gao - 14-29 . washington , d.c.: october 23 , 2013 . this information is presented in appendix i of this report . we conducted this performance audit from october 2018 to january 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the goldwater - nichols department of defense reorganization act of 1986 , in part , was intended to improve joint officer management policies , otherwise enhance the effectiveness of military operations , and improve dod's management and administration . with the goldwater - nichols act , congress also intended to , consistent with the congressional declaration of policy in section 2 of the national security act of 1947 and among other things , reorganize dod and strengthen civilian authority in dod . the goldwater - nichols act , as amended , also: established various joint officer management policies , including requiring jpme for certain joint assignments and promotion categories ; required officers to successfully complete an appropriate program at a jpme school , among other things , to be designated as joint qualified — a prerequisite for promotion to brigadier general or rear admiral lower half rank except under certain circumstances ; and required the secretary of defense , with the advice and assistance of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , to periodically review and revise the curriculum of jpme schools to enhance the education and training of officers in joint matters . in addition , the ronald w. reagan national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 required the secretary of defense to implement a comprehensive framework for officer jpme . the pme continuum consists of five military educational levels that correspond to the five phases of a military officer's career: ( 1 ) precommissioning , ( 2 ) primary , ( 3 ) intermediate , ( 4 ) senior , and ( 5 ) general / flag officer . as figure 1 indicates , intermediate - and senior - level pme and jpme programs — the focus of our review — are designed for officers at pay grades o - 4 through o - 6 . as identified in figure 2 below , the military services' intermediate - and senior - level pme programs tailor curricula according to their respective services' needs . for example , the army , navy , and marine corps pme programs focus on land , maritime , and maneuver warfare , respectively .