opportunities to make more such adjustments were missed . an example of a complete adjustment for complexity is the compliance support case processing redesign team's use of a proxy for complexity . the project illustrates both the shortcomings of sb / se's productivity data and the feasibility of some adjustments using other currently available information . the team wanted to measure the work needed to enter examination and collection case data into the information system , holding complexity constant , but direct measures of complexity were not available . while developing their new process , the team knew that more complex cases were to be assigned to higher - grade clerks . the team used the grade of the clerk to adjust output for complexity . although not a direct measure of relative complexity , the grade level of the clerks provided managers a means to adjust for complexity and better identify performance increases that were due to changes in productivity by holding complexity constant . such an adjustment increases the credibility of the team's estimate that irs would save up to 385 positions from the proposed redesign . sb / se has systems in place that measure quality against current standards but do not account adequately for changes in standards of quality . the exam quality measurement system ( eqms ) and the collection quality measurement system ( cqms ) use samples of audit and collection cases , respectively , to determine if irs standards were followed and compute scores that summarize the quality of the case . the other two steps address employee responsibilities . two of these steps are related to pilot testing . pilot testing allows corrective actions to be taken if needed to correct problems prior to full implementation . in the next stage , an organization makes plans to assess the outcome of the new process . the single step in this stage ensures that an organization makes plans early for evaluating the success the success of the new process . it is important to develop assessment plans prior to full project implementation in order to ensure that the data necessary for evaluation are collected . the last three steps are related to how an organization manages the change to the new process . successfully managing change reduces the risk that improvement efforts will fail due to the natural resistance to change within an organization . benchmarking is a key tool for performance improvement because it provides “real world” models and reference points for setting ambitious improvement goals . process mapping is a graphical representation depicting the inputs , outputs , constraints , responsibilities , and interdependencies of the core processes of an organization . acceptable modeling tools and other analysis techniques include flowcharting , tree diagrams , fishbone diagrams , and business activity maps . it is important that a process map defines what the components of each process are , as well as the process's boundaries , dependencies , and interconnections with other processes . if initial process mapping is done at a high level , more detailed modeling is necessary to identify all of the current process's activities and tasks , staff roles and responsibilities , and links and dependencies with other processes , customers , and suppliers .