gao - 04-994 . washington , d.c.: september 13 , 2004 . telecommunications: intelsat privatization and the implementation of the orbit act . gao - 04-891 . washington , d.c.: september 13 , 2004 . washington , d.c.: october 11 , 1996 . telecommunications: competition issues in international satellite communications . gao / rced - 97-1 . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the privatization of intelsat and the implementation of the orbit act . in 2000 , the congress passed the open - market reorganization for the betterment of international telecommunications act ( orbit act ) to help promote a more competitive global satellite communication services market . today we will discuss ( 1 ) the impetus for the privatization of intelsat as competition developed during the 1990s , ( 2 ) the extent to which the privatization steps required by the orbit act have been implemented , and ( 3 ) whether access by global satellite companies to non - u.s. markets has improved since the enactment of the orbit act . to address these issues , we have drawn upon our previous work on the international satellite market and the orbit act . nevertheless , intelsat officials noted that it seeks market access on a transparent and nondiscriminatory basis and that intelsat has participated with other satellite operators , through various trade organizations , to lobby governments to open their markets . the congress passed the communications satellite act of 1962 to promote the creation of a global satellite communications system . as a result of this legislation , the united states joined with 84 other nations in establishing the international telecommunications satellite organization — more commonly known as intelsat — roughly 10 years later . each member nation designated a single telecommunications company to represent its country in the management and financing of intelsat . these companies were called “signatories” to intelsat and were typically government - owned telecommunications companies , such as france telecom , that provided satellite communications services as well as other domestic communications services . unlike any of the other nations that originally formed intelsat , the united states designated a private company , comsat corporation , to serve as its signatory to intelsat . the orbit act , enacted by the congress in march 2000 , was designed to promote a competitive global satellite communication services market . the act did so primarily by calling for the privatization of intelsat after about three decades of operation as an intergovernmental entity . the orbit act required , for example , that intelsat be transformed into a privately held , for - profit corporation with a board of directors that would be largely independent of former intelsat signatories . moreover , the act required that the newly privatized intelsat retain no privileges or other benefits from governments that had previously owned or controlled it . to ensure that this transformation occurred , the congress imposed certain restrictions on the granting of licenses that allow intelsat to provide services within the united states . by the mid - 1980s , the united states began encouraging the development of commercial satellite communications systems that would compete with intelsat .