ii ) . according to epa officials , the agency issued 9 of these rules following settlements in deadline suits . they were all clean air act rules . the 9 rules stem from seven settlements . two of the settlements established a schedule to complete 1 or more rules , and five established a schedule to complete 1 or more rules or make a determination that such a rule was not appropriate or necessary in accordance with the relevant statute . some of the schedules included interim deadlines for conducting rulemaking tasks , such as publishing a notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register . appendix iii provides information on the schedules contained in each settlement . in addition to schedules , the seven settlements also included , among other things , provisions that allowed deadlines to be modified ( including the deadline to issue the final rule ) and specified that nothing in the settlement can be construed to limit or modify any discretion accorded epa by the clean air act or by general principles of administrative law . consistent with doj's 1986 meese memorandum , none of the settlements we reviewed included terms that required epa to take an otherwise discretionary action or prescribed a specific substantive outcome of the final rule . §§ 0.160-0.163. duty . thus , in general , this policy restricts doj from entering into a settlement if it commits epa to take an otherwise discretionary action , such as including specific substantive content in the final rule unless an exception to this restriction is granted by the deputy attorney general or associate attorney general of the united states . according to epa and doj officials , to their knowledge , epa has been granted only one exception to the general restriction on creating mandatory duties through settlements — a 2008 settlement in a suit related to water quality criteria for pathogens and pathogen indicators . the meese memo also provides that doj should not enter into a settlement agreement that interferes with the agency's authority to revise , amend , or promulgate regulations through the procedures set forth in the apa.stated that they have not , and would not agree to settlements in a deadline suit that finalizes the substantive outcome of the rulemaking or declare the substance of the final rule . the terms of settlements in deadline suits that resulted in epa issuing major rules in the last 5 years established a schedule to either promulgate a statutorily required rule or to promulgate a statutorily required rule or make a determination that doing so is not appropriate or necessary pursuant to the relevant statutory provision . epa received public comments on all but one of the draft settlements in these suits . epa issued 32 major rules from may 31 , 2008 through june 1 , 2013 ( see app . the seven settlements , committing epa to issue the 9 statutorily required rules , were finalized between about 10 months and more than 23 years after the applicable statutory deadlines . for each of the 9 rules , figure 1 shows the date the regulation was due , the date the settlement was filed with the court , and the date the final rule was published in the federal register .