( see fig . public housing authorities administer both programs . because tenants' rents typically do not cover the cost of operating public housing , pih administers subsidies , vouchers , and other federal payments to more than 3,000 local public housing authorities . pih also provides the housing authorities with oversight , monitoring , and technical assistance in planning , developing , and managing public housing , and intervening if problems arise with public housing authorities' delivery of services . hud also provides funds to housing authorities for major modernization projects through the capital fund program that pih administers . although hud has started to do workforce planning and has identified the resources required to do its current work , it does not have a comprehensive strategic workforce plan that identifies the knowledge , skills , and abilities it needs to build its workforce for the future . hud has done a detailed analysis of its potential losses of staff to retirement ; but without a complete workforce plan , hud is not fully prepared to recruit and hire staff to pursue its mission . in the interim , hud has begun to hire interns whom it hopes can be trained to fill positions that are likely to be affected by upcoming retirements . workforce planning steps hud has taken thus far include completion of a detailed analysis of hud's potential staff losses due to retirement and the reap , which estimates the staff needed to handle the current workload in each office . hud has analyzed data on retirement eligibility by component office , position , and grade level . among its findings is that by august 2003 , half of its workforce in general schedule ( gs ) grades 9 through 15 will be eligible to retire . figure 3 shows retirement eligibility by grade level . the reap study reviews staffing levels by component office and the tasks that staff in various job classifications are assigned . on an office - by - office basis , the reap study looked at the number of staff on board and assigned a staff ceiling — the number of staff needed for that office based on the work the office is currently performing — and then calculated the resources required to do the work . the reap also provides a framework for periodic validation of the data . figure 4 compares the reap estimated needs for major hud offices with the staff on board as of september 30 , 2001 . the compilation of data on retirement eligibilities and the reap study are important first steps for hud toward strategic human capital planning , but additional workforce planning steps are necessary .