pub . 112-55 , 125 stat . salaries and expenses ( s&e ) and buildings and facilities ( b&f ) .because bop's s&e account generally represents over 95 percent of bop's budget , we focused our review on the s&e account . moreover , we selected 2008 as the starting point for our analysis because bop began using a consistent format for presenting information on its programs , projects , and activities ( ppa ) in its 2008 budget justification . according to bop officials , they use the cost data they maintain in doj's financial management information system to develop estimated dollar amounts for the cost components that compose bop's ppas . reliable for the purposes of this review . we also interviewed officials in doj's justice management division ( jmd ) and budget officials in bop's administration division and budget development and execution branches to discuss their approach for developing and presenting information in the budget justification . specifically , we discussed with doj officials the guidance they provided to components for developing budget justifications . we discussed with bop officials the type of funding information and financial management systems used to develop their budget justifications . we conducted this performance audit from february 2013 to december 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . through the budget system , the president and congress determine the allocation of resources among the agencies of the federal government . omb , as part of the executive office of the president , guides the annual budget process , makes decisions on executive agencies' budgets , aggregates submissions for departmental components , and submits the consolidated document for the executive branch as the president's budget request to congress . omb issues guidance to federal agencies through omb circular a - 11 , which provides instructions for submitting budget data and materials , as well as criteria for developing budget justifications . within doj , the justice management division issues additional annual budget development guidance to doj's components , including bop , usually about 1.5 years before the fiscal year begins for the budget cycle . jmd budget staff ( 1 ) collect and analyze all of the components' budget requests , taking into consideration department - wide policy priorities and omb guidance ; ( 2 ) coordinate with doj policy offices ; and ( 3 ) secure approval and submit the attorney general's budget submission to omb . key steps in this process are shown in figure 1 . when developing its budget justification , bop estimates costs for budget accounts using three steps , as described below . first , bop estimates cost increases for maintaining the current level of services for operations as provided in the prior year's enacted budget . these include costs to address mandatory staff pay raises and benefit increases , inmate medical care , and utilities . bop analyzes historical obligations from the past 5 years to identify average annual operating cost increases .