pub . components , such as the army , navy , and air force , are expected to develop and implement fips in accordance with the fiar guidance . the steps required for these plans include assessing processes , controls , and systems ; identifying and correcting weaknesses ; assessing , validating , and sustaining corrective actions ; and ultimately achieving audit readiness . after a component's management determines that an assessable unit is ready for audit , both the dod comptroller and the dod inspector general ( ig ) review the related fip documentation to determine if they agree with management's conclusion of audit readiness . dod intends to progress toward achieving financial statement auditability by executing the fiar guidance methodology for groups of assessable units across four waves . under the fiar plan , successful execution of the fiar guidance methodology for groups of assessable units across these waves is intended to result in the audit readiness of various components' financial statements through fiscal year 2017 . the first two waves of the fiar plan focus on achieving the dod comptroller's interim budgetary priorities , which dod believes should lead to an auditable sbr . the third wave focuses on accountability for dod's mission - critical assets , and the fourth wave focuses on the remaining assessable units constituting dod's complete set of financial statements . as mentioned earlier , the secretary of defense directed the department to achieve audit readiness for the sbr for general fund activities by the end of fiscal year 2014 . the ndaa for fiscal year 2012 reinforced this directive by requiring that the next fiar plan status report — to be issued in may 2012 — include a plan , with interim objectives and milestones for each military department and the defense agencies , to support the goal of sbr audit readiness by 2014 . the ndaa for fiscal year 2012 also requires the plan to include process and control improvements and business systems modernization efforts necessary for the department to consistently prepare timely , reliable , and complete financial management information . the sbr is the only financial statement predominantly derived from an entity's budgetary accounts in accordance with budgetary accounting rules , which are incorporated into generally accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) for the federal government . the sbr is designed to provide information on authorized budgeted spending authority reported in the budget of the united states government ( president's budget ) , including budgetary resources , availability of budgetary resources , and how obligated resources have been used . in november 1990 , dod created the defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) as its accounting agency to consolidate , standardize , and integrate finance and accounting requirements , functions , procedures , operations , and systems . the military services continue to perform certain finance and accounting activities at each military installation . these activities vary by military service depending on what the services retained and the number of personnel they transferred to dfas .