laos . according to officials we met with , usaid coordinates its tcb activities in laos from its regional office in thailand . usaid does not have a mission in laos , although it does have a usaid representative ( a u.s . personal services contractor ) located in the u.s. embassy in laos who helps to coordinate usaid regional and bilateral projects , including tcb activities . according to a usaid official , tcb efforts in laos are relatively small and focused , so formal coordination structures are not necessary or practical . instead , this official explained that the usaid representative regularly liaises with the state economics officer , who meets with the ambassador weekly . although no official working group has been established , the economic officer , ambassador , and usaid representative meet at least quarterly to discuss tcb assistance . these discussions help to ensure conflicts are avoided and resources are used effectively . because economic development and tcb projects have been key priorities of the embassy in laos in recent years , usaid communicates frequently with state counterparts in - country , according to an official . in addition , another official told us that usaid and state worked together to develop the integrated country strategy for laos , helping to ensure that tcb fit into a common set of interagency goals and priorities . at the headquarters level , usaid officials noted that they have introduced a web - based tool and taken various actions , such as committing to regularly identify best practices , based on the multicountry evaluation completed in 2010 . in 2013 , usaid launched a web - based tool , called “project starter,” designed to bring together guidance , templates , examples , and checklists to facilitate monitoring , evaluation , and adaptive learning in tcb activities . from january 1 , 2014 , through march 31 , 2014 , the project starter website had nearly 4,000 visitors , including a mix of technical , program , and managerial staff from headquarters and the field . in our 2011 report , we found that usaid had commissioned a limited number of evaluations of tcb programs to assess long - term results , in part because of the resources required and the difficulty of evaluating impact in the area of tcb . we recommended that usaid develop a written plan for using the 2010 multicountry evaluation and conduct further evaluations on an ongoing basis . as a result of our recommendation , usaid committed to conduct every 5 years an analysis of evaluations completed by missions , to identify best practices for trade projects . however , usaid has not incorporated lessons learned identified in the 2010 multicountry evaluation into its tcb strategy . usaid officials at headquarters also told us that they provide guidance to field staff to facilitate tcb program management , leveraging best practices and lessons learned from evaluations and experience . for example , subject matter experts at headquarters regularly respond to requests for assistance from field staff on designing or evaluating projects .