drummond . “assault rates and implementation of a workplace violence prevention program in the veterans health care administration,” journal of occupational and environmental medicine , vol . peek - asa , c. , c. casteel , v. allareddy , m. nocera , s. goldmacher , e. o'hagan , j. blando , d. valiante , m. gillen , and r. harrison . “workplace violence prevention programs in hospital emergency departments,” journal of occupational and environmental medicine , vol . peek - asa , c. c. casteel , v. allareddy , m. nocera , s. goldmacher , e. o'hagan , j. blando , d. valiante , m. gillen , and r. harrison . “workplace violence prevention programs in psychiatric units and facilities,” archives of psychiatric nursing , vol . pompeii , l. a. , a.l . schoenfisch , h.j . lipscomb , j.m . dement , c.d . smith , and m. upadhyaya . “physical assault , physical threat , and verbal abuse perpetrated against hospital workers by patients or visitors in six u.s. hospitals,” american journal of industrial medicine ( 2015 ) : 1-11 . speroni , k.g. , t. fitch , e. dawson , l. dugan , and m. atherton . “incidence and cost of nurse workplace violence perpetrated by hospital patients or patient visitors,” journal of emergency nursing , vol . novaco . “a cross - sectional survey of factors related to inpatient assault of staff in a forensic psychiatric hospital,” journal of advanced nursing , vol . kowalenko , t. , d. gates , g.l . gillespie , p. succop , and t.k . mentzel . “prospective study of violence against ed workers,” american journal of emergency medicine , vol . lipscomb , j. , k. mcphaul , j. rosen , j. geiger brown , m. choi , k. soeken , v. vignola , d. wagoner , j. foley , and p. porter . “violence prevention in the mental health setting: the new york state experience,” canadian journal of nursing research , vol . mohr , d. c. , n. warren , m.j. hodgson , and d.j . inspector training . according to osha officials , all inspectors are required to complete web - based training as part of their initial training that includes four lessons related to workplace violence: ( 1 ) defining workplace violence , ( 2 ) identifying solutions to the violence , ( 3 ) conducting workplace violence inspections , and ( 4 ) protecting oneself during an inspection . three other optional webinars are offered: a 1.5- hour webinar on the 2011 workplace violence enforcement directive that includes discussion of its purpose , procedures for conducting inspections and issuing citations for workplace violence , and resources available for workplace violence inspections . the second is a 1.5-hour webinar that focuses on identifying risks for violence and prevention strategies in health care and social services settings . the third is a 2-hour webinar that includes information on how to conduct inspections as part of the nep targeting nursing and residential care facilities .