postal service ) . in selecting these agencies for our review , we considered both civilian and military agencies with fleets of more than 5,000 vehicles . we looked for variation in fleet characteristics , such as age of passenger vehicles , changes in fleet size from 2005 to 2011 , and changes in fleet composition ( owned versus leased ) from 2005 to 2011 , with the goal of capturing a range of agency characteristics . within usda , interior , dhs , and va , we selected the subagencies with the largest fleets and selected a sufficient number to account for two - thirds of each department's non - tactical fleet . consequently , in usda we reviewed the natural resources conservation service and forest service ; in dhs we reviewed u.s. customs and border protection and immigration and customs enforcement ; in interior we reviewed the national park service , fish and wildlife service , and bureau of land management ; and in va we reviewed the veterans health administration . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . we assessed the extent to which the following agencies use leading practices to manage their fleets , including the size and costs of these fleets: the departments of agriculture ( usda ) , interior ( interior ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) , and the united states air force ( air force ) and the united states army corps of engineers ( army corps ) within the department of defense . collectively , these agencies account for about 46 percent of the roughly 450,000 civilian and non - tactical military vehicles maintained by the federal government ( excluding the u.s . postal service ) . when selecting these agencies , we considered both military and civilian agencies with fleets of more than 5,000 vehicles . we looked for variation in fleet characteristics , including: age of passenger vehicles , change in fleet size from 2005- 2011 , and change in fleet composition ( owned versus leased ) from 2005- 2011 , to ensure that we selected agencies with a range of fleet characteristics . we eliminated agencies that had been the subject of a fleet - related audit within the past 2 years , with the exception of agencies covered in a recent report that stemmed from the same congressional request as this review . for example , officials from usda's natural resources conservation service told us that , in addition to implementing an fmis , it will obtain vehicle and repair cost data from the new usda fleet card program by the end of 2013.will help them collect cost data that their previous card did not collect accurately or completely . similarly , dhs's immigration and customs enforcement is pursuing the capability of importing fuel and maintenance cost data from fleet payment cards . four agencies are also exploring gps systems that are capable of collecting data on utilization , greenhouse gas emissions , and direct costs such as scheduled maintenance and fuel consumption .