of the ansf . ultimately , we met with 23 deployed u.s. advisor teams in afghanistan operating in four different regional commands' areas of operations — 18 army teams and 5 marine corps teams . we conducted this performance audit from june 2012 to april 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , james a. reynolds , assistant director ; virginia chanley ; carole coffey ; grace coleman ; mark dowling ; kasea hamar ; marcus oliver ; luis rodriguez ; and sally williamson made key contributions to this report . building partner capacity: key practices to effectively manage department of defense efforts to promote security cooperation . gao - 13-335t . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2013 . afghanistan: key oversight issues.gao - 13-218sp . washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2013 . afghanistan security: security transition . gao - 12-598c . washington , d.c.: september 11 , 2012 . observations on u.s. military capabilities to support transition of lead security responsibility to afghan national security forces . gao - 12-734c . washington , d.c.: august 3 , 2012 . afghanistan security: long - standing challenges may affect progress and sustainment of afghan national security forces . gao - 12-951t . washington , d.c.: july 24 , 2012 . interim results on u.s. - nato efforts to transition lead security responsibility to afghan forces . gao - 12-607c . washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2012 . security force assistance: additional actions needed to guide geographic combatant command and service efforts . gao - 12-556 . washington , d.c.: may 10 , 2012 . iraq and afghanistan: actions needed to enhance the ability of army brigades to support the advising mission . gao - 11-760 . washington , d.c.: august 2 , 2011 . these exercises include training based on the level ( eg , brigade , battalion ) and type ( eg , army , police ) of the ansf unit that teams will be advising and their specific areas of responsibility in afghanistan , individual and team proficiency assessments , and live - fire drills , such as combat patrols . marine corps advisor teams receive similar training at the advisor training group , though this training does not include the combat unit with which they will be operating in afghanistan . the army , marine corps , and isaf have established mechanisms to gather feedback on predeployment training from advisor teams in afghanistan in order to update and refine training for the advisor mission . the department stated that advisor teams and the leadership of brigades must collaborate and use the site survey as well as the brigade's intelligence infrastructure to support the teams in getting situational awareness . further , dod further noted that space and logistical constraints may limit participation in a brigade's site survey .