the race will be displayed to the voter on its own ballot page . when the voter is satisfied with the selections and has reached the final summary screen , the red vote button is illuminated , indicating the voter can now cast his or her ballot . when the vote button is pressed , the voting session is complete and the ballot is recorded on the ivotronic dre . in sarasota county's 2006 general election , there were nine different ballot styles with between 28 and 40 races , which required between 15 and 21 electronic ballot pages to display , and 3 to 4 summary pages for review purposes . ( 2 ) what was the scope of the undervote in sarasota county in the general election ? ( 3 ) to what extent were tests conducted on the voting systems in sarasota county prior to the general election and what were the results of those tests ? ( 4 ) considering the tests that were conducted on the voting systems from sarasota county after the general election , are additional tests needed to determine whether the voting systems contributed to the undervote ? to conduct our work , we met with officials from the sarasota county supervisor of elections , the florida department of state and division of elections , and election systems and software ( es&s ) , the manufacturer of the voting systems used in sarasota county . we reviewed voting system documentation , including standards documents , audit and testing documentation , submissions from the contestant and contestee , and selected florida election laws and rules . in sarasota county , election officials demonstrated how the es&s voting system was used to support the 2006 general election . to determine the scope of the undervote in sarasota county , we collected election data from the supervisor of elections and analyzed it to determine whether the undervote could be attributed to particular voting machines or machine characteristics . specifically , we examined ballot image logs and event logs from the voting systems and technician and incident reports generated by elections staff from sarasota county on election day . we also conducted various statistical analyses to characterize the undervote and to identify whether a subset of machines or precincts may have caused the large undervote . we reviewed test documentation and interviewed officials involved with testing from es&s , the florida division of elections , and the sarasota county supervisor of elections . to determine the need for additional tests , we also reviewed the tests conducted following the election , including those conducted or sponsored by the florida division of elections , including the parallel testing , the examination of sarasota county's election procedures and practices , and the source code review conducted at florida state university's security and assurance in information technology ( sait ) laboratory . we reviewed the final reports of these tests and also met with the leader of the source code review team .