we have not reviewed these actions to determine if they adequately address our recommendations . the recent outbreaks of e. coli in spinach and salmonella in peanut butter , along with outbreaks of contaminated pet food , underscore the need of a broad - based transformation of the federal oversight of food safety to achieve greater economy , efficiency , effectiveness , accountability , and sustainability . gao's high - risk designation raises the priority and visibility of this necessary transformation and thus can bring needed attention to address the weaknesses caused by a fragmented system . among the reasons we designated the federal oversight of food safety as a high - risk area is that usda and fda have limited recall authority . even within this limited authority , we found that these agencies could have done better in carrying out their food recall programs . how can agencies more strategically manage their portfolio of tools and adopt more innovative methods to contribute to the achievement of national outcomes ? integration can create synergy and economies of scale and can provide more focused and efficient efforts to protect the nation's food supply . further , to respond to the nation's pressing fiscal challenges , agencies may have to explore new ways to achieve their missions . many of our recommendations to agencies to promote the safety and integrity of the nation's food supply have been acted upon . for example , we recommended that fda adopt a risk - based approach to overseeing states' shellfish safety programs . in response to our recommendation , fda designed a risk - based approach to reviewing the states' shellfish safety programs and incorporated it into their fiscal year 2003 to 2005 compliance program , which fda's shellfish specialists use to evaluate state programs . nevertheless , as we discuss in the 2007 high - risk series , a fundamental reexamination of the federal food safety system is warranted . taken as a whole , our work indicates that congress and the executive branch can and should create the environment needed to look across the activities of individual programs within specific agencies and toward the goals that the federal government is trying to achieve . others have also called for fundamental changes to the federal food safety system overall . in 1998 , the national academy of sciences concluded that the system is not well equipped to meet emerging challenges . going forward , to build a sustained focus on the safety and the integrity of the nation's food supply , congress and the executive branch can integrate various expectations for food safety with congressional oversight and through agencies' strategic planning processes . the development of a governmentwide performance plan that is mission - based , is results - oriented , and provides a cross - agency perspective offers a framework to help ensure agencies' goals are complementary and mutually reinforcing . further , this plan can help decisionmakers balance trade - offs and compare performance when resource allocation and restructuring decisions are made .