hehs - 99-135 . washington , d.c.: july 28 , 1999 . see figure 6 . similarly , among 2-year schools , proprietary schools have higher default rates than other schools . for example , the default rate 4 years into repayment for proprietary schools is the highest – 27.2 percent – of the three school sectors . see figure 7 . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and recommendations based on our audit objectives . to determine how proprietary schools compare to public and private non - profit schools in regard to federal student loan default profiles , we analyzed fiscal year 2004 cohort default rate data that education calculated from the national student loan data system ( nslds ) . nslds includes data from schools , agencies that guaranty loans , the direct loan program , and other education programs . we used fiscal year 2004 cohort default rate data to analyze default rates 2 , 3 , and 4 years after students entered repayment . these data were drawn from nslds in december 2007 . from the dataset of 3-year cohort default rates for individual schools , we conducted our own analysis to calculate the numbers of proprietary schools that had default rates of 0 and under 5 percent . we chose 5 percent because it is a qualifying rate for the most favorable loan disbursement and delivery terms in all school sectors . in addition , we used education calculations of title iv funding for the various sectors over time from nslds for background information . we began our data analysis of title iv funding in the 2001 / 02 award year after learning from a data specialist at education that data prior to 2001 / 02 are considered less accurate because the department used different methodologies to identify and calculate title iv funding data . to ensure that the title iv funding and cohort default rates from nslds were accurate for us to report education's data and for us to conduct our own analysis , we reviewed information about the data itself and the nslds system and interviewed an education official knowledgeable about the data and the system . additionally , we reviewed the analyses that education performed and determined that the data were accurate and reliable for our purposes . as part of our analysis of student default rates , we examined data on student demographics and outcomes . to identify information on borrowers' dependency status and their parents' education and income levels , we analyzed the most recent student survey data available from the 2004 national postsecondary student aid study ( npsas ) . npsas is a nationally representative sample of students in postsecondary education institutions , including undergraduate and graduate students from all types of institutions . to provide information on borrowers' age , gender , enrollment , and racial status , we analyzed the most recent data available on schools during the 2007 / 08 school year from the integrated postsecondary education database system ( ipeds ) . ipeds contains data on postsecondary institutions such as student demographics , enrollments , and finances .