janssen . remote land mine ( field ) detection , an overview of techniques . tno defence research . the hague , the netherlands. gros , bertrand and claudio bruschini . sensor technologies for the detection of antipersonnel mines , a survey of current research and system developments . epfl - lami detec . lausanne , switzerland. havlík , stefan and peter licko . humanitarian demining: the challenge for robotic research . the journal of humanitarian demining , issue 2.2 ( may 1998 ) . healey , a.j . webber . sensors for the detection of land - based munitions . naval postgraduate school . monterey , ca. , 1995 heberlein , david c. , progress in metal - detection techniques for detecting and identifying landmines and unexploded ordnance , institute for defense analyses , 2000 . horowitz , paul , et al. , new technological approaches to humanitarian demining , the mitre corporation , 1996 . hussein , esam m.a . and edward j. waller . landmine detection: the problem and the challenge . laboratory for threat material detection , department of mechnaical engineering , university of new brunswick . fredericton , nb , canada . janzon , bo , international workshop of technical experts on ordnance recovery and disposal in the framework of international demining operations ( report ) , national defence research establishment , stockholm , sweden , 1994 . johnson , b. et al. , a research and development strategy for unexploded ordnance sensing , massachusetts institute of technology , 1996 . kerner , david , et al . anti - personnel landmine ( apl ) detection technology survey and assessment . prepared for the defense threat reduction agency . dynmeridian . alexandria , va. , 1999 . mcfee , john , et al. , crad countermine r&d study – final report , defense research establishment suffield , 1994 . mächler , ph . detection technologies for anti - personnel mines . lami - detec . lausanne , switzerland , 1995 . scroggins , debra m. , technology assessment for the detection of buried metallic and non - metallic cased ordnance , naval explosive ordnance disposal technology center , indian head , md , 1993 . sensor technology assessment for ordnance and explosive waste detection and location . prepared for u.s. army corps of engineers and army yuma proving ground . jet propulsion laboratory , california institute of technology . pasadena , ca . tsipis , kosta . report on the landmine brainstorming workshop of august 25-30 , 1996 . program in science and technology for international security , massachusetts institute of technology . cambridge , ma. electromagnetic radiography 2 . gamma ray imaging 3 . microwave enhanced infrared 4 . quadrupole resonance 5 . x - ray fluorescence four operate by sending em energy into the ground , reflecting off the mine . five operate by sending em energy into the ground , creating an effect on the explosive substance . whereas four of the five act on the explosive within the mine casing , one relies on detecting released explosive molecules . metal detectors 1 . two operate by detecting differences in the low frequency electromagnetic field around the mine . nvesd accounted for 17 of the solicitations .