provide oversight of it investments . officials from the office of the cio at seven agencies ( commerce , interior , labor , opm , nsf , state , and va ) stated that they use the information to provide oversight of it investments . most agencies agreed with our recommendation or had no comment . in addition , sba officials noted that , as part of their certification process , the office of the cio portfolio management team meets with the cio to determine if any it investments should have a techstat review . given the significant size of the federal government's annual investment in it and the often disappointing results from it development efforts , finding innovative ways to improve the quality and timeliness of agencies' it investments may help improve these development efforts . the discussion of benefits identified with using the certification process — and the range of management oversight activities taken by the agencies — may have the potential to help agencies improve their management and oversight of it acquisitions . of the 24 agencies in our review , only 4 had clearly defined processes and policies to ensure that the cio will certify that major it investments are adequately implementing incremental development . the remaining 20 agencies either did not include details such as the role of the cio in the certification process or how certification would be documented , or had not yet finalized a policy . omb's fiscal year 2018 guidance was not clear regarding what actions agencies should take to demonstrate compliance with fitara's certification requirement . however , omb issued its new fiscal year 2019 guidance in august 2017 , which addressed the weaknesses we identified . a provision in fitara , enacted in december 2014 , states that , in its annual it capital planning guidance , omb is to require agency cios to certify that it investments are adequately implementing incremental development . subsequent omb guidance on the law's implementation , issued in june 2015 , directed agency cios to define processes and policies for their agencies which ensure that they certify that it resources are adequately implementing incremental development . as part of the guidance , omb defined adequate incremental development as the development of software or services , with planned or actual delivery of new or modified technical functionality to users that occurs at least every 6 months . omb's guidance allows agencies the flexibility to define the processes that cios use for ensuring the certification of adequate incremental development . for example , cios can rely on internal governance processes , such as investment and capital planning processes , to evaluate agency investments for adequate use of incremental development . program officials were actively engaged with stakeholders . these critical factors help support omb's objective of improving the management of large - scale it acquisitions across the federal government . in may 2014 , we reported on the status of incremental development at five agencies ( defense , dhs , hhs , transportation , and va ) . we noted that these agencies planned to deliver functionality for fewer than half of the investments in 12-month cycles and that only about one - fourth of these investments would deliver in 6-month increments , as required by omb .