availability . the system was not reliable on a 24-hour - a - day , 7-day - a - week basis ; it had no backup for disaster recovery ; and the data repository experienced system shutdowns and functional interruptions . as a result of the system problems associated with block 1 , dod set a new date for system completion — september 2011 — and increased the projected life - cycle cost of the system to approximately $5 billion , which it attributed primarily to the need for increased operations and maintenance for block 1 . the department also took a number of other steps with regard to the initiative . specifically , in may 2005 , it terminated plans for deploying the block 4 inpatient functionality with the intent of moving this functionality into block 3 . however , due to continuing performance problems with the functionality that had been delivered , and because the block 3 deployment had exceeded the department's 5-year limit for achieving initial operational capability by january 2008 , dod terminated block 3 ( laboratory , radiology , and pharmacy ) as well . this action left only one of the four planned blocks — block 2 — for implementation . although the department reduced the scope of the initiative to only two blocks , the estimated life - cycle costs were revised back to the original $3.8 billion ( through 2021 ) . however , the department encountered performance problems with the block 2 dental module as well and , in december 2009 , mhs senior leadership implemented a strategic pause in its further deployment . beyond these actions , the department took other steps over the course of the initiative . specifically , in november 2005 , the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs announced a change in the name of the system from chcs ii to ahlta , but did not give a specific reason for doing so . further , as part of its attempt to improve the system , dod awarded several contracts between fiscal year 2006 and fiscal year 2009 for a total of approximately $40 million to address performance problems and implement software enhancements . the contractors began deployment of these software enhancements ( which dod referred to as ahlta 3.3 ) in december 2008 . to acquire its electronic health record system , dod used several contractors and types of contracts . these included fixed - price , time - and - materials , and cost - plus - fixed - fee contracts , each of which involved a different level of cost or performance risk for the government . the prime developer and lead integrator for chcs ii , integic ( acquired by northrop grumman in 2005 ) , was awarded a time - and - materials contract for about $65.4 million in 1997 and was tasked to perform systems engineering , requirements analysis , architecture evaluation , software design and development , engineering and development testing , test and evaluation , maintenance , site installation and implementation , and training . contracts for system development and integration continued through fiscal year 2009 . dod also used noncompetitive contracts for the development of the system .