sources . for example , assuming no change in consumption during working years , our tax increase benchmark may overestimate total retirement income because no provision is made to decrease income from saved assets that might diminish as higher payroll taxes reduce disposable income before retirement . x ! weight ) – y ! weightt = the year of the factor , x = constant proportional benefit reduction , y = constant “subtractive” benefit reduction , and weight and weight determine the relative effects of x and y and sum to 1 . our three potential benchmarks can now be described as follows: proportional offset: weight = 1 and weight = 0 . the value of x is calculated to achieve 75-year solvency , given the chosen phase - in period and scope of reductions . the formula specifies that the proportional reduction is always taken as a proportion of the base year factor value rather than the prior year . this maintains a constant rate of benefit reduction from year to year . in contrast , taking the reduction as a proportion of the prior year's factor value implies a decelerating of the benefit reduction over time because the prior year's factor gets smaller with each reduction . to achieve the same level of 75-year solvency , this would require a greater proportional reduction in earlier years because of the smaller reductions in later years . the proportional offset hits lower earners especially hard because the constant x percent of the higher formula factors results in a larger percentage reduction over that segment of the formula , while the higher formula factors apply to the lower earnings segments of the formula . for example , in a year when the cumulative size of the proportional reduction has reached 10 percent , the 90 percent factor would then have been reduced by 9 percentage points , the 32 percent factor by 3.2 percentage points , and the 15 percent factor by 1.5 percentage points . as a result , earnings below the first bendpoint would be replaced at 9 percentage points less than current law , while earnings above the second bendpoint would be replaced at only 1.5 percentage points less than current law . still , the proportional offset is easily described as a constant percentage reduction of current law benefits for everyone . in the example , beneficiaries of all earnings levels would have their benefits reduced by 10 percent . progressive offset: weight = 0 and weight = 1 . the value of y is calculated to achieve 75-year solvency , given the chosen phase - in period and scope of reductions . this offset results in equal percentage point reductions in the formula factors , by definition , and subjects earnings across all segments of the pia formula to the same reduction . therefore , it avoids hitting lower earners especially hard as the proportional offset does . as it happens , this offset produces exactly the same effect as the offset we used in our 1990 analysis of a partial privatization proposals . social security: analysis of a proposal to privatize trust fund reserves . gao / hrd - 91-22 , dec. 12 , 1990. not to the pia .