portfoliostat . in order to eliminate duplication , move to shared services , and improve portfolio management processes , omb ( in march 2012 ) launched its portfoliostat initiative . it required agencies to conduct annual agency - wide it portfolio reviews to , among other things , reduce commodity it spending and demonstrate how it investments align with agency mission and business functions . portfoliostat is designed to assist agencies in ( 1 ) assessing the current maturity of their it investment management process , ( 2 ) making decisions on eliminating duplicative investments , and ( 3 ) moving to shared solutions in order to maximize the return on it investments across the portfolio . omb estimates that the portfoliostat effort has the potential to save $2.5 billion from fiscal year 2013 through fiscal year 2015 by , for example , consolidating duplicative systems . given the importance of these initiatives , omb has established reporting requirements to , among other things , track the status of agencies' implementation of these efforts . in addition , congress recently incorporated key aspects of a number of these reforms into law . our extensive experience at federal agencies and in particular , our recent reports on techstat , data center consolidation , and portfoliostat , have shown that these reforms and the required information agencies are to report on to omb as part of these efforts offer important opportunities to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of federal agency programs and operations , including producing financial savings . the reports also included recommendations to omb to improve agency reporting on key initiatives ; the recommendations highlighted the importance of omb's reporting requirements and the need for federal agencies to provide current and accurate information about the status of these initiatives . they also highlighted that the requirements are a critical component to ensuring omb's effective management and oversight of the initiatives . together , the responsibilities discussed above require cios to be key leaders in managing it in a coordinated fashion in order to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of programs and operations . over the last several years , omb has made changes to cio reporting requirements to address , among other things , changes in federal it management . such changes included modifying how requirements are reported , updating what information is requested as part of existing requirements , and establishing new requirements . for example , in march 2013 , omb issued a memorandum which , among other things , established the integrated data collection , which was a new way for agencies to submit information relating to it reform initiatives such as portfoliostat and data center consolidation . omb , fiscal year 2015 guidance on exhibits 53 and 300 – information technology and e - government ( washington , d.c.: july 1 , 2013 ) . agencies provide information on investments that are to be reduced or eliminated as the result of new investments .