devtech systems , inc . we also analyzed data and information from usaid implementer progress reports , mid - point and final evaluations , and other performance reports , which provided a longer - term perspective on results . collectively , we believe that this information provided meaningful insight into the successes and shortcomings of the projects in the sectors we reviewed . our report acknowledges that agency officials described progress and challenges to achieving the prosperity , governance , and security objectives , as well as the steps taken to modify projects to address such challenges . however , such modifications fell outside the scope of our analysis of results , absent documentation of the specific impact of such modifications on the achievement of objectives . non - experimental program evaluation of usaid assistance to smallholder farmers in guatemala , august 18 , 2014 . notre dame initiative for global development . food for education mid - term evaluation , july 2014 . democracy international , inc . final report: mid - term performance evaluation of the transparent local governance and improved service delivery project ( usaid / nexos ) and the decentralized enabling environment project ( usaid / dee ) , may 2014. international business and technical consultants , inc . evaluation report: final performance evaluation of the usaid municipal competitiveness project in el salvador , january 29 , 2014 . development training services , inc. report on the mid - term performance evaluation of the usaid transparency and governance project el salvador , december 24 , 2012 . rivera cira consulting , inc. usaid / guatemala final performance evaluation for the project against violence and impunity ( pavi ) , december 20 , 2012 . amex international and devtech systems , inc. usaid / guatemala mid - term performance evaluations for two economic growth office projects , october 25 , 2012. international business and technical consultants , inc . performance evaluation of the “improving access to employment program in el salvador” . october 17 , 2012 . the department of state ( state ) and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) produced the results architecture for the u.s. strategy for central america ( strategy ) . the results architecture presents the desired end - state of the strategy ; the three primary objectives of prosperity , governance , and security ; and sub - objectives that support each of the primary objectives . state and usaid defined the strategy's mission as to secure u.s. borders and protect u.s. citizens by addressing the economic , governance , and security drivers of illegal immigration and illicit trafficking , and to promote private sector investment in central america . the result architecture's overall objective is an economically integrated central america that is fully democratic ; provides economic opportunities to its people ; enjoys more accountable , transparent , and effective public institutions ; and ensures a safe environment for its citizens . the strategy's prosperity objective is to work with central american governments to improve the business environment , create jobs , enhance food security , expand energy security , and increase u.s. investment and trade .