inspection procedures . according to epa officials , the agency requires that srf programs have procedures to help ensure subrecipients are using recovery act srf funding for eligible purposes . while epa has not established required procedures for state project inspections , it has provided states its optional recovery act inspection checklist to help them evaluate a subrecipient's compliance with recovery act requirements , such as the buy american and job reporting requirements . some states we reviewed have adopted epa's recovery act inspection checklist procedures and modified their procedures accordingly . for example , california and arizona plan to implement all elements of epa's checklist for conducting inspections of recovery act projects , according to officials in these states . other states have modified their existing inspection procedures to account for the new recovery act requirements . for example , officials from georgia said they added visual examination of purchased materials and file review steps to their monthly inspections to verify that subrecipients are complying with the buy american provision . in contrast , the pennsylvania department of environmental protection's inspection procedures do not include a review of recovery act requirements . for example , we found that inspection reports for three recovery act projects we visited in pennsylvania do not include inspection elements that covered davis - bacon or buy american provisions . instead , the pennsylvania infrastructure investment authority requires subrecipients to self - certify their compliance with these recovery act requirements when requesting payment from the state's funds disbursement system . registered professional engineers who work for the subrecipients must sign off on these self - certifications and subrecipients could face loss of funds if a certification is subsequently found to be false , according to the executive director of the authority . frequency and timing of inspections . according to epa officials , the agency does not have requirements on how often a state srf program must complete project inspections , and the frequency and complexity of inspections vary by state for the base srf program . officials from several states told us they have increased the frequency of project site inspections . for example , colorado srf officials said the state is conducting quarterly project site inspections of each of the state's recovery act funded srf projects , whereas under the state's base srf programs , colorado inspects project sites during construction only when the state has concerns . however , we found that two states either did not conduct site inspections of some projects that are complete or had not yet inspected projects that were near completion . for example , as of april 19 , 2010 , ohio epa had inspected about 41 percent of its clean water srf projects , but our review of ohio's inspection records showed that at least 6 projects are complete and have not been inspected , and a number of others are nearing completion and have not been inspected . monitoring compliance with recovery act requirements . we found issues in several states during interviews with srf subrecipients that suggest uncertainty about subrecipients' compliance with recovery act requirements .