( see app . ii for a list of the initiatives and their outcomes. ) these initiatives notwithstanding , between july 1997 and june 30 , 2000 , the backlog more than doubled to 562 ( see table 2 ) although the percent of unsettled change orders decreased from 62 percent to 52 percent . on july 1 , 2000 , tma initiated an ambitious , short - term effort , referred to as mobilization , to settle its 562 open change orders as well as other contract adjustments by the end of the calendar year . tma officials stated that clearing the backlog was necessary in order to prepare for changes mandated in the floyd d. spence national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2001 ( p.l . 106-398 ) that would result in significant program changes , including expanded health care and pharmacy benefits for military retirees who are age 65 and older . in addition , tma officials recognized that they needed to reimburse mcs contractors for implementing past change orders that had not been negotiated and paid . to help achieve this goal , tma increased the technical support for its contract management staff by using 14 staff on contract from the center for naval analysis ( cna ) , who were originally slated to analyze and evaluate the proposals submitted in response to tma's solicitations for the next round of tricare contracts , which had been postponed . these additional staff were used primarily to help with change order proposal reviews by providing technical and pricing expertise . tma also hired an information systems consulting firm to help review proposals and increased the numbers of other contracted staff who support contract management . tma worked with its mcs contractors to make this initiative a priority by setting deadlines for the cost proposal submissions , which are needed to negotiate and settle the change orders . tma officials soon realized , however , that reviewing and negotiating individual change orders would be too time - consuming to meet its 6-month goal . as a result , even though tma officials told us that proposals are frequently inadequate , they have not maintained statistics to demonstrate this . tma officials acknowledged that contract staff exercise a fair amount of judgment in determining the adequacy of a proposal . for example , one contracting officer may find a proposal adequate , while another , who prefers more detailed cost data , may not . this can be a problem for mcs contractors if the tma contract official they work with changes . to expedite negotiations , tma sent a team of contract staff to each mcs contractor to negotiate global settlements , which included all change orders that had not yet been settled under this effort , as well as reas , claims , and other outstanding contract adjustments . as of february 8 , 2001 , tma had completed payments to four of its five mcs contractors and had made partial payments to the fifth mcs contractor . through this effort , tma settled all but 71 change orders . according to tma , some change orders were not settled under this effort because it lacked information or disagreed with the mcs contractors about settlement terms .