gao - 05-287 . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2005 . vocational rehabilitation: more va and dod collaboration needed to expedite services for seriously injured servicemembers . gao - 05-167 . tried hard not to think about it or went out of your way to avoid situations that remind you of it ? were constantly on guard , watchful , or easily startled ? felt numb or detached from others , activities , or your surroundings ? dod is also using these four questions in its post - deployment health assessment questionnaire ( form dd 2796 ) to identify servicemembers at risk for ptsd . dod requires the questionnaire be completed by all servicemembers , including reserve and national guard members , returning from a combat theater and is planning to conduct follow - up screenings within 6 months after return . va faces significant challenges in providing services to servicemembers who have sustained serious physical and psychological injuries . for example , in providing vr&e services , individual differences and uncertainties in the recovery process make it inherently difficult to determine when a seriously injured servicemember will be most receptive to assistance . the nature of the recovery process is highly individualized and depends to a large extent on the individual's medical condition and personal readiness . consequently , va professionals exercise judgment to determine when to contact the seriously injured and when to begin services . in our january 2005 report on va's efforts to expedite vr&e services to seriously injured servicemembers , we noted that many need time to recover and adjust to the prospect that they may be unable to remain in the military and will need to prepare instead for civilian employment . yet we found that va has no policy for maintaining contact with those servicemembers who may not apply for vr&e services prior to discharge from the hospital . as a result , several regional offices reported that they do not stay in contact with these individuals , while others use various ways to maintain contact . va is also challenged by dod's concern that outreach about va benefits could work at cross purposes to military retention goals . in our january 2005 report , we stated that dod expressed concern about the timing of va's outreach to servicemembers whose discharge from military service is not yet certain . to expedite vr&e services , va's outreach process may overlap with the military's process for evaluating servicemembers who may be able to return to duty . according to dod officials , it may be premature for va to begin working with injured servicemembers who may eventually return to active duty . with advances in medicine and prosthetic devices , many serious injuries no longer result in work - related impairments . army officials who track injured servicemembers told us that many seriously injured servicemembers overcome their injuries and return to active duty . further , va is challenged by the lack of access to systematic data regarding seriously injured servicemembers . in the absence of a formal information - sharing agreement with dod , va does not have systematic access to dod data about the population who may need its services .