market risk . the potential for financial losses due to an increase or decrease in the value of an asset or liability resulting from broad price movements ; for example , in interest rates , commodity prices , stock prices , or the relative value of currencies ( foreign exchange ) . liquidity risk . the potential for financial losses due to an institution's failure to meet its obligations because it cannot liquidate assets or obtain adequate funding . operational risk . the potential for unexpected financial losses due to a wide variety of institutional factors including inadequate information systems , operational problems , breaches in internal controls , or fraud . legal risk . the potential for financial losses due to breaches of law or regulation that may result in heavy penalties or other costs . compliance risk . the potential for loss arising from violations of laws or regulations or nonconformance with internal policies or ethical standards . according to scap regulators and many market participants we interviewed , the process used to design and implement scap was effective in promoting coordination and transparency among the regulators and participating bhcs , but some scap participants we interviewed expressed concerns about the process . the majority of supervisory and bank industry officials we interviewed stated that they were satisfied with how scap was implemented , especially considering the stress test's unprecedented nature , limited time frame , and the uncertainty in the economy . scap established a process for ( 1 ) coordinating and communicating among the regulators and with the bhcs and ( 2 ) promoting transparency of the stress test to the public . in addition , according to regulators , the process resulted in a methodology that yielded credible results and by design helped to assure that the bhcs would be sufficiently capitalized to weather a more adverse economic downturn . robust coordination and communication are essential to programs like scap when bringing together regulatory staff from multiple agencies and disciplines to effectively analyze complex financial institutions and understand the interactions among multiple layers of risk . moreover , supervisory guidance emphasizes the importance of coordination and communication among regulators to both effectively assess banks and conduct coordinated supervisory reviews across a group of peer institutions , referred to as “horizontal examinations.” the regulators implemented each phase of scap in a coordinated interagency fashion . also , while some disagreed , most regulators and market participants we interviewed were satisfied with the level of coordination and communication . they also thought that the scap process could serve as a model for future supervisory efforts . the regulators executed the scap process in three broad phases: in the first phase , the analytical group , comprising interagency economists and supervisors , generated two sets of economic conditions — a baseline scenario and a more adverse scenario with a worse - than - expected economic outcome — and then used these scenarios to aid in estimating industrywide indicative loan loss rates . to develop these scenarios , the analytical group used three primary indicators of economic health: the u.s. gdp , housing prices in 10 key u.s. cities , and the annual average u.s. unemployment rate .