funding . a majority of the stakeholders we surveyed agreed on the financing authorities for a national infrastructure bank , including how it should be funded and how it should finance projects . specifically , most stakeholders ( 20 of 22 ) agreed that the federal government should provide all or some of the initial capital for a national infrastructure bank , though four suggested that federal funds should be augmented by private funds . further , most stakeholders ( 21 of 23 ) agreed that a bank should be authorized to generate its own funds for operating expenses and lending , using multiple financing mechanisms ( 15 of 23 ) . some of these stakeholders stressed the need for a bank to have access to low - cost capital through borrowing from the department of the treasury and issuing tax - exempt bonds . however , we noted that the internal revenue service said that these guaranteed bonds are not exempt , so a statutory exemption to allow tax - exempt , guaranteed bonds would be needed to accomplish this . a third approach for financing wastewater infrastructure is to encourage private investment in projects , including through public - private partnerships at the municipal level . a privately financed public - private partnership , as defined in our june 2010 report , is a contractual agreement in which the private partner invests funds in the wastewater project , but the agreement does not include full privatization , in which the municipality sells its wastewater infrastructure assets to a private partner . in that report , we identified and reviewed only a few privately funded public - private partnerships developed for wastewater since 1992 , concluding that the use of such approaches is still uncommon for wastewater . stakeholders from municipalities and private companies engaged in such partnerships cited several advantages and challenges in their use . the seven partnerships we identified and reviewed , the parties administering the partnership , the eligible activities and assets , and the form of financial assistance are described in table 3 . officials from the municipalities and companies we interviewed reported advantages of privately funded public - private partnerships , including faster delivery of facilities or upgrades , access to alternative sources of financing , cost and operational efficiencies , access to expertise and technology solutions , up - front payments to municipalities , and increased focus by local governments on their other functions . for example , two of the municipalities we interviewed were facing regulatory deadlines that required them to upgrade their facilities or pay fines . company and municipal officials said that private procurement may be faster because it is more streamlined than public procurement . other municipal officials said that they could not access the bond market to pay for their project , and another community official said that it was difficult to get the public to approve their bonds , and the public - private partnership offered an alternative source of financing .