pub . ยง 3501 note . agencies must conduct pias before developing or procuring information technology that collects , maintains , or disseminates information that is in a personally identifiable form . in conducting pias , agencies are to ensure that the handling of the information conforms to applicable privacy legal requirements , determine risks , and examine and evaluate protections and alternative processes for handling information to mitigate potential privacy risks . to ensure that contractor - operated systems meet federal information security and privacy requirements , the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) requires that agency acquisition planning for it comply with the information technology security requirements in fisma , omb's implementing policies including appendix iii of omb circular a - 130 , and nist guidance and standards . the far addresses application of the privacy act to contractors at subpart 24.1 , protection of individual privacy . nist special publications 800-53 and 800-53a guide agencies in selecting security and privacy controls for systems and assessing them to ensure that the selected controls are in place and functioning as expected . additional nist special publications on it security services and risk management ( special publications 800-35 and 800-37 ) identify several key activities important to contractor oversight for assessing the security and privacy controls of information systems . the key activities and the steps included in each are shown in table 3 . the far establishes uniform policies and procedures for acquisition of supplies and services by executive agencies . the far and agency supplements are codified in title 48 of the code of federal regulations . as relevant here , the far's acquisition planning requirements for it security are at 48 c.f.r . ยง 7.103 ( w ) . see also , far ยง 7.105 ( b ) ( 16 ) ( government - furnished information ) and ( 18 ) ( security considerations ) . nist special publication 800-53 rev . 4 , security and privacy controls for federal information systems and organizations , ( gaithersburg , md: apr . 2013 ) and nist special publication 800-53a , guide for assessing the security controls in federal information systems and organizations , ( gaithersburg , md: jun . in april 2005 , we reported on federal agencies' implementation of fisma requirements and their oversight of contractors and others with privileged access to federal data and systems . we determined that , although most agencies reported having written policies that addressed information security for contractor - provided it services and systems , few had established specific policies for overseeing the information security practices of contractors and contractor employees to ensure compliance with contract requirements and agency information security policies . we concluded that , without specific oversight policies establishing when and how agencies will review contractor - operated systems , officials responsible for the systems may not be taking sufficient action to ensure that security requirements are being met . we recommended , among other things , that the director of omb ensure that federal agencies develop policies for ensuring the information security of contractors and other users with privileged access to federal data . subsequently omb modified its instructions to better ensure that federal agencies develop policies for ensuring the information security provided by contractor employees .