government procurement . according to wto officials , there is no official definition of government procurement ; as a result , gpa parties lack a clear , common understanding or practice for computing its value . our review of statistical data submitted by the united states and the next five largest gpa parties for 2010 found that they generally measured procurement by the total value of contracts awarded or by actual expenditures on goods and services in a given time frame . however , we found that the reported contract values represented different measures of procurement at different points in time , which resulted in inconsistent reporting . for example , canada and japan report data on government procurement based on the full value of awarded contracts , the eu reports data on government procurement based on total contract values at the time of award , norway reports the agreed full value of contracts when they are signed , and the united states reports the total dollars obligated against gpa - covered contracts in the year they are signed and any subsequent obligations on those contracts during the following 5 years . inconsistencies in reporting . our review of the statistical notifications submitted by the united states and next five largest gpa parties found a number of inconsistencies . for example , canada switched its reporting from fiscal to calendar year in 2010 , making it more difficult to compare canada's data over time . japan denominates central government procurement in sdr and subcentral government procurement in yen , but its statistical notifications do not provide a conversion rate . norway reports three estimates of covered government procurement , which are disaggregated by different characteristics , but none of the estimated totals match the others . the united states provided data on federal procurement for 2008 , 2009 , and 2010 , but the u.s. data on overall and covered federal procurement in 2008 and 2009 are inconsistent because of a change in the reporting methodology that began with the 2009 notification . in forming the working group , the united states and other gpa parties agreed to submit relevant information and review the submissions in order to make recommendations on whether the parties should adopt a common method for collecting statistics , standardize the classifications of statistical data , facilitate the collection of country of origin of goods and services data , and address other technical issues in government procurement data reporting raised by any party . according to a wto document , the working group was also to consider the “potential harmonization” of parties' statistical data to provide transparency regarding procurement covered under the gpa and consider how these data may be used for further analyses to facilitate greater understanding of the agreement's economic importance . the wto document states that statistical data illustrating the extent to which the parties procure goods and services covered by the agreement from other gpa parties could be an important tool in encouraging other wto members to accede to the agreement . as of december 2016 , nine parties had provided submissions to the working group .