performance management . federal agencies have faced long - standing challenges developing modern , credible , and effective employee performance management systems and dealing with poor performers . additionally , the changing nature of federal work and high percentage of employees eligible for retirement could produce gaps in leadership and institutional knowledge . it could also threaten to aggravate the problems created from existing skills gaps . for example , 31.6 percent of permanent federal employees who were on board as of september 30 , 2017 will be eligible to retire in the next five years , with some agencies , such as the department of housing and urban development and the environmental protection agency , having particularly high levels of employees eligible to retire . in march 2019 , we identified key trends in agency operations and attitudes toward work that are affecting how federal work is done and consequently , the skills and competencies that workers will need to accomplish agency missions ( see fig . agencies will need to apply talent management strategies that are adapted to these trends to recruit , develop , and retain a high - performing workforce and better meet their missions . in light of trends and other challenges facing the government's human capital management efforts , our prior work has identified actionable strategies that agencies may be able to use to effectively manage the future federal workforce in key talent management areas ( see table 2 ) . we noted that while these strategies are not an exhaustive list , collectively they suggest basic steps that agencies can take within existing authorities to position themselves to meet their talent needs . these practices are based on our review of related reports , group interviews with federal chief human capital officers ( chco ) , and interviews with selected private organizations and foreign governments . for each strategy , we highlight examples of the challenges agencies face , actions opm can take to implement related recommendations from our prior work , and practices that may help agencies implement the strategy . align human capital strategy with current and future mission requirements . pay system . employees are compensated through an outmoded system that ( 1 ) rewards length of service rather than individual performance and contributions , and ( 2 ) automatically provides across - the - board annual pay increases , even to poor performers . with shifting attitudes toward work , technological advances , and increased reliance on nonfederal partners , agencies need to identify the knowledge and skills necessary to respond to current and future demands . key practices include identifying and assessing existing skills , competencies , and skills gaps . in may 2014 , we reported that agencies should be aware of existing skills and competencies in their workforce to help inform workforce planning . as one example , the department of the treasury chco told us that , following the puerto rico debt crisis — where it needed to be able to identify the necessary skills to manage the crisis — the agency decided to implement an integrated talent management system to facilitate workforce and succession planning as well as learning and performance management . acquire and assign talent .