reg . 35336 ( june 13 , 2012 ) . justice has developed guidance on how law enforcement may obtain which is primarily obtained through various court mobile location data,orders . these methods have been the subject of recent litigation . there are various methods in which mobile location data can be obtained , including , but not limited to: warrant: a warrant allows law enforcement to obtain prospective mobile location data generated by gps or similar technologies ( i.e. , where the device is currently located ) . to obtain a warrant for these data , the government must establish probable cause to believe that the data sought will aid in a particular apprehension or conviction . this method requires the highest standard of evidence of all methods outlined below . section 2703 ( d ) court order: a 2703 ( d ) court order allows law enforcement officials to obtain certain kinds of historical mobile location data ( i.e. , where the device was located in the past ) that providers collect for business purposes.government must offer specific and articulable facts showing that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the data are relevant and material to an ongoing criminal investigation . to obtain this order , the hybrid order: justice has routinely acquired , since at least 2005 , certain categories of prospective mobile location data generated by cell tower information through the combination of two court orders , the pen / trap court order and the 2703 ( d ) order . the combination order is known as a “hybrid order.” to obtain this order , law enforcement officials must affirm that the information likely to be obtained is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation and further demonstrate specific and articulable facts showing that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the information sought is relevant and material to an ongoing criminal investigation . this order is used because the communications assistance for law enforcement act of 1994 precludes law enforcement officials from relying solely on the authority of the pen / trap statute to obtain cell tower data for a mobile customer . section 2702 voluntary disclosure: communications providers are permitted by law to voluntarily disclose information to law enforcement if the provider , in good faith , believes that an emergency involving danger of death or serious physical injury to any person requires disclosure without delay of communications relating to the emergency . as already described , law enforcement agencies access location data frequently using these various authorities . law enforcement's use of location information has spurred courts to review government actions to compel third parties to disclose location data , as judges question and examine what legal standards govern law enforcement access to historical and prospective location information . for example , in 2010 , a federal district court in texas denied government applications for historical cell site data , declaring that compelled warrantless disclosure of cell site data violates the fourth amendment . in contrast , in 2012 , a federal district court in maryland upheld the government's use of historical cell site data , concluding that the privacy issues surrounding the collection of historical cell site location records are best left for congress to decide .