sec agreed with our recommendations . sec indicated that it is in the process of converting its investigation opening form to a web - based application , which will provide for documentation of informal referrals to criminal authorities . sec also noted steps it is taking to avoid conflicts of interests that could affect the implementation of sec programs and activities , which include establishing a formal ethics component to exit procedures . as part of this process , sec will ask departing staff to provide information about the identity of their next employer , and , to the extent a potential conflict is identified , will investigate as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the report date . at that time we will provide copies of this report to sec and interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others upon request . they are a major part of managing an organization . among other things , they should promote the effectiveness and efficiency of operations , including the use of the entity's resources , and the agency's compliance with applicable laws and regulations . they should also be designed to provide reasonable assurance that the objectives of the agency are being achieved . sec has responded to the widespread trading abuses in the mutual fund industry by bringing 14 enforcement actions against investment advisers and 10 enforcement actions against broker - dealer , brokerage - advisory , and financial services firms that conducted or facilitated the illicit trading . penalties sec has obtained in settlements with these firms have included some of the highest in the agency's history and are consistent with other penalties obtained in cases of similarly egregious and pervasive misconduct . further , sec has held individuals , many of them high - ranking , responsible for their role in the misconduct and also obtained historically high penalties in settlements with several of them . in reviewing a selection of 11 out of the 14 enforcement actions sec brought against investment advisers and their associated individuals , we found that sec consistently applied its penalty - setting process and that this process contained various levels of review to help ensure that no one individual or group of individuals had disproportionate influence on penalty decisions . additionally , sec coordinated penalties and disgorgements ( which force firms to give up ill - gotten gains ) with interested states in the majority of cases , although some states obtained additional monetary sanctions . since nysoag announced its discovery of the trading abuses in the mutual fund industry in september 2003 , sec has brought 14 enforcement actions against investment advisers primarily for market timing abuses and 10 enforcement actions against broker - dealer , brokerage - advisory , and financial services firms for market timing abuses and late trading . sec has entered into settlements in all 14 investment adviser cases and obtained penalties ranging from $2 million to $140 million ( see fig . these penalties are among the highest sec has ever obtained for securities laws violations .