( see app . i for a table including each of the subpart h restricted drugs and their approved indications. ) one common element across the approval processes for the subpart h restricted drugs was that for seven of the drugs , including mifeprex , fda needed to evaluate potential limitations in key clinical data supporting the nda . specifically , with the exception of accutane and lotronex , the drugs were approved on the basis of studies without concurrent controls or data that were limited by relatively small sample sizes or data collection issues . fda approved the mifeprex nda on the basis of historically controlled clinical trials that studied the drug in several thousand patients . fda concluded that the use of historical controls was not a limitation because the course of pregnancy was well - documented and the effect of the treatment was self - evident . revlimid , thalomid , plenaxis , and xyrem were also each approved on the basis of data that included at least one key clinical study that lacked a concurrent control . in contrast to the mifeprex data , fda concluded that the lack of concurrent controls in these studies was a weakness because data on the course of the disease in a comparable population was not available to be used as a reliable historical control . for example , thalomid was approved on the basis of clinical trial data from the published literature as well as a series of retrospective case studies for several dozen patients . additionally , five of the drugs — actiq , revlimid , thalomid , tracleer , and xyrem — were approved on the basis of key clinical studies with relatively small sample sizes of several hundred patients or less . finally , for actiq , plenaxis , thalomid , and xyrem , fda identified data collection issues , such as incomplete documentation , in some of the key data sources . another common element was that for six of the drugs , including mifeprex , fda issued at least one prior action letter before ultimately approving the drug for marketing . fda issued one approvable letter before ultimately approving thalomid and tracleer . both mifeprex and xyrem received two approvable letters . in some cases the types of issues fda cited — such as insufficient safety or efficacy data , the need for additional information on the restricted distribution system , or chemistry and manufacturing issues — were similar . for all four of these drugs , the adequacy of proposed distribution restrictions was a significant issue . distributors are required to ensure that the physician is registered before distributing the drug . secure manufacturing , receiving , distribution , shipping , and return procedures , including unique serial numbers on packaging and tamper - proof seals . in addition to the contact named above , martin t. gahart , assistant director ; jill center ; chad davenport ; and cathy hamann made key contributions to this report . julian klazkin also contributed . the plan had three key elements . first , the mifeprex regimen would only be administered under the supervision of qualified physicians who had agreed to provide the treatment according to several guidelines .