size . we used total assets to measure size and we divided banks into five equal - sized groups , or quintiles , based on their size each quarter . in this dataset , a bank is a community bank if it is part of a banking organization that has loans or core deposits , a foreign assets - to - total assets ratio less than 10 percent , and has less than 50 percent of assets in certain specialty banks , including credit card specialists , consumer nonbank banks , industrial loan companies , trust companies , and bankers' banks . ( consumer nonbank banks are financial institutions with limited charters that can make commercial loans or take deposits , but not both. ) in addition , the banking organization must either have total assets less than an indexed asset size threshold or total assets greater than the indexed asset size threshold , a loan - to - assets ratio greater than 33 percent , a core deposits - to - assets ratio greater than 50 percent , more than one office but no more than the indexed maximum number of offices , offices in less than three large metropolitan statistical areas , offices in less than four states , and no single office with deposits greater than the indexed maximum branch deposit size . subservicers . third - party servicers that have no investment in the loans they service . banks , credit unions , and nonbanks may outsource loan servicing activities to a subservicer that performs the same administrative functions the bank , credit union , or nonbank would to service the mortgage loan . all u.s. depository institutions that have federal deposit insurance have a federal prudential regulator that generally may issue regulations and take enforcement actions against institutions within its jurisdiction . the federal prudential regulators , which are the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , fdic , and federal reserve , along with the credit - union - regulating ncua , oversee depository institutions for safety and soundness purposes and for compliance with other laws and regulations that fall within the scope of the relevant prudential regulator's authority ( see table 1 ) . additionally , the dodd - frank act transferred consumer financial protection regulation and some other authorities regarding certain federal consumer financial laws from other federal banking regulators to cfpb , to help foster consistent enforcement of federal consumer financial laws . cfpb has supervision and primary enforcement authority for most federal consumer financial laws for insured depository institutions with more than $10 billion in assets and their affiliates as well as certain nonbank entities . the prudential regulators — the federal reserve , office of the comptroller of currency , federal deposit insurance corporation , and ncua — have primary supervision and exclusive enforcement authority for federal consumer financial laws for institutions that have $10 billion or less in assets . cfpb also has rulemaking authority to implement provisions of federal consumer financial law .