1 for examples. ) fta supports transit agencies' workforce development by providing financial and technical assistance , among other things . fta's financial assistance efforts include implementing the innovative public transportation frontline workforce development program , which provides competitive grants to transit agencies ( transit workforce grants ) to assist with the development of innovative human resources activities . fta awarded transit workforce grants in fiscal years 2011 , 2012 , and 2015 . grant - eligible projects included employment training , outreach to increase minority and female employment in transit , research on transit personnel and training needs , and training and assistance for minority business opportunities . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who contributed to this report are listed in appendix ii . this report addresses: ( 1 ) the extent to which information exists about future transit workforce needs , ( 2 ) the actions selected transit stakeholders are taking to address current and future transit workforce needs , and ( 3 ) the extent to which the federal transit administration ( fta ) assists with identifying and addressing current and future transit workforce needs . for all objectives , we analyzed key department of transportation ( dot ) and fta documents such as dot strategic plans , annual reports to congress in fiscal years 2017 and 2016 , and public presentations , which discussed workforce needs , grant programs , and data involving the transit industry . we also interviewed government officials from dot , including from fta , the office of the secretary , and the federal highway administration ; from the department of labor ( dol ) and its bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) ; and from the department of education . further , we interviewed three transit stakeholders — the eno center for transportation , the national transit institute ( nti ) , and the american public transportation association ( apta ) to understand available data sources , relevant studies , and grant programs focused on the transit workforce . based on our research and recommendations from those interviews with those three stakeholders and fta , we selected a non - generalizable sample of an additional eight transit stakeholders for interviews . these selected stakeholders included: two research organizations ( transportation learning center and the transportation research board , which includes the transit cooperative research program and the transit research analysis committee ) ; two unions ( amalgamated transit union and transport workers union of america ) ; two trade groups ( community transportation association of america and conference of minority transportation officials ) ; and one membership association of workforce boards ( national association of workforce boards ) ; one transportation subject - matter expert ( mort downey consulting , llc ) . in addition , we selected and interviewed officials from six transit agencies to understand their perspectives regarding workforce issues such as recruiting and retention challenges , and efforts to address those challenges . we selected and interviewed three urban transit agencies: los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority ( ca ) ; regional transportation district — denver ( co ) ; and the jacksonville transportation authority ( fl ) .