wait times on the southwest border . a more detailed description of our methodology and the results of these studies are presented in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2012 to july 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . additional details on our scope and methodology are contained in appendix ii . at each location , we interviewed cbp management , toured the facility , and convened a roundtable of local industry representatives and local government officials . to obtain a range of perspectives on commercial vehicle traffic at southwest border crossings , we met with representatives of 21 companies and associations ( who were identified to us as knowledgeable stakeholders ) representing industries that rely on cross - border commerce including customs brokers , trucking companies , and distributors ) , as well as bridge directors and representatives of four local government entities ( the mayors of el paso and san diego , the laredo city manager , and representatives of the san diego association of governments ) at all four cities we visited or by teleconference . because we focused on four land ports of entry with six commercial vehicle crossings , our findings are not generalizable to the entire southwest border . however , the ports we visited accounted for , in total , approximately 70 percent of the commercial vehicle crossings into the united states from mexico in fiscal years 2008 through july 2012 . over the course of our work , we also interviewed officials from agencies involved in securing the border and facilitating trade at land ports of entry , including officials from cbp's office of administration and office of field operations , the general services administration ( gsa ) , the department of transportation's ( dot ) federal highway administration and federal motor carrier safety administration , the department of commerce ( commerce ) , the department of health and human service's food and drug administration , and the department of state . we also interviewed other stakeholders , including officials from the mexican foreign ministry , academics , and representatives of national trade associations , including the american trucking associations and the border trade alliance , to obtain a broader range of perspectives on commercial vehicle traffic at southwest border crossings . to address the first objective , we reviewed and analyzed cbp's policies and guidance for calculating and reporting wait times to determine the source of these data and the agency's control over these data . we interviewed cbp headquarters officials about the wait time data , including data quality , data entry protocols , quality assurance procedures , and any steps taken to improve the reliability of these data . we also interviewed officials at the six crossings we visited about how they collect and report wait time data .