we provided a draft of this report to dot for review and comment . airbus offers two designs to accommodate a passenger with an onboard wheelchair . the space flex version 1 design consists of two adjacent lavatories with a connecting retractable partition . this retractable partition can open to allow for a passenger who relies on the aircraft onboard - wheelchair to enter the lavatory with or without the help of an assistant . a representative from a disability organization was generally positive about the space flex version 1 and said it was a good design for both carriers and travelers with disabilities . airbus also offers another lavatory design specifically for its a220 single - aisle aircraft model . airbus officials told us that it is a single lavatory that is designed to accommodate a wheelchair but cannot accommodate both a passenger in an onboard wheelchair and an assistant . boeing offers one lavatory designed to accommodate a passenger using an onboard wheelchair for single - aisle aircraft for its 737 aircraft family . this design , known as the pax plus , consists of two adjacent lavatories with a removable partition designed to enable a wheelchair and assistant to enter . in addition , officials from the eight selected air carriers told us that their crews are trained to assist passengers with reduced mobility to use lavatories . these officials from the eight air carriers stated that they provide their cabin crew with initial and , in some cases , recurrent training about how to assist passengers with reduced mobility , pursuant to dot regulations . dot regulations further stipulate that if there is an on - board wheelchair , the carrier must provide assistance to enable the passenger to move to and from the lavatory if , in general , such assistance is requested by or on behalf of a passenger with a disability . while aircraft manufacturers offer lavatories designed to accommodate passengers with mobility impairments , carriers do not often choose to acquire them . both airbus and boeing offer their customers a range of standard lavatory designs . for example , both airbus and boeing offer a lavatory with a contoured design ( see fig . specifically , these four carriers have either the space flex version 1 or the airbus a220 lavatory . despite boeing's offering of the pax plus lavatories since 2017 , boeing officials told us that as of november 2019 no u.s. carriers have ordered these lavatories for their current or future single - aisle boeing aircraft . overall , about 4.5 percent of the combined single - aisle fleet of the eight selected carriers have lavatories designed to provide some measure of greater access to passengers with reduced mobility , including those who require the use of the onboard wheelchair ( see fig.4 ) . according to the carriers we interviewed , they consider the configuration of the aircraft among other factors , including their business strategy , when ordering lavatories for new aircraft . providing a lavatory designed to accommodate onboard wheelchairs on single aisle aircraft may require financial tradeoffs for carriers , such as reducing the number of revenue generating seats in the aircraft cabin .