, part d ) . medicare consists of four parts . medicare part a provides payment for inpatient hospital , skilled nursing facility , some home health , and hospice services , while part b pays for hospital outpatient , physician , some home health , durable medical equipment , and preventive services . in addition , medicare beneficiaries have an option to participate in medicare advantage , also known as part c , which pays private health plans to provide the services covered by medicare parts a and b . further , all medicare beneficiaries may purchase coverage for outpatient prescription drugs under medicare part d , and some medicare advantage plans also include part d coverage . in 2010 , medicare covered 47 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries and had estimated outlays of about $509 billion . cms uses contractors to help administer the claims processing and payment systems for medicare . these administrative contractors are responsible for processing approximately 4.5 million claims per workday . the contractors review the claims submitted by providers to ensure payment is made only for medically necessary services covered by medicare for eligible individuals . medicaid is the federal - state program that provides health coverage for acute and long - term care services for over 65 million low - income people . it consists of more than 50 distinct state - based programs that each define eligibility requirements and administer payment for health care services for low - income individuals , including children , families , the aged , and the disabled . within broad federal requirements , each state operates its medicaid program according to a state plan . low - income americans who meet their state's medicaid eligibility criteria are entitled to have payments made on their behalf for covered services . states are entitled to federal matching funds , which differ from state to state but can be up to three - fourths of their costs of this coverage . the amount paid with federal funds is determined by a formula established in law . cms oversees the medicaid program at the federal level , while the states administer their respective programs' day - to - day operations , such as enrolling eligible individuals , establishing payment amounts for covered benefits , establishing standards for providers and managed care plans , processing and paying for claims and managed care , and ensuring that state and federal health care funds are not spent improperly or diverted by fraudulent providers . the estimated outlays for medicaid for both the federal and state governments were $408 billion in 2010 . of this cost , approximately $275 billion was incurred by the federal government and $133 billion by the states . the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) of 1996 established the medicare integrity program to increase and stabilize federal funding for health care antifraud activities . the act appropriated funds for the program as well as amounts for hhs and the department of justice to carry out the health care fraud and abuse control program . subsequent legislation further outlined responsibilities under the medicare integrity program .