systems . based on our examination , we generally found the data that fda maintains on the number of approved pma and hde devices labeled for use in pediatric patients not to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes and , as a result , in order to identify pediatric devices , we reviewed fda documents — the approval order , approved labeling , and summary of safety and effectiveness data — that fda makes publicly available for each approved pma and hde device . each document contains the approved indication for use statement , which specifies the disease and population the device is intended to treat . however , the indication for use statement may not explicitly state if a device can be used in pediatric patients ; in these cases , fda may still consider the device to be labeled for use in pediatric patients based on other information in the labeling or summary documents . given the extent of information and expertise needed to determine if a device is labeled for use in pediatric patients , for our analysis we considered pediatric devices to be those explicitly indicated for use in pediatric patients when the indication for use statement in these approval documents ( 1 ) specified a population that included patients age 21 years or younger , ( 2 ) stated that the device was for pediatric patients , or ( 3 ) stated that it was for skeletally immature patients . we reviewed approval documents for pma devices , including pma supplements called panel - track supplements , approved in fiscal years 2006 through 2011 and hde devices approved in fiscal years 2001 through 2011 . in addition , to determine how many humanitarian use device ( hud ) designations — a required first step for fda approval to market an hde device — fda granted for devices used to treat diseases that occur in pediatric populations since fdaaa was enacted , we analyzed data provided by fda for all hud requests submitted and designated in fiscal years 2001 through 2011 . we interviewed fda officials regarding methods for tracking hud requests and designations and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we also interviewed fda officials and reviewed fda data to identify the hde devices exempted from the hde profit prohibition and determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted this performance audit from february 2011 through december 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . medical devices include items used for the diagnosis , cure , mitigation , treatment , or prevention of a disease . these devices range from simple tools like bandages and surgical clamps to complicated devices like pacemakers ; unless exempt by fda regulations , devices are generally subject to fda premarket review . pediatric patients may be among those a device is intended to treat and generally are defined as those age 21 years or younger .