all agencies returned their questionnaires . we conducted follow - up interviews with respondents to confirm the information and to clarify the information , if necessary . in our questionnaire , we requested financial information on the direct costs of agencies' freshwater programs , such as capital construction and operations and maintenance costs of freshwater infrastructure . we also requested information on the amount of financial support provided for technical assistance and research and development efforts related to freshwater programs . we requested information on freshwater programs that agencies typically fund during a year and excluding atypical funding , such as financial support for freshwater projects in response to natural disasters . we obtained and reported on financial support for freshwater projects in afghanistan and iraq separately from the total foreign assistance because these funds were provided in recent years . we requested this information in the form of obligations because obligations provide a good estimate of what an agency plans to spend during a fiscal year . they do not include subsequent reestimates . see figure 1 for the financial support provided by each funding mechanism . direct federal spending ( $21.8 billion ) grant programs ( $22.5 billion ) the $49 billion for domestic freshwater programs includes funding provided from one agency to another to conduct freshwater activities in the united states . for example , the corps received financial support from epa to conduct watershed management activities . we included funding for this effort in the financial information reported by epa . see table 4 for examples of agencies that performed work on freshwater activities in the united states using financial support provided to them by other agencies . we also identified domestic programs that may provide financial support for freshwater activities , but are not included in the $49 billion because supporting freshwater activities is not the programs' primary purpose and activity - level data is not readily available . for example , housing's office of community planning and development administers a loan guarantee program that may provide financial support for water infrastructure projects , but aggregate information on the use of loan guarantee authority for particular categories of activities is not readily available . consequently , financial support provided by these types of programs is not included in table 1 . other agencies also have these types of programs that may support freshwater - related activities: agriculture's farm service agency , forest service , and rural utilities service ; commerce's economic development administration ; interior's fish and wildlife service ; the appalachian regional commission ; and epa . furthermore , while these 27 agencies provided the majority of the federal financial support for freshwater programs in the united states , other agencies may also provide financial support for these types of programs . appendix ii provides information on some other agencies and programs that can provide financial support for freshwater - related activities . these agencies provide financial assistance primarily for specific regions of the united states and / or support a variety of programs , including freshwater - related activities .