, unliquidated obligations ) . epa established the superfund program to carry out these responsibilities . data as of september 2011 — the most current data available — show that there were 13,856 sites in epa's cerclis active site inventory , which may require attention under epa's superfund program . management of these sites , including the special accounts associated with them , has historically been the responsibility of the epa region in which a site is located . epa has 10 regional offices , each one responsible for the execution of epa programs within several states and , in some regions , territories . figure 1 shows the states included in each of the 10 regions . this section discusses ( 1 ) epa's process for cleaning up superfund sites , ( 2 ) epa's enforcement process for site cleanup , ( 3 ) the trust fund established under cercla , ( 4 ) epa's use of special accounts for superfund cleanup , and ( 5 ) the epa ig's recommendations for better management of these special accounts . epa's superfund cleanup process can be lengthy , sometimes taking decades to clean up contamination to the standards selected for a site . a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from october 2010 to january 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . cercla , often referred to as the “superfund” law , gave the federal government the authority to respond to actual and threatened releases of hazardous substances , pollutants , and contaminants that may endanger public health and the environment . the cleanup process involves a series of steps during which specific activities take place or decisions are made . the first step occurs when the superfund program is notified of a potential site through various mechanisms , including receipt of citizens' petitions , and referrals or notifications from states , tribes , and other federal agencies . following notification , a site undergoes a minimal screening process , called a pre - cerclis screening , to determine whether a site assessment process is appropriate . sites deemed appropriate are added to the cerclis active site inventory . during the site assessment process , epa and states collect data to identify , evaluate , and rank hazardous waste sites based on hazard ranking system criteria . using these criteria , epa and / or its state and tribal partners conduct a preliminary assessment and , if warranted , a site inspection or other more in - depth assessment to determine whether the site warrants short - or long - term cleanup attention . sites that epa determines are among the nation's most seriously contaminated hazardous waste sites are placed on the national priorities list ( npl ) for attention under the federal superfund program .