this concludes my testimony . i would be pleased to take your questions . should you have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov . other major contributors to this testimony were phyllis anderson and maria edelstein , assistant directors ; joy labez , pierre toureille , valérie l. nowak , jeffrey baldwin - bott , michaela brown , joseph carney , debbie j. chung , kristy kennedy , clarette kim , j.j. marzullo , and barbara shields . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the un headquarters buildings are in need of renovation . the original un headquarters complex , located in new york city and constructed between 1949 and 1952 , no longer conforms to current safety , fire and building codes and does not meet un technology or security requirements . over the last 50 years there have been no major renovations or upgrades to the buildings or their systems . in december 2002 , the general assembly endorsed the cmp to renovate the un headquarters complex and approved funds to further develop the conceptual designs and cost estimate . in may 2003 , we reported that the resulting renovation planning was reasonable , but that additional management controls and oversight were needed . since our last report , the un has completed design development of the renovation . we have identified problems affecting the un's bid protest process , headquarters contract review committee , vender rosters , procurement workforce , ethics guidance for procurement personnel , and procurement manual . in our april 2006 report on un procurement , we recommended that the secretary of state and the permanent representative of the united states to the un work with member states to encourage the un to establish an independent bid protest mechanism , address problems facing its principal contract - review committee , implement a process to help ensure that it conducts business with qualified vendors , and to take other steps to improve un procurement . the un has not established an independent process to consider vendor protests , despite the 1994 recommendation of a high - level panel of international procurement experts that it do so as soon as possible . such a process would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding and would also help alert senior un management to situations involving questions about un compliance . an independent bid protest process is a widely endorsed control mechanism that permits vendors to file complaints with an office or official who is independent of the procurement process . oios later concluded that as of 2005 the roster was not fully reliable for identifying qualified vendors that could bid on contracts . while the procurement service became a partner in an interagency procurement vendor roster in 2004 to address these concerns , oios has found that many vendors that have applied through the interagency procurement vendor roster have not submitted additional documents requested by the procurement service to become accredited vendors .