competition . the extent to which the compensation model creates an environment in which nrsros compete for customers by producing higher - quality ratings at competitive prices . to what extent would the compensation model encourage new entrants and reduce barriers to entry in the industry ? to what extent does the model allow for flexibility in the differing sizes , resources , and specialties of nrsros ? to what extent do market forces determine ratings fees ? when evaluating an alternative compensation model , considering its potential impact on the competition in the ratings industry is important . most importantly , the model should not in itself present a barrier to entry or increase existing barriers . it should not promote convergence of one class of products or methodologies by nrsros , but should foster diversity in ratings methodologies and products . for example , the compensation model should be flexible to allow for relatively smaller nrsros or nrsros with specialties to adapt to any new requirements and not inadvertently hinder them from competing with the larger nrsros or expanding their product lines to meet market demand . an effective compensation model also will promote competition around the quality of ratings . in that sense , this factor is closely related to the accountability factor , in that the compensation model should not economically reward nrsros that consistently produce poor - quality ratings . some compensation models could increase competition by reducing barriers to entry for smaller or newer nrsros ; for example , by offering or guaranteeing them more opportunity to produce ratings and increase their coverage of the market . however , it is unclear whether a model that increases the number of nrsros would result in more competition among them to produce quality ratings over time . in assessing these models , considering their potential impact on nrsros' incentives to compete around ratings quality , product innovation , and overall efficiency is important . similarly , an effective compensation model will promote competition around ratings fees . some nrsros are highly specialized , serving particular markets or asset classes . as such , the ratings fees charged by each nrsro reflects its own cost structure . compensation models should not incorporate a uniform approach to setting ratings fees . such an approach would promote inefficiencies in the market and dissuade some nrsros from continuing to offer services if they believed they were economically disadvantaged . those nrsros with comparatively lower - cost structures for producing ratings might benefit from such an approach , but overall it would not encourage nrsros to produce ratings cost effectively . transparency . the accessibility , usability , and clarity of the compensation model and the dissemination of information on the model to market participants . how clear are the mechanics of the compensation model to market participants ? how transparent are the following procedures and processes: how the nrsros obtain ratings business ; how ratings fees are determined ; how nrsros are compensated ; and how the compensation model links ratings performance to nrsro compensation . an effective compensation model should be transparent to market participants to help them understand it and to increase market acceptance .