this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact jayetta hecker at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or by e - mail at heckerj@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include samantha goodman , steven martin , beverly norwood , and alwynne wilbur . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . ( 2 ) what is the status of faa's implementation of reforms and / or procedural relief that congress provided ? and ( 3 ) what are some of the critical success factors that will enable faa to become a high - performing organization ? our statement is based on our past reports on atc modernization and airline competition work — updated to reflect important milestones and recent interviews with key stakeholders in the aviation community , including several current and former faa officials . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . significant external and internal demands will challenge faa's ability to meet current operational needs and require it to adapt to meet the evolving needs of the aviation industry . the commercial aviation industry is still recovering from financial losses exceeding $20 billion over the past 3 years . the downturn in travel has affected the airport and airways trust fund , from which faa draws the majority of its budget . transportation tax receipts into the trust fund fell by a total of $2.0 billion ( 19.6 percent ) between 1999 and 2003 . the overall condition of the federal budget adds more pressure on faa's budget . taken together , cost - cutting and cost - control need to be watchwords for faa from this point forward . traditionally , faa's ability to operate efficiently and effectively – particularly regarding its air traffic control modernization projects — have been hampered by inadequate management of information technology and financial management controls . my statement today focuses on three main questions: ( 1 ) what are some of the major challenges and demands that confront faa ? to meet the demands of the aviation industry for safe , secure , and efficient operations and for additional capacity to meet forecasted growth , faa will need to continue to improve its management controls . nine years have passed since congress provided faa with the personnel and acquisition reforms the agency contended were critical to successfully modernizing the nation's air traffic control ( atc ) system . despite these reforms , systemic management issues , including inadequate management controls and human capital issues continue to contribute to the cost overruns , schedule delays , and performance shortfalls that faa's major atc projects have consistently experienced in the past . personnel reforms addressed three broad areas: ( 1 ) compensation and performance management , ( 2 ) workforce management , and ( 3 ) labor and employee relations . faa has taken steps to implement a number of reforms in each of the three areas .