dod concurred . the former assistant secretary of the air force for acquisition agreed with our concerns about significant concurrency and the need to transition to a fixed price environment . in an april 2009 memo , as the assistant secretary of the air force for acquisition , she discussed her views on the concurrency of production and development testing as driving risks to the development program . she recommended that the jsf joint program office closely examine manufacturing processes and work to convert cost reimbursement contracts to fixed - price as soon as practical . after reducing test resources and activities to save money in 2007 , the jsf program office developed a new test plan in the spring of 2008 that extended the development period by 1 year , better aligned test resources and availability dates , and lessened the overlap between development and operational testing . while improved , the new plan is still aggressive and has little room for error discovery , rework , and recovery from downtime should test assets be grounded or otherwise unavailable . the sheer complexity of the jsf program — with 22.9 million lines of software code , three variants , and multi - mission development — suggests that the aircraft will encounter many unforeseen problems during flight testing requiring additional time in the schedule for rework . given the complexity of the program , the joint estimating team noted that an additional 2 years beyond the recent 1 year extension may be needed to complete development . the test plan relies heavily on a series of advanced and robust simulation labs and a flying test bed to verify aircraft and subsystem performance . figure 3 shows that 83 percent of the aircraft's capabilities are to be verified through labs , the flying test bed , and subject - matter analysis , while only 17 percent of test points are to be verified through flight testing . program officials argue that their heavy investment in simulation labs will allow early risk reduction , thereby reducing the need for additional flight testing , controlling costs , and meeting the key milestones of the program's aggressive test plan . however , while the jsf program's simulation labs appear more prolific , integrated , and capable than the labs used in past aircraft programs , their ability to substitute for flight testing has not yet been demonstrated . despite an improved test plan , jsf flight testing is still in its infancy . challenges are many — continuing cost and schedule pressures ; complex , extensive , and unproven software requirements ; and a nascent , very aggressive test program with diminished flight test assets . while the program must move forward , we continue to believe that the program's concurrent development and production of the aircraft is extremely risky . by committing to procure large quantities of the aircraft before testing is complete and manufacturing processes are mature , dod has significantly increased the risk of further compromising its return on investment — as well as delaying the delivery of critical capabilities to the warfighter .