iii ) . the independent auditor of the department of state subsequently withdrew its qualified opinion on the department's fiscal year 2005 financial statements and reissued an unqualified opinion on such financial statements dated december 14 , 2005 . as a result , 19 cfo act agencies received unqualified opinions on their fiscal year 2005 financial statements . however , irrespective of these unqualified opinions , many agencies do not have timely , reliable , and useful financial information and effective controls with which to make informed decisions and ensure accountability on an ongoing basis . the ability to produce the data needed for efficient and effective management of day - to - day operations in the federal government and provide the necessary accountability to taxpayers and the congress has been a long - standing challenge at most federal agencies . the results of the fiscal year 2005 federal financial managers integrity act of 1996 ( ffmia ) assessments performed by agency inspectors general or their contract auditors show that certain problems continue to affect financial management systems at most cfo act agencies . these problems include nonintegrated financial systems , lack of accurate and timely recording of data , inadequate reconciliation procedures , and noncompliance with accounting standards and the u.s. government standard general ledger ( sgl ) . while the problems are much more severe at some agencies than at others , the nature and severity of the problems indicate that overall , management at most cfo act agencies lack the complete range of information needed for accountability , performance reporting , and decision making . ffmia requires auditors , as part of the cfo act agencies' financial statement audits , to report whether agencies' financial management systems substantially comply with ( 1 ) federal financial management systems requirements , ( 2 ) applicable federal accounting standards , and ( 3 ) the sgl at the transaction level . the major barrier to achieving compliance with ffmia continues to be the inability of agencies to meet federal financial management systems requirements , which involve not only core financial systems , but also administrative and programmatic systems . for fiscal year 2005 , auditors for 18 of the 24 cfo act agencies reported that the agencies' financial management systems did not substantially comply with one or more of the ffmia requirements noted above . for 5 of the remaining 6 cfo act agencies , auditors provided negative assurance , meaning that nothing came to their attention indicating that the agencies' financial management systems did not substantially meet ffmia requirements . the auditors for these 5 agencies did not definitively state whether the agencies' systems substantially complied with ffmia requirements , as is required under the statute . in contrast , auditors for the department of labor provided positive assurance by stating that , in their opinion , the department's financial management systems substantially complied with the requirements of ffmia . further , auditors for the department of energy and the general services administration reported that those agencies' financial management systems did not substantially comply with ffmia requirements in fiscal year 2005 due to recently identified internal control weaknesses over financial reporting . the auditors had not reported any ffmia compliance issues at those 2 federal agencies in fiscal year 2004 .