manage requirements . dod's major space acquisition programs have typically not achieved a match between requirements and resources ( technology , time , and money ) at program start . historically , these programs have attempted to satisfy all requirements in a single step , regardless of the design challenge or the maturity of technologies needed to achieve the full capability . as a result , these programs' requirements have tended to be unstable — that is , requirements were changed , added , or both — which has led to the programs not meeting their performance , cost , and schedule objectives . we have found that when resources and requirements are matched before individual programs are started , programs are more likely to meet their objectives . one way to achieve this is through an evolutionary development approach , that is , pursue incremental increases in capability versus significant leaps . use mature technologies . dod's major space acquisition programs typically begin product development before critical technologies are sufficiently matured , forcing the program to mature technologies after product development has begun . our reviews of dod and commercial technology development cases indicate that demonstrating a high level of maturity before new technologies are incorporated into product development puts those programs in a better position to succeed . develop technology within the science and technology environment . dod's space acquisition programs tend to take on technology development concurrently with product development , increasing the risk that significant problems will be discovered late in development and that more time , money , and effort will be needed to fix these problems . our reviews have shown that developing technologies separate from product development greatly minimizes this risk . dod officials and industry representatives we spoke with also noted that some long - term benefits could result from focusing on delivering capabilities to the warfighter quickly . first , small , low - cost , responsive satellites like the tacsats could augment major space systems — provided there is a means to launch the satellites . because tacsats do not require significant investment and are not critical to multiple missions , the consequence of failure of a tacsat is low . in contrast , major space systems typically are large , complex , and multimission , and take many years to build and deliver . if a major space satellite fails , there are significant cost and schedule consequences . ultimately , the already long wait time for the warfighter to receive improved capabilities is extended . second , developing small , low - cost launch vehicles could provide an avenue for testing new technologies in space . according to dod officials , less than 20 percent of dod's space research and development payloads make it into space , even while relying heavily on the national aeronautics and space administration's space shuttle , which was most recently grounded for 2 ½ years . we recently reported that dod's space test program , which is designed to help the science and technology community find opportunities to test in space relatively cost - effectively , has only been able to launch an average of seven experiments annually in the past 4 years .