all contractors can choose to waive these charges . including these charges in fair consideration price comparisons may give an advantage to an incumbent contractor ( since the incumbent's price would generally not include such charges ) , but this advantage is permissible . in three cases , the decision documentation suggests that not all maa contractors were included in those fair consideration evaluations , but it does not indicate why not all contractors were considered . further , the documentation in three other decisions indicates that price was not considered in these cases , although price must be considered in all fair consideration decisions . in three regional offices , gsa has taken some action to improve its fair consideration documentation . specifically , in response to concerns that we initially raised during our prior review of early maa contract implementation efforts , gsa improved its decision documentation in cleveland and indianapolis by including additional analyses and clarifying memorandums in those contract files . in addition , denver staff have also taken action to correct their files . nevertheless , gsa has yet to take nationwide action to improve its fair consideration documentation . currently , weak documentation of fair consideration decisions makes it difficult to determine the basis upon which a contractor was selected for a task order . these problems were permitted to occur because gsa did not establish uniform guidelines to ensure that all regional offices were documenting fair consideration decisions in a manner consistent with the far . how these technical factors are weighted depends on the particular circumstances of each decision . technical factors were cited as the reason for fair consideration decisions , either as a whole or in part , in four maa cities: boston , dallas , indianapolis , and new york . for three of these cities , boston , dallas , and indianapolis , we were not able to determine how these technical factors were applied to support a total of 20 decisions . contract documentation for these 20 decisions included a statement that both price and technical factors were considered . however , in one case , the specific factor considered was not identified . in the other 19 cases , the specific technical factor was identified , but the documentation did not specify how it supported the decision reached . other documentation weaknesses were identified in boston . documentation prepared to support fair consideration decisions in boston contained two additional weaknesses . as a result , in 19 percent of the cases we reviewed , gsa , customer agencies , maa contractors , and the congress do not have assurance that the procedure followed by gsa to award maa task orders was properly applied . in maa multiple - award cities , gsa attempted to reduce the cost of telecommunications services by asking contractors to submit price quotations to compete for task orders . however , the process had mixed results in the only maa city in which we could do a partial evaluation .