state challenges . in our semi - structured interviews with officials from the 12 states that did not use 25 percent or more of their award in fiscal year 2015 , we gathered information about continuing challenges in fully using the grant funds . these states were: maine we conducted these interviews in march and april 2018 . however , our 12 interviews represent a nongeneralizable sample of the population of states that have received the 301 awards made through the step grant cycles since fiscal year 2011 . as such , challenges reported by these states may not be common to all states receiving this grant . we asked officials from these 12 states questions about their experiences participating in the program , about challenges they had experienced , and about their views on how the program could be improved . to describe the themes that emerged from these 12 interviews with respect to challenges in fully using the funds , we identified categories based on an analysis of the responses that we received . two gao analysts independently coded the content of these interviews according to these categories . we conducted further analysis of the results of our coding to identify the three major groupings of challenges that we present in this report: ( 1 ) the timing of the application and award periods ; ( 2 ) administrative burden ; and ( 3 ) communication . the coders had an initial agreement rate of about 90 percent . disagreements were resolved through discussion between the coders and , occasionally , through arbitration by a knowledgeable third party . sido survey data review . total match requirement . states must provide a 25 percent or 35 percent non - federal total match to the federal grant amount . cash match requirement . a state's match cannot be less than 50 percent cash . oit has established a process for ensuring compliance with the tftea requirement outlined in the “proportion of amounts” section of the law . as discussed above , tftea requires that oit determine the 10 states with the highest percentage of eligible small businesses using the most recent data from the department of commerce . oit officials told us they review data from commerce's census bureau that show the number of exporting small and medium - sized businesses in each state , and then use these data to determine the top 10 states . according to oit officials , they use the most recent data available , with an approximately 2- to 3-year lag in the data . for example , to assess the top 10 states for the fiscal year 2017 cycle , oit used data from 2014 . based on these data , the 10 states that sba identified for the fiscal year 2017 cycle received about 32 percent of the total amount appropriated — which was below the 40 percent threshold and therefore in compliance with the proportional distribution requirement . oit officials told us that they planned to use available 2016 census data to determine the top 10 states for the fiscal year 2018 award cycle and then , after receiving applications , determine award amounts that would comply with this requirement . tftea requires that states receiving a step grant provide matching funds .