ii . in its comments , the agency concurred with all three of our recommendations for executive action regarding facility inspections and other areas related to safe storage of federal records . in addition , we received technical comments via email from nara , which we have incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the archivist of the united states ; and other interested parties . this report also is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or your staffs have any questions on information discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the types of facilities agencies use to store federal records and the extent to which nara's data on agencies' use of storage facilities are complete , ( 2 ) evaluate the extent to which nara has determined these facilities to be compliant with standards in 36 c.f.r . part 1234 , ( 3 ) determine what actions nara has taken to minimize damage to records in federal records centers and the extent to which it documents such efforts , and ( 4 ) determine how nara determines storage fees and whether fees differ among facilities . to accomplish the first objective , we reviewed 36 c.f.r . part 1234 and developed a thorough understanding of the regulation through discussions with nara officials who are responsible for administering it . we then obtained lists of nara , agency , and commercial records storage facilities from nara . these lists included nara's central registry of approved facilities . we corroborated the lists by comparing them with other documentation such as facility approval memoranda and inspection schedules , as well as through interviews with agency officials . additionally , we obtained nara's database of agencies' records storage facilities and discussed nara's methods for populating the database with responsible nara officials . we determined the database to be unreliable because it was incomplete , outdated , and largely reliant on self - reported data from agencies . for the second objective , we obtained and reviewed memoranda from nara that indicated approval of nara , agency , and commercial records storage facilities and the facilities' compliance with 36 c.f.r . part 1234 . we then used additional documentation , including detailed facility inspection checklists , fire inspection reports , and structural engineering reports to determine the existence of support for nara's approval determinations . we also discussed nara's method for approving and inspecting facilities , in addition to plans for conducting future facility inspections with the officials who are responsible for performing the inspections . to accomplish the third objective , we reviewed nara policies and procedures for the storage and management of federal records and compared them with applicable internal control standards . we also reviewed procedures for handling records damage in nara records centers and documentation relative to records emergency planning and training .