, a case for change ) ? how will the agency hold the leader or leaders accountable for successful implementation of the reforms ? has the agency established a dedicated implementation team that has the capacity , including staffing , resources , and change management , to manage the reform process ? what management challenges and weaknesses are the reform efforts designed to address ? how has the agency assessed the effects of the proposed agency reforms on the current and future workforce and what does that assessment show ? to what extent does the agency track the number and cost of contractors supporting its agency mission and the functions those contractors are performing ? how has the agency ensured that actions planned to maintain productivity and service levels do not cost more than the savings generated by reducing the workforce ? what succession planning has the agency developed and implemented for leadership and other key positions in areas critical to reforms and mission accomplishment ? to what extent have the reforms included important practices for effective recruitment and hiring such as customized strategies to recruit highly specialized and hard - to - fill positions ? what employment - and mission - related data has the agency identified to monitor progress of reform efforts and to ensure no adverse impact on agency mission , and how is it using that data ? before implementing workforce reduction strategies , it is critical that agencies carefully consider how to strategically downsize the workforce and maintain the staff resources to carry out its mission . agencies should consider long - term staffing plans and associated personnel costs , organizational design and position structures and the appropriateness of backfilling positions as they become vacant . to what extent has the agency considered skills gaps , mission shortfalls , increased contracting and spending , and challenges in aligning workforce with agency needs prior to implementing workforce reduction strategies ? in situations when “early outs” and “buyouts” are proposed , to what extent has the agency linked proposed early outs and buyouts to specific organizational objectives , including the agency's future operational , restructuring , downsizing , or other reform goals ? how is the agency planning to measure customer satisfaction with the changes resulting from its reforms ? as part of its reform effort , omb also required agencies to develop a long - term workforce reduction plan and a plan to maximize employee performance as part of the april 2017 reform guidance . specifically , omb required agencies to develop proposals intended to improve performance , increase accountability , and reduce the size and costs of the federal workforce . our prior work has found that at the heart of any serious change management initiative are the people — because people define the organization's culture , drive its performance , and embody its knowledge base . experience shows that failure to adequately address — or often even consider — a wide variety of people and cultural issues can lead to unsuccessful change . research on both private - and public - sector organizations has found that increased levels of engagement — generally defined as the sense of purpose and commitment employees feel toward their employer and its mission — can lead to better organizational performance .