such funds as may be necessary . .” to pay approved claims through the end of fiscal year 2001 . the reca legislation requires that applications be processed within 1 year . as shown in table 4 , about 89 percent of the applications were processed within 12 months . according to recp officials , applicants may request additional time to submit more documentation to support their claims . we could not readily determine how many of the 692 applications that were not processed within 1 year were due to such requests . processing times for claims differed among the three applicant types . our analysis of information from the case histories database showed that for fiscal years 1992 through 2000 the average processing time from the date the application was filed until its disposition was 269 days for uranium miner employee - based claims , 190 days for downwinders - based claims , and 245 days for onsite participant - based claims . as shown in table 5 , the average processing times for approved and denied applications varied by application type from fiscal year 1992 through fiscal year 2000 . recp attributed fluctuations in the time required to process claims to the unique characteristics associated with each claim and the different factors involved in the review and application of the law for the three claims categories . recp told us that since the inception of the program , its policy has been to assist claimants in any way that it can . in addition , rather than denying a claim , recp said that it allows the claimant additional time to provide corroborating documentation . recp cited other reasons for delays in processing claims , including recp's need , in certain cases , to gather medical records to address the statutory restrictions on certain compensable diseases and in other cases to gather the documentation necessary to establish that the victim meets the radiation exposure eligibility requirements . recp said that in these instances , staff would conduct additional research on behalf of the claimant or allow the claimant more time to provide the proof necessary to establish exposure . justice processed and adjudicated 496 claims that were subsequently refiled . on average , these 496 claims were initially processed and adjudicated within 317 days . for those claims that were refiled for the first time , recp took on average 258 days to process and adjudicate them . furthermore , for those 21 claims refiled for a second time , recp took on average 212 days to process and adjudicate them . the paid interest is then added to the account balance . according to opb&e , justice requested that $21.7 million be appropriated to the trust fund in fiscal year 2000 ; however , the congress appropriated $3.2 million . combined with funds carried over from fiscal year 1999 , a total of $11.6 million was on deposit in the trust fund at the beginning of fiscal year 2000 . these funds were fully committed by may 9 , 2000 , and payment of awards was deferred . recp notified the eligible candidates by letter that although they qualified for compensation , their award could not be paid until additional funds became available .