preparedness . we also interviewed homeland security council ( hsc ) staff and the associate counsel to the president on the rol responsibilities of the council in designing , executing , and following up on corrective actions resulting from principal level exercises because these staff were responsible for summarizing lessons learned and corrective actions for such exercises . for information that would provide a broader perspective on fema's efforts , we examined several fema databases , including the fema secure portal — the fema repository of after - action reports ; the national exercise schedule ( nexs ) system — a scheduling system for all exercises ; and the corrective action program ( cap ) system — which was designed for tracking capability improvement plans entered by federal , state , and local exercise participants . we assessed the reliability of these databases by checking them against documents , such as after - action reports produced by states , and by interviewing staff responsible for the data . we concluded the data in the fema secure portal , nexs system , and cap system were not reliable for use in this report . we discuss the reliability of these data later in this report . finally , we compared fema's policies and procedures for implementing the national exercise program with criteria in gao's standards for internal control in the federal government . to determine the extent to which fema has made progress and what issues , if any , remain in conducting a nationwide capabilities - based assessment and developing required preparedness reports , we analyzed information pertinent to fema's assessment approach , such as state preparedness reports and the federal preparedness report . we also examined fema's plans for implementing the comprehensive assessment system . we interviewed fema staff responsible for developing fema's assessment system and performance objectives for measuring capabilities . finally , we reviewed our prior reports on fema's preparedness programs . to determine the extent to which fema has developed a strategic plan that integrates the national preparedness system , we analyzed key fema documents including the agencywide strategic plan for fiscal years 2008 through 2013 , the grant programs directorate strategic plan , and the draft annual national preparedness directorate operating plan . we interviewed fema national preparedness directorate staff on strategic planning and policy and procedures for the national preparedness system . we also compared fema's current approach for developing a national preparedness system with the desirable characteristics of effective national strategies we identified in february 2004 . to supplement our analyses of fema's preparedness activities , we visited six states — california , georgia , illinois , new york , texas , and washington . while we cannot generalize our work from these visits to all states , we chose these locations for their geographic diversity and to provide examples of the way in which states carry out their exercise and preparedness programs . in selecting these states , we considered factors such as states' participation in national level exercises ; states located in hurricane - prone regions ; and states with varying percentages of homeland security grant funding planned to support exercises .