is approximately $1.3 billion . as gcss - army was initiated in december 2003 and is expected to integrate multiple logistics functions by replacing numerous legacy systems and interfaces . the system will provide tactical units with a common authoritative source for financial and related nonfinancial data , such as information related to maintenance and transportation of equipment . the system is also intended to help the army achieve total asset visibility . gcss - army will manage over $49 billion in annual spending by the active army , national guard , and the army reserve . the may 2011 financial improvement and audit readiness ( fiar ) plan notes that the full - deployment date has been changed from the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2015 to the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017 in order to reduce the operational risk of having tactical units in training and combat in a mixed logistics information systems environment . in august 2011 , the program received approval to be placed into limited deployment to support operational testing . the army estimates the life - cycle cost to be approximately $4.2 billion . as of september 30 , 2011 , the army reported that it had obligated approximately $890 million and expended $804 million for gcss - army . deams was initiated in august 2003 and is intended to provide the air force with the entire spectrum of financial management capabilities , including collections , commitments and obligations , cost accounting , general ledger , funds control , receipts and acceptance , accounts payable and disbursement , billing , and financial reporting for the general fund . according to air force officials , when deams is fully operational , it is expected to maintain control and accountability for about $160 billion in annual spending . the air force anticipates that deams will be fully deployed by july 2016 . air force officials estimate the deams life - cycle cost estimate to be approximately $2 billion . as of september 30 , 2011 , the air force reported that it had obligated approximately $315 million and expended $301 million for deams . ecss was initiated in january 2004 and is intended to provide the air force with a single , integrated logistics system — including transportation , supply , maintenance and repair , engineering and acquisition — for both the air force's general and working capital funds . ecss is also intended to provide the financial management and accounting functions for the air force's working capital fund operations . when fully implemented , ecss is expected to control and account for about $122 billion of inventory . as noted in the may 2011 fiar plan , the full - deployment decision and the full deployment for the first release only are scheduled for the first and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2013 . according to the may 2011 fiar plan , the two events had originally been scheduled for the third quarter of fiscal year 2012 and the third quarter of fiscal year 2013 . according to air force officials , the ecss life - cycle cost estimate is approximately $5.2 billion .