check one . ( 17 panel members responded to this question ) 2 ) if the federal government should support small community transportation , what is the primary reason for doing so ? are the measures outcome based , and are all applicable costs and benefits being considered ? if there are outcome - based measures , how successful is it based on these measures ? is it well targeted to those with the greatest needs and the least capacity to meet those needs ? is it affordable and financially sustainable over the longer term , given known cost trends , risks , and future fiscal imbalances ? is it using the most cost - effective or net beneficial approaches when compared to other tools and program designs ? what would be the likely consequences of eliminating the program , policy , function , or activity ? what would be the likely implications if its total funding was cut by 25 percent ? when taken together , these questions can usefully illustrate the breadth of issues that can be addressed through a systematic re - examination process . this appendix provides an overview of the gis analyses we conducted of community access to the transportation network . in this appendix we discuss ( 1 ) the motivation for the analysis , ( 2 ) some key societal and industry factors that have changed since deregulation , ( 3 ) how we generated the set of communities for examination , ( 4 ) how an index measuring of “access” was defined , and results for communities' access to airports , amtrak , and major roads . it has been approximately 30 years since the eas program was developed as part of the deregulation of the airline in industry in 1978 . the program had the particular goal of ensuring that communities that had commercial airline service in the regulated era retained that service even if the newly deregulated airlines chose not to provide service to some of those locations . given that goal , the communities that were eligible for the program were essentially those that had had airline service at in 1978 . thirty years later much has changed in the industry and in the country . the country has experienced demographic shifts , automobiles are of better quality , and the airline industry has continually restructured itself . if the eas program — or any program that promotes access to the national transportation network — is to be re - examined , consideration of these developments is warranted . the goal of our analysis is to use information on community demographics , access to transportation modes , and other relevant factors to provide illustrations of how these key factors could be considered in developing an approach to ensuring access to air service or other modes of transportation . our intent is not to point to any particular program structure , but rather to illuminate the type of information that can be brought forth to help policymakers answer those questions . throughout the 20th century , a significant degree of urbanization occurred as people moved out of rural areas and into cities and their suburbs .