we disagree . in our report , we did not state that the issuance of passports to sex offenders in fiscal year 2008 facilitated their commission of sex offenses abroad . this was not part of our objectives for this review . however , our introduction does cite examples from doj in which prior sex offenders committed sex crimes overseas . our investigation did find several cases where the passport recipients traveled to locations known for sex tourism , and one of our 30 cases is currently under indictment related to sex crimes overseas . state also said that there was no logical connection between the issuance of passports and sex offenders' travel to mexico , adding that our evidence was based on hearsay information and that a passport was not required to enter the united states from mexico ( via land border ) until june 2009 . in our report , we state that convicted sex offenders are required to register with local or state law enforcement authorities . as part of this requirement , the pertinent police departments stated that the offenders informed them of their moving to mexico . finally , state wrote that our report provides graphic details that were used to suggest that state knew these details at the time of passport issuance and should have taken action to prevent the issuance of the passport . state's assessment of the details of our case studies as “graphic” is the result of the nature of the criminal acts of the passport recipients ; the offenses are directly relevant to our objective to develop case studies of passport recipients who are sex offenders . in addition , state said that the details of two of our cases in the highlights could be construed as indicating an “anti - gay” bias . however , the descriptions of these case studies are at the same level of detail that we report in other case studies , describing illegal activities between an adult and a child of either gender . furthermore , because these case studies only discuss sexual abuse of children , we have not made any assumptions or implications regarding the sexual orientations of these individuals . we do not believe the public would condone such illegal activities , regardless of the genders of the sex offenders or their victims . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to interested congressional committees , the secretary of state , and the attorney general . the report also will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . as of fiscal year 2009 , the offender was a federal employee with an entity that manages a national historical landmark .