the information provided is limited . how prevalent are cdhps ? how are the associated health accounts funded and used ? what factors may contribute to the growth of cdhp enrollment ? what factors may limit the appeal of cdhps ? to determine the prevalence of cdhps , we summarized existing literature and industry surveys regarding the extent to which employers offer and individuals enroll in cdhps , and the extent to which insurance carriers and financial institutions offer the plans and their associated accounts . to determine how the associated accounts are funded and used , we interviewed representatives of five of the largest cdhp insurers , six of the largest financial institutions that administer hsas , cdhp experts , and industry officials . we obtained hra funding and use data from three of the insurers we contacted , obtained hsa account funding and use data from one of the financial institutions we contacted , and obtained tax data on hsa contributions and deductions from the internal revenue service ( irs ) . irs data may not be nationally representative of hsa account holders because the data do not capture individuals who opened hsas and made no individual contributions , even if their employers contributed , or those who did not claim an hsa deduction . we did not independently verify the account data we received from insurers and financial institutions ; however , we performed certain quality checks , such as determining consistency between data elements provided and discussing data reliability and limitations with the private entities providing the data , and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we also discussed the use of hsas during eight focus groups with 75 hsa - eligible plan and traditional plan enrollees at three large employers in the public , energy utility , and insurance sectors . to determine the factors that may contribute to the growth or limit the appeal of cdhps , we conducted interviews with officials at the department of the treasury and irs ; industry officials representing health insurance carriers , america's health insurance plans ( ahip ) , blue cross blue shield association , hsa insider , and a nationwide health insurance broker ; representatives of employers offering cdhps ; representatives of financial institutions administering hsas ; provider association officials , such as the american hospital association and the american medical association ; and cdhp experts , including the american academy of actuaries , benefit consultants , and health policy analysts . we also obtained information from five large employers in the retail , health care , financial services , technology , and beverage industries that offer hra - based plans and obtained information from the focus groups of hsa - eligible plan enrollees . we evaluated the decision - support tools on provider quality and prices for medical services that five large multistate cdhp insurers made available to their enrollees . we reviewed federal statutory requirements and guidance related to cdhps . to validate information provided by a health insurance trade association on the effects of state requirements on the appeal of hsa - eligible plans , we reviewed selected state insurance and tax laws related to cdhps .