intervention . a set of enforcement tools , such as warning letters , additional investigations , or fines are used to encourage the highest risk carriers to correct safety deficiencies , or place carriers out - of - service . aggregate approaches , such as those used in several prior evaluations , do not directly assess the ability of sms and regulatory violations to predict future crash risk for specific carriers . well - known findings in statistics on “ecological fallacies” show that associations at higher levels of analysis are not guaranteed to exist at lower levels of analysis . in this application , carriers that crash may have higher violation rates or sms scores as a group than carriers that do not crash , but this pattern does not necessarily apply to specific carriers within the groups . because less variation exists at the carrier level , aggregation can overstate the strength and precision of these correlations for individual carriers . even when similar correlations exist at the carrier level , comparing average crash rates for sms percentiles or risk groups does not assess the prediction error for any particular carrier . the average crash rate may be higher for groups of carriers with increasingly high sms percentiles , but crash rates may vary significantly around these means . this residual variation , not differences in means or other aggregate statistics , is more directly relevant for assessing the quality of predicted crash rates for a particular carrier . in statistical terms , the prediction error summarized by the residual variance of a linear regression model or the classification matrix of a categorical model is what matters for assessing predictive power for individual carriers , not the models' coefficients , which estimate mean crash rates conditional on these percentiles . thus , it is not surprising that previous evaluations of carrier - level data have found weaker relationships between crash risk and sms scores and regulatory violations than have the evaluations of aggregated data . umtri estimated the relationship between exceeding thresholds in the six non - crash basics and mean crash rates , using an empirical bayesian negative binomial model estimated on carrier - level data . the results showed that carriers exceeding the thresholds for the unsafe driving and vehicle maintenance basics had average crash rates that were 1.1 to 1.8 times higher than carriers not exceeding the thresholds — usually lower than the rate ratios of 1.0 to 5.4 reported by umtri's aggregate analysis and fmcsa's december 2012 effectiveness testing . however , this relationship was negative for the driver fitness and loading / cargo ( currently hazardous materials ) basics , with mean crash rates for alerted carriers that were 0.85 and 0.91 times the rates of non - alerted carriers , respectively . the ratios were not significantly greater than 1 for the fatigued driving and substance abuse / alcohol basics .