even start has no such requirement . with respect to services , head start historically has been authorized to provide services that specifically support children's development , such as early childhood education , nutrition , health , and social services . head start legislation has long required that local programs provide parent involvement activities that ensure the direct participation of parents in the development , conduct , and overall program direction of local programs . however , in 1992 , the congress added a requirement that head start provide family literacy services , if these services are determined to be necessary . in the 1998 reauthorization of head start , the congress clarified the definition of family literacy , requiring that head start family literacy services be of sufficient intensity and duration to make sustainable changes in a family . the legislation also required that family literacy programs integrate early childhood education , parenting education , parent and child interactive literacy activities , and adult literacy services . the same definition of family literacy services is found in even start's legislation . even start legislation also requires that it integrate early childhood education , adult literacy or adult basic education and parenting education into a unified family literacy program . head start and even start have some similar measures to assess children's progress but different measures for adult literacy and educational attainment ( see table 2 ) . copies will also be made available to other interested parties upon request . if you have questions regarding this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or eleanor johnson , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7209 . other contributors can be found in appendix ii . in addition to those named above , tiffany boiman , james rebbe , stan stenersen , and jill peterson made key contributions to this report . bilingual education: four overlapping programs could be consolidated gao - 01-657 . washington , d.c.: may 14 , 2001 . early childhood programs: characteristics affect the availability of school readiness information . gao / hehs - 00-38 . washington , d.c.: february 28 , 2000 . early childhood programs: the use of impact evaluations to assess program effects . gao - 01-542 . washington , d.c.: april 16 , 2001 . early education and care: overlap indicates need to assess crosscutting programs . gao / hehs - 00-78 . washington , d.c.: april 28 , 2000 . evaluations of even start family literacy program effectiveness . gao / hehs - 00-58r . washington , d.c.: march 8 , 2000 . head start: challenges in monitoring program quality and demonstrating results . gao / hehs - 98-186 . according to hhs officials , these early results suggest that participation in early head start has positive effects on both children and their parents . the even start study is expected to be a 6-year , $3.6 million study tracking 400 even start families from 18 program locations and focuses on measuring children's readiness for school and adult literacy . the final report is scheduled for completion in 2003 . the current study is actually the second even start impact study conducted using an experimental design . the first evaluation examined even start programs operated by five grantees .