renewable energy . of the total amount of electricity consumed , at least 3 percent must be from a renewable energy source , with at least half of that amount from a renewable energy source put into service after january 1 , 1999 . this goal is in place through 2009 . after 2009 , the percentage of electricity from a renewable energy source increases incrementally , but at least half of the amount must still be from renewable energy sources put into service after january 1 , 1999 . under epact 2005 , agencies also get a 100 percent bonus for renewable electric energy generated on federal or indian land . 13423 , this energy must be defined as “new” to qualify for the bonus . doe , the office of the federal environmental executive ( ofee ) , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) play a role in ensuring that agencies comply with the goals . doe is responsible primarily for coordinating the implementation of the energy efficiency and renewable energy goals for agencies set forth in epact 2005 , while ofee is responsible primarily for overseeing the implementation of e.o . rather , it is the administration's policy to encourage agencies to voluntarily partner with other groups to reduce emissions , and the administration believes emissions will decline without a quantifiable goal . although energy intensity is an imperfect measure of greenhouse gas emissions , there is no scientific consensus on the best measure . some organizations , such as the energy information administration , a statistical agency of doe which provides data , forecasts , and analyses , and the world resources institute , have used or proposed several alternatives for measuring greenhouse gas emissions . such measures include reporting total emissions , as was the case for the previous greenhouse gas emissions goal under e.o . 13123 , and using greenhouse gas intensity measures . some greenhouse gas measures , like the current energy intensity measure based on square footage , attempt to account for expanding or shrinking production or mission . other proposed measures have included calculating greenhouse gas intensity by dividing total greenhouse gas emissions by building square footage or by units of performance or output , such as million dollars of gross domestic product or economic output , kilowatt hour , customer , or dollar of revenue . doe , in its annual reports to congress , estimates emissions from energy use in buildings that are subject to the goal , and presents annual emissions in metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent , and in terms of metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per gross square foot . none of the measures is perfect . for example , one agency official noted that an absolute emissions goal — as was used to measure emissions prior to the current measure — does not account for the fact that an agency may change its energy consumption or square footage to support its expanded or contracted work resulting from a change in mission . however , this absolute emissions measure allowed agencies to more easily track progress in reducing their total emissions . imperfect metrics also are an issue at the international level .