these estimates do not include the cost of the ships . during the course of developing and testing the surtass / lfa system , environmental interest groups , including the natural resources defense council , began to raise concerns that the system may cause harm to marine mammals . environmentalists were concerned that the high - intensity sound emitted by the system could cause physical damage to marine mammals and adversely affect their behavior . in august 1995 , in a letter to the secretary of the navy , the natural resources defense council questioned whether the navy had complied with all applicable environmental laws and regulations . in response to growing public concerns and recognition that further assessment of the system was needed , the navy decided to initiate an environmental impact statement process . as part of this process , the navy conducted a scientific research program from 1997 to 1998 to test the effects of low frequency sonar on a limited number of whale species off the coasts of california and hawaii . the navy distributed a draft environmental impact statement for public comment in 1999 and issued a final environmental impact statement in 2001 . the navy concluded in the environmental impact statement that the potential impact or injury to marine mammals from surtass / lfa is negligible . as reflected in the environmental impact statement , this is based on using the system with certain proposed geographic restrictions and monitoring to prevent harm to marine mammals . because there is some potential for incidental harm to marine mammals , the navy must obtain a letter of authorization from the national marine fisheries service before surtass / lfa can be used . the national marine fisheries service issued a draft authorization for public comment in 2001 , which concurred with the findings of the navy's environmental impact statement . if approved , the authorization would allow the navy to use the surtass / lfa system with certain specified mitigation measures and restrictions . these measures include limiting ( 1 ) sonar sound levels to 180 decibels within 12 nautical miles of any coastline or in any designated biologically important offshore area and ( 2 ) sound levels to 145 decibels in known recreational or commercial dive sites . in addition , the authorization would require the navy to monitor marine mammals from the ship visually and with passive and high frequency active sonar . if marine mammals were detected , the navy would be required to shut down lfa operations to prevent , to the greatest extent possible , marine mammals' exposure to potentially harmful sound levels . in addition , a benefit of active sonar is its ability to seek out targets rather than wait passively for a target to approach . as a result , a system such as surtass / lfa can provide the means to detect enemy submarines before they can get within the effective weapons range of u.s. ships . the decision on the authorization is expected later in 2002 . notwithstanding the mitigation measures outlined by the letter of authorization , environmental organizations are still expected to oppose the use of the surtass / lfa .