honduras . project delays and challenges in implementing originally planned impact evaluation designs have slowed progress of some impact evaluations . mcc initially anticipated completing impact evaluations for the honduras compact projects by the end of the compact . however , according to mcc officials , mcc modified its approach to impact evaluations so that evaluations are completed after the end of the compact .  transportation project . the impact evaluation for the transportation project began before project implementation , but delays in road construction led to delays in collecting necessary data and completing the evaluation . according to the impact evaluator , other than some delays in final data collection , the transportation impact evaluation was planned with a robust design and has been implemented as planned .  farmer training and development activity . challenges encountered in implementing the original evaluation design led to potential limitations in the results . as a result , mcc added a supplemental design to enhance the methodology . specifically , the impact evaluator had identified a certain group of farmers to participate in the program and serve as a sample for the evaluation . however , the activity contractor chose not to train a large portion of the selected group , reducing the sample size for the evaluation and potentially limiting the results . according to mcc , the challenge in implementing the original evaluation design arose because the contractor was focused on achieving targets set in the contract , instead of implementing the activity in parallel with the evaluation methodology , which was not outlined in the contract . mcc noted that this experience highlighted the importance of incorporating impact evaluation designs into implementation plans and contracts and the need to anticipate and manage potential tradeoffs .  farmer access to credit activity . according to the impact evaluator , the assessment of the farmer access to credit activity was complicated by changes that took place during implementation , such as the expansion of the activity beyond an exclusive focus on program farmers , as well as the delay in program implementation . by the time changes were made to the activity , no baseline data had been collected . subsequently , mca - honduras hired a third - party contractor to collect qualitative data . however , when the impact evaluator's contract ended at the end of the compact , these data had not been analyzed and an evaluation report had not been completed as originally intended .  agricultural public goods grants facility activity . the impact evaluator conducted an economic rate of return calculation by comparing the costs and benefits that resulted from the agricultural public goods grants facility activity . for example , the report compared the expected costs and benefits as a result of certain grant activities with the estimated costs and benefits had the grant activity not been implemented . the evaluator produced a final report on the impact of a selection of the 15 public goods grants . mcc updated its err analyses for the cape verde and honduras compacts when project activities changed significantly during implementation . however , the updated err analyses were not always well - documented or supported .