this should not be the role for the pension insurance system . certain rules that affect funding for underfunded plans of troubled sponsors can also create perverse incentives for employees that aggravate a plan's underfunding . to the extent that participants believe that the pbgc guarantee may not cover their full benefits , many eligible participants may elect to retire and take all or part of their benefits in a lump sum rather than as lifetime annuity payments in order to maximize the value of their accrued benefits . in some cases , this may create a “run on the bank,” exacerbating the possibility of the plan's insolvency as assets are liquidated more quickly than expected , and potentially leaving fewer assets to pay benefits for other participants . as previously noted , it can also create incentives for workers to retire prematurely , creating potential labor shortages in key occupations for the firm . we have seen aspects of these effects in some airline pilots' reaction to the deteriorating financial condition of their employers and pension plans . further , current rules may create an incentive for financially troubled sponsors to increase benefits , even if they have insufficient funding to pay current benefit levels . currently , sponsors can increase plan benefits for underfunded plans , even in some cases where the plans are less than 60 percent funded . the most visible is the financial exposure of pbgc . the agency reports that airline pensions are currently underfunded by $31 billion . this figure includes $8.3 billion of underfunding in united's plans , and $2.3 billion of underfunding for us airways . second , thousands of plan participants and beneficiaries will lose pension benefits due to limits on pbgc guarantees and certain provisions affecting pbgc's insurance program . finally , airlines that terminate their plans may gain a competitive advantage because such terminations effectively lower overall labor costs . those lower costs may also permit some airlines to continue operating that might otherwise be forced to exit the marketplace . the challenges i describe today also suggest that any effective solution be comprehensive in nature . such a solution should include meaningful incentives for adequate plan funding , enhanced transparency for participants , and strong accountability for those firms that fail to match the benefit promises they make with the resources necessary to fulfill those promises . before i discuss the airlines more specifically , i want to briefly note the recent , serious financial challenges posed by underfunded pension plans in the airline and other industries for pbgc and the agency's role in protecting db pension plans . pbgc's single - employer insurance program is a federal program to insure the benefits of the more than 34 million workers and retirees participating in private and not - for - profit db pension plans . despite these cost - cutting efforts , low - cost airlines still maintain a significant unit cost advantage over legacy airlines . legacy airlines also face considerable debt and pension funding obligations in the next few years . while the program is intended to be self - sufficient through employer premiums and investments , over the last few years , the program's finances have taken a severe turn for the worse .