ties. ) most siv holders travel to the united states in the same way as refugees , with travel booked by the international organization for migration ( an inter - governmental organization ) . hhs stated that it would also explore ways to capture more information on siv holders through its administrative program data , including on employment outcomes . state , in its response , said that prm has developed new guidance for the refugee processing center's siv unit regarding the distribution of additional information to siv holders and that staff from this unit plan to include additional links to cultural orientation information in all their correspondences with siv applicants . additionally , state noted that embassy baghdad will distribute copies of the welcome guide to iraqi siv holders and that prm will work with consular affairs to identify other ways to provide information to siv applicants . hhs and state also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . ( 3 ) to what extent have state and hhs helped resettlement agencies and others address siv holders' resettlement challenges ? to address our first research objective , we examined available data from state and hhs . specifically , we analyzed individual record - level data from state's bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) for fiscal year 2011 through the first quarter of fiscal year 2017 ( i.e. , october 2010 through december 2016 ) that provide information on recipients of state's resettlement program , the reception and placement ( r&p ) program . the r&p information we examined included data on recipients' employment status and other household income sources at 90 days after arrival in the united states . additionally , we reviewed prm data on recipients' background characteristics , such as education level and spoken english ability , that prm collects during the application and screening process prior to an individual's resettlement in the united states . prm collected both the background and the r&p data in a way that allowed siv holders to be examined separately from resettled refugees . we also did analyses with the same variables for resettled refugees from the same general timeframe . we reviewed the data from prm for missing data and internal inconsistencies , and interviewed prm officials knowledgeable about the data to resolve identified issues . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes of reporting employment rates , income sources , and receipt of services at 90 days , as well as broad categories of education and spoken english levels , for siv holders and , in some cases , refugees . we also examined summary - level data from hhs's office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) , which administers the refugee assistance programs , on the matching grant program — the one orr program that collects information in a way that allowed us to identify outcomes for siv holders separately from all other program participants . we examined siv outcome data from orr for the matching grant program for fiscal year 2016 , the only year such data were available . about one - third of siv holders participate in the matching grant program , which is also available to refugees and other eligible individuals .