gao - 09-553 . washington , d.c.: april 23 , 2009 . iii for more detail ) . we conducted this performance audit from april 2009 through june 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since its creation , ofs has implemented numerous programs and initiatives to carry out tarp . according to treasury , the purpose of each program is as follows: cpp was created in october 2008 to stabilize the financial system by providing capital to viable banks through the purchase of preferred shares and subordinated debentures . in return for its investment , the treasury will receive dividend payments and warrants . tip was created in january 2009 to foster market stability and thereby strengthen the economy by making case - by - case investments in institutions that treasury deems are critical to the functioning of the financial system . agp was created in november 2008 to provide government assurances for assets held by financial institutions that are viewed as critical to the functioning of the nation's financial system . ssfi was created in november 2008 to provide stability in financial markets and avoid disruptions to the markets from the failure of a systemically significant institution . treasury determines participation in this program on a case - by - case basis . aifp was created in december 2008 to prevent a significant disruption of the american automotive industry . treasury has determined that such a disruption would pose a systemic risk to financial market stability and have a negative effect on the u.s. economy . the program requires participating institutions to implement plans that will achieve long - term viability . auto supplier support program was created in march 2009 to help stabilize the auto supply base , which designs and builds the components for cars and trucks . making home affordable program was created in march 2009 to offer assistance to as many as 7 to 9 million homeowners . the program aims to prevent the destructive impact of the housing crisis on families and communities . according to treasury , it will not provide money to speculators , but will target support to the working homeowners who have made every possible effort to stay current on their mortgage payments . consumer and business lending initiative created in march 2009 is an initiative under the financial stability plan that includes the federal reserve - run talf . this initiative is intended to support consumer and business credit markets by providing financing to private investors to issue new securitizations to help unfreeze and lower interest rates for auto , student , and small business loans ; credit cards ; commercial mortgages ; and other consumer and business credit . subsequently , it subsumed the small business and community lending initiative , which was also created in march 2009 to increase credit available to local businesses by reducing fees and increasing guarantees for sba loans and having treasury purchase securities backed by sba loans .