, subject to frequent changes ) . this evm approach in effect ensured that material variances from planned performance would not be identified and that the state of the project would not be reliably reported . we recommended that the director of opm conduct effective system tests prior to system deployment and improve program cost estimation and progress reporting . risk management entails identifying potential problems before they occur . risks should be identified as early as possible , analyzed , mitigated , and tracked to closure . the reported results indicated that the project was progressing almost exactly as planned . however , this view of project performance was not reliable because the baseline on which it was based did not reflect the full scope of the project , had not been validated , and was unstable ( i.e. opm stated that it concurred with our recommendations and would take steps to address the weakness we identified . nevertheless , opm deployed a limited initial version of the modernized retirement system in february 2008 . after unsuccessful efforts to address system quality issues , the agency suspended system operation , terminated the system contract , and began restructuring the modernization effort . in april 2009 , we again reported on opm's retirement modernization , noting that the agency still remained far from achieving the modernized specifically , we retirement processing capabilities that it had planned.noted that significant weaknesses continued to exist in the areas of cost estimating , progress reporting , and testing , while also noting two additional weaknesses related to planning and oversight . although it concurred with our january 2008 recommendation to develop a revised cost estimate for the retirement modernization effort , opm had not completed initial steps for developing the new estimate by the time we issued our report in april 2009 . we reported that the agency had not yet fully defined the estimate's purpose , developed an estimating plan , or defined the project's characteristics . by not completing these steps , opm increased the risk that it would produce an unreliable estimate and not have a sound basis for measuring project performance and formulating retirement modernization budgets . opm also concurred with our january 2008 recommendation to establish a basis for effective evm but had not completed key steps as of the time of our report . specifically , despite planning to use evm to report the retirement modernization project's progress , the agency had not developed a reliable cost estimate and a validated baseline . engaging in evm reporting without first taking these fundamental steps could have again rendered the agency's assessments unreliable . as previously discussed , effective testing is an essential component of any project that includes developing systems . to be effectively managed , testing should be planned and conducted in a structured and disciplined fashion . beginning the test planning process in the early stages of a project life cycle can reduce rework later . early test planning in coordination with requirements development can provide major benefits . however , at the time of our april 2009 report , the agency had not begun to plan test activities in coordination with developing its requirements for the system it was planning at that time .