ii ) . in these comments , hhs supported our emphasis on improvements needed in key information security program elements , but stated that our report did not appropriately reflect the progress that the department has made in addressing information security . specifically , hhs expressed concerns that our evaluation approach did not provide an accurate or complete appraisal of the department's information security program , in that the report does not mention the department's defense - in - depth strategy or accomplishment of two major goals — the department's campaign to mitigate its deficiency pertaining to contingency planning and reduce its number of reportable conditions by 25 percent . according to hhs , it employs a defense - in - depth strategy to ensure threats are effectively addressed and mitigated . we acknowledge hhs's statement on its defense - in - depth strategy , but note that the significant control weaknesses identified in this report and by independent auditors indicate that this strategy is not fully working as intended . with regard to the two major goals , we have revised the report to reflect the elimination of the contingency planning deficiency . regarding the department's reduction in the number of reportable conditions , in its report on internal controls , the oig's independent auditor reported progress made in strengthening security controls ; however , it still reported weaknesses in several information security areas , including the entitywide security program , access controls , application development and program change controls , system software , and service continuity . hhs also noted that our report did not mention recent improvements or progress made in information security until a brief statement in the conclusion of the report , and that the report was predicated on findings originally documented by the hhs oig in fiscal year 2005 . however , throughout the report we acknowledge hhs's improvements and progress made in correcting information security weaknesses and have added additional statements based on these comments . in addition , as noted in our scope and methodology , our evaluation included the most recent reports issued at the time of our review . in its comments , hhs also expressed concern over our use of the word “significant” to describe the reported weaknesses . in their most recent report on internal controls , the oig's independent auditor reported information security as a “reportable condition” at the department . the auditors concluded that “the cumulative effect of these weaknesses represents significant deficiencies in the overall design and operation of internal controls.” based on the findings in our report , the definition of “reportable condition,” and the comments of the independent auditors , we believe the use of the word “significant” is appropriate to describe these weaknesses . hhs also took exception to our conclusion that it had not fully implemented a departmentwide information security program , and stated that our findings instead indicate that the full integration or maturity of the program has not been achieved . fisma requires that agencies develop , document , and implement an information security program . as stated in our report , we acknowledged that hhs has made progress in developing and documenting its program . however , elements of the program have not been fully or consistently implemented .