gao - 06-860 . number of staff that would need to concurrently use dcms during a disaster situation . in planning for the maximum user capacity of dcms , we found that sba relied on data on the volume of disaster loan applications it had received from victims of the most severe disaster in the agency's experience — the northridge , california , earthquake of 1994 — and other agency historical data . if sba had considered information available from disaster simulations and risk modeling firms ( particularly potentially more severe disaster scenarios than the northridge earthquake ) , we concluded that the agency may have acquired additional capacity for dmcs that would have allowed it to process gulf coast hurricane - related applications on a timelier basis . we recommended , among other things , that sba reassess dcms's maximum user capacity based on lessons learned from the gulf coast hurricanes and information from catastrophe risk modeling firms , among other sources . although sba took issue with some of our analysis that supported this recommendation , the agency generally agreed to implement it . we have prepared this second report under the comptroller general's authority to conduct evaluations on his own initiative as part of a continuing effort to assist congress in reviewing how sba's preparedness for future disasters can be enhanced . this report generally focuses on sba's disaster planning and preparations prior to the gulf coast hurricanes for logistical areas other than dcms , such as hiring of additional staff necessary to process applications in large disaster situations , space acquisition , obtaining telecommunication and other necessary technologies , and efforts to inform disaster victims of the agency's relevant loan programs . specifically , our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess sba's logistical planning efforts prior to the gulf coast hurricanes and current disaster planning efforts and ( 2 ) discuss outreach efforts that sba provided to gulf coast hurricane victims . to address the first objective , we reviewed our previous reports and reports from other organizations that have investigated the federal response to the gulf coast hurricanes , including the association of contingency planners and the office of inspector general of the department of homeland security . we also interviewed disaster management experts , sba officials in headquarters and agency field offices , and state officials in mississippi and louisiana . further , we reviewed sba documents that pertain to the agency's disaster planning process . for the second objective , we reviewed sba documentation that describes the agency's outreach efforts during the gulf coast hurricanes and discussed these outreach efforts with sba officials . further , we discussed sba's current plans to evaluate its disaster outreach program with agency officials . appendix i explains our objectives , scope and methodology in greater detail .