id . agencies may not award personal services contracts unless specifically authorized by statute to do so . far § 37.104 ( b ) .” matter of: encore management , inc. , b - 278903.2 , feb. 12 , 1999 . in addition to the contact named above , staff members who made key contributions to this report include robert owens , assistant director ; lisa brownson ; f. abe dymond , assistant general counsel ; tony eason ; frederick evans ; tiffany epperson ; jehan - abdel - gawad ; thomas hackney ; paul kinney ; scott mcnulty ; and meg mills . the academy is headed by a superintendent . the superintendent reports directly to the head of marad , the maritime administrator . marad , an agency of the department , is responsible for overseeing and monitoring the academy . a deputy superintendent and four assistant superintendents — administration , regimental affairs , academic affairs , and plans , assessment , and public affairs — report directly to the superintendent and are the principal officials responsible for carrying out the academy's operations . academy components with respect to the issues discussed in this report include the following . the department of resource management ( drm ) provides bookkeeping , payroll , and other administrative support services for the academy . further , for most of fiscal years 2006 and 2007 , the director of drm was also the head of the fiscal control office ( fco ) nafi . during fiscal years 2006 and 2007 , the director of drm reported to the academy's deputy superintendent . when the position of deputy superintendent was not occupied , the director of drm reported directly to the superintendent . the department of waterfront activities operates the waterfront area of the academy's property , maintains the kings pointer and other training vessels , and provides training to midshipmen . further , the department of waterfront activities collaborates with two nafis on waterfront related activities ( the sail , power and crew association , and the global maritime and transportation school ( gmats ) ) , and the sailing foundation , a private non - profit foundation . the director of waterfront activities reported to the deputy superintendent , or when that position was not occupied , the director reported directly to the superintendent . the department of information technology provides information technology services for all academy operations and midshipmen . the director of information technology reported to the deputy superintendent or when that position was not occupied , the director reported directly to the superintendent . the department of health services provides medical and dental services to midshipmen . the director reported to the assistant superintendent for administration as well as the deputy superintendent or the superintendent . an overview of the organizational relationships of the department of transportation , marad , selected components within the academy , as well as the academy's affiliated nafis and foundations is provided in figure 1 . the academy carries out its mission and operations primarily using appropriated funds . the academy's 14 affiliated nafis operate using the proceeds from their own operations , rather than with appropriated funds .