reducing staff . three grantees we interviewed told us they had reduced the number of staff that administered the cdbg program . for example , officials from one grantee said that the organization had placed a moratorium on hiring cdbg staff , and representatives from another said that the organization had reduced its staff by half and hired a consultant to administer the program . leveraging supplemental funding sources . officials from two grantees told us they had begun paying the salaries of existing staff with non - cdbg funding . for example , one grantee used its local funds to supplement the salaries of cdbg staff . limiting the number and types of projects . three grantees told us that they had limited the number and types of projects they administered to address the reduction in funds . for example , officials from a grantee we contacted told us that they had revisited the consolidated plan to determine which cdbg activities the city could continue to fund and had determined that it could no longer administer its housing rehabilitation program . similarly , an official from another grantee told us that the city had reduced the number of cdbg subrecipients it administered by half and developed a strategy of selecting less administratively burdensome grants . some grantees also said that they selected projects based on the priorities and needs of the communities they served and not on the need to reduce administrative costs , but six indicated that the administrative limit did affect the type of projects they chose . for example , one grantee told us that it did not fund economic development projects under cdbg because it did not have the capacity to administer them . similarly , officials from another grantee told us that funding a planning grant could depend on whether the grantee was close to the limit . in addition , an official from another grantee told us that the staff tried to manage many of their projects through larger subrecipients as a way to mitigate administrative expenses . officials explained that administering a small cdbg grant might not be cost - effective because of the program's complex reporting requirements . incomplete data , technical limitations of idis , and reliance on field office oversight have meant that hud has not routinely assessed compliance with the limit on the use of funds for administration across the program . a recent congressional request for hud to provide information on compliance across the program resulted in a labor - intensive process that we determined produced unreliable results . internal control standards state that information should be recorded and communicated in a form and within a time frame that enables management and others to carry out their internal control and other responsibilities . specifically , internal control guidance states that operating information should be provided to managers so that they may determine whether their programs comply with applicable laws and regulations . the guidance also states that information should be presented appropriately and available on a timely basis to allow for effective monitoring and prompt action if shortcomings are found .