pub . we reported on usps's retiree health prefunding requirements in gao - 13-112 . period of just 10 years , as has sometimes been stated . however , we have reported that the required payments are significantly “frontloaded,” in that the total payments required in the first 10 years ( fiscal years 2007 – 2016 ) were significantly in excess of estimates of what actuarially determined amounts would be . the federal employees' compensation act ( feca ) is the workers' compensation program for federal employees , including usps . feca is managed by the department of labor ( dol ) and provides benefits paid out of the employees' compensation fund to federal employees who sustained injuries or illnesses while performing federal duties . usps funds its workers' compensation under a pay - as - you go system by annually reimbursing dol for all workers' compensation benefits paid to or on behalf of postal employees in the previous year . usps reimbursed dol $1.4 billion for fiscal year 2013 . without congressional action to address usps's benefit funding issues and better align its costs and revenues , usps faces continuing low liquidity levels , insufficient revenues to make annual prefunding payments , and increasing benefit liabilities . deferring funding could increase costs for future ratepayers and increase the possibility that usps may not be able to pay for these costs . usps stated that in the short term , should circumstances leave the agency with insufficient cash , it would be required to implement contingency plans to ensure that mail delivery continues . these measures could require that usps prioritize payments to employees and suppliers ahead of some payments to the federal government . for example , as discussed previously , near the end of fiscal year 2011 , in order to maintain its liquidity usps temporarily halted its regular fers contribution . however , usps has since made up those missed fers payments . according to usps , current projections indicate that it will be unable to make the required $5.7 billion retiree health benefit prefunding payment due in september 2014 . usps has stated that its cash position will worsen in october 2014 when it is required to make an estimated payment of $1.4 billion to dol for its annual workers' compensation reimbursement . usps's statements about its liquidity raise the issue of whether usps will need additional financial help to remain operational while it restructures and , more fundamentally , whether it can remain financially self - sustainable in the long term . we have previously reported that congress and usps need to reach agreement on a comprehensive package of actions to improve usps's financial viability . in previous reports , we have discussed a range of strategies and options , to both reduce costs and enhance revenues , that congress could consider to better align usps costs with revenues and address constraints and legal restrictions that limit usps's ability to reduce costs and improve efficiency . we have also reported that it is important for usps to align its expenses and revenues to avoid even greater financial losses , repay its outstanding debt , and increase capital for investments needed to sustain its national network .