total income . of the 10 waitress returns prepared for us , 3 included the unreported cash tip income . however , only one of the three returns included the correct amount of tip income . total income for the waitress scenario should include income documented on the form w - 2 , as well as the amount of unreported cash tip income offered by our investigator to the paid preparer during the site visit . the two returns that did not include the correct amount of tip income included lesser amounts . waitress scenario , site visit #5 in response to the investigator mentioning her unreported cash tip income , one paid preparer told her that tips not included on the form w - 2 do not need to be reported . total income for the mechanic return should include non - form w - 2 business income — resulting from mechanic work and babysitting conducted outside of a formal employment arrangement — and income from ordinary dividends and capital gains . of the 9 mechanic returns prepared for us , 4 returns included both the business income and the investment income . however , only 3 returns included the correct amounts of business and investment income . incorrectly reporting income often resulted in cascading errors on other lines of the tax return . tax returns that did not include side income had errors in credits that are calculated based on income . for example , if a paid preparer did not report side income in the mechanic scenario , the resulting total income would make the mechanic eligible for the eitc when he otherwise would not be eligible . similarly , because two paid preparers incorrectly chose not to include unreported tip income for the waitress , they selected the wrong type of tax return , the form 1040a . mechanic scenario , site visits #3 and #9 two paid preparers demonstrated what the refund amount would be if the side income were reported compared to if it were not reported . both preparers did not record the side income . itemized or standard deduction . all but one of the 19 returns correctly recorded the most advantageous deduction for the two scenarios . according to irs guidance , taxpayers should itemize deductions when the amount of their deductible expenses is greater than the standard deduction amount . for the waitress scenario , the most advantageous deduction would be the standard deduction for head of household , and for the mechanic scenario , the itemized deductions were more advantageous . one paid preparer chose to use the standard deduction for the mechanic , even though it was approximately $3,000 less than the total amount of the itemized deductions we included in the scenario . our results are summarized in figure 4 . type of tax return . paid preparers completed the correct type of tax return — the form 1040 — for 17 of 19 site visits . two paid preparers incorrectly completed the form 1040a for the waitress scenario . the form 1040a should not have been used because the waitress received tip income that was not reported to her employer . dividend and capital gains income . preparers recorded the income correctly on 8 of 9 returns .