dod concurred with this recommendation . in may and september of 2003 , dod implemented two web - based surveys of reservists to collect data on mobilization issues , such as income change . dod has tabulated the survey results and expects to issue a report with its analysis of the results by july 2004 . we anticipate issuing a report addressing these questions in september 2004 . while we have not specifically reviewed the use of reenlistment bonuses for reservists , our work has shown that dod could improve the management and oversight of the srb program with more methodologically rigorous evaluations . the srb program is intended to help the services retain enlisted personnel in critical occupational specialties , such as linguists and information technology specialists . concerned about missing their overall retention goals in the late 1990s , all the services expanded their use of srbs to help retain more active duty enlisted personnel . there were increases in the number of specialties that the services made eligible for the bonuses and in the number of bonus recipients . the air force , for example , awarded bonuses to 158 specialties ( 80 percent of total specialties ) in fiscal year 2001 , up from 68 specialties ( 35 percent of total specialties ) in fiscal year 1997 . during this time period , the number of active duty air force reenlistees receiving bonuses increased from 3,612 ( 8 percent of total reenlistees ) to 17,336 ( 42 percent of total reenlistees ) . as a result of the services' expanded use of srbs for active duty personnel , the cost of the program more than doubled — from $308 million in fiscal year 1997 to $791 million in fiscal year 2002 . the srb budget was expected to rise to over $800 million in fiscal year 2005 . about 44 percent of the srb budget growth over the 1997 to 2005 period is attributable to increases in the air force srb budget . despite increased use of the srb program , dod has cited continued retention problems in specialized occupations such as air traffic controller , linguist , and information technology specialist . in november 2003 , we reviewed a congressionally directed dod report to the congress on the program and found that dod had not thoroughly addressed four of the five concerns raised by the congress . as a result , the congress did not have sufficient information to determine if the program was being managed effectively and efficiently . more specifically , dod did not directly address the srb program's effectiveness or efficiency in correcting shortfalls in critical occupations . dod had not issued replacement program guidance for ensuring that the program targets only critical specialties that impact readiness . dod did not address an important change — the potential elimination of the requirement for conducting annual reviews . we were told that the new guidance will require periodic reviews , but neither the frequency nor the details of how these reviews would be conducted was explained . dod did not describe the steps it would take to match program execution with appropriated funding .