ii ) . as the authorized period under tea - 21 draws to a close in 2003 , congress will need to make decisions about reauthorizing the surface transportation programs , including requirements related to selling , leasing , and disposing of real property . as agreed with your staff , this report discusses ( 1 ) the extent to which states are selling , leasing , or disposing of real property purchased with federal - aid funds and ( 2 ) how the proceeds generated from the sale or lease of real property are being used , including whether they are being used in accordance with tea - 21 . to determine the extent to which states are selling , leasing , or disposing of real property purchased with federal - aid highway funds , we obtained information from fhwa officials and surveyed 51 state dots , including the district of columbia . we then compared fiscal years 1999 and 2000 total proceeds reported by each state from the sale or lease of real property with the states' total highway receipts reported by dot . we obtained information from state dots about how they use the proceeds generated from the sale or lease of real property and about any restrictions they placed on the proceeds , and we compared these responses with our legal opinion . we also obtained information from officials of the dot inspector general's office regarding their review of massachusetts' central artery project that had initially raised concerns about fhwa's interpretation of tea - 21 changes related to sales and leases of real property . we conducted our review from june 2002 through december 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government audit standards . in our recent legal opinion , we reviewed the statutory provisions governing the disposition of the proceeds from the sale or lease of real property acquired with federal highway grant funds and fhwa's interpretation of that provision . fhwa issued regulations in 1999 implementing real property management policies in conjunction with the federal - aid highway program , which we reviewed . we disagreed with fhwa's interpretation of the law . we concluded that congress did not intend for states to convert federal money to state money by buying and selling property and / or use the federal share of recaptured funds to reduce or avoid their obligation to provide matching funds . dot's inspector general raised similar concerns about fhwa's interpretation of the federal law governing the proceeds from the sale or lease of real property in its report regarding the finance plan for the central artery tunnel project in massachusetts . in its report , the dot inspector general questioned whether the proceeds derived from the sale of excess properties purchased with federal - aid highway funds should be counted against the $8.549 billion cap imposed by congress on federal contributions to the central artery tunnel project . further , the dot inspector general found that massachusetts intended to sell land , originally purchased with federal aid , on which it had temporarily located its project headquarters , reinvesting the money in the project as “state funds.” the sale of the project headquarters is expected to generate about $100 million .