( see fig . three states ( indiana , iowa , and arizona ) reported undertaking efforts to exclude the nemt benefit under a demonstration as part of a broader health care initiative to expand medicaid in their respective states . however , only indiana and iowa had received approval from hhs for these waivers as of september 30 , 2015 , while arizona was still seeking approval . indiana: indiana's effort to exclude the nemt benefit from coverage pre - dates ppaca and is not specific to newly eligible enrollees under the state's expansion . other research reiterates the effect that a lack of transportation can have on access . for example , one study cited an estimate that approximately 3.6 million americans miss or delay care because they lack appropriate transportation to reach their medical appointments . another study noted that for poorer populations , which tend to encounter more barriers to accessing health care generally , transportation can be a significant issue to accessing care . given that transportation limitations can disproportionately affect low - income individuals' access to medical services , medicaid's nemt benefit can serve as an important safety net for program enrollees . under the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) , states can opt to expand eligibility for medicaid to most non - elderly , non - pregnant adults who are not eligible for medicare , and whose incomes are at or below 133 percent of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) . the decision whether to expand medicaid can be a complex consideration for states , involving competing interests , as well as decisions about the structure and content of states' programs — such as the scope of benefits offered to newly eligible medicaid enrollees . although states are required to ensure necessary transportation to and from providers for newly eligible enrollees covered through their state plans , some states have received approval to expand medicaid coverage through demonstration projects under section 1115 of the social security act . under this authority , states may obtain a waiver to exclude the nemt benefit for newly eligible enrollees . as of september 2015 , 30 states had expanded medicaid eligibility , some through demonstrations . arizona: when arizona expanded medicaid in january 2014 , it had not sought to exclude the nemt benefit for newly eligible enrollees . however , when the state submitted a request on september 30 , 2015 , to extend its longstanding demonstration , it sought approval to exclude the nemt benefit . arizona's proposed extension would require newly eligible adults , including those with incomes from 100 to 133 percent of the fpl , to enroll in a new medicaid program that includes enrollee contributions into an account that can be used for non - covered services and an employment incentive program . the proposed extension , including the request to exclude the nemt benefit , was under review , as of november 2015 . officials from these three states cited several reasons for their efforts to exclude the nemt benefit , including a desire to align medicaid benefits with private insurance plans , which typically do not cover this benefit .