postal service ( usps ) . as requested , my statement addresses the following: 1 . usps's financial condition and outlook . options and actions to help usps remain financially viable in the short and long term . we conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . usps's financial condition has continued to deteriorate in the first 5 months of fiscal year 2009 and usps expects its financial condition to continue deteriorating for the rest of the fiscal year , including: accelerating declines in mail volume after the first quarter , with a total decline of about 11 billion pieces ; and accelerating losses after the first quarter , with a total loss of about $2 billion . usps has updated its projections for fiscal year 2009 , projecting a mail volume decline by a record 22.7 billion pieces ( 11.2 percent ) from fiscal year 2008 ; a record $6.4 billion net loss , and an unprecedented $1.5 billion cash shortfall ( i.e. , insufficient cash to cover expenses and obligations ) , assuming cost - cutting targets of $5.9 billion are achieved ; and plans to increase outstanding debt by $3 billion ( the annual statutory limit ) to $10.2 billion , or two - thirds of the total $15 billion statutory limit . usps attributes much of its net loss this fiscal year to the economic recession that has resulted in unprecedented declines in mail volume and decreased revenues . thus far in fiscal year 2009 , first - class mail volume ( eg , correspondence , bills , payments , and statements ) dropped about 9 percent , while standard mail volume ( primarily advertising ) dropped about 15 percent . according to usps , the housing market downturn , the credit crisis , and lower retail sales have contributed to these volume declines . the financial and housing sectors are major mail users , mailing bills , statements , and advertising such as credit card , mortgage , and home equity solicitations . usps has taken steps to address our recommendations and , thus , should be positioned to take action . in addition , it is imperative for usps and congress to take informed action to review mail use , what future postal services will be needed , and what operational and statutory options are available to provide those services . key areas with options include: universal postal service: a recently completed prc study identified options for universal service and trade - offs involving quality and costs . when usps asked congress in january 2009 to eliminate the long - standing statutory provision mandating 6-day delivery , it provided little information on where it would reduce delivery frequency , and the potential impact on cost , mail volume , revenue , and mail users .