this enhancement has been implemented . removable electronic media have been placed in separate storage and in an accountability system , and inventories have been completed . the requirement for separate storage was rescinded on october 2 , 2000 , because it was believed that security measures already in place were adequate and that separate storage did not provide more security . the fifth enhancement required that classified equipment and information belonging to the nuclear emergency search team and accident response group be kept in separate storage , be placed in accountability , and be inventoried . this requirement has been completed at both sandia and los alamos national laboratories . finally , under the sixth enhancement , certain classified electronic media were required to be encrypted . both laboratories had implemented this requirement to the extent possible . part of the enhancement covered databases deployed with doe emergency response teams . encryption technologies for classified electronic media must be approved by the national security agency . there is a national security agency - approved encryption technology for one of the computer operating systems that the laboratories use for these databases and encryption is in place on that system at both laboratories . another part of the enhancement covered highly classified information on other computer operating systems . however , all computer systems could not be encrypted because the national security agency has not approved encryption software for these other computer operating systems . the agency has told doe that it is working on a hardware - based solution and that the time frame for availability is not currently known . in the meantime , those systems may be encrypted with an interim solution software until the national security agency's hardware - based solution is available . recent inspections by doe's office of independent oversight and performance assurance and surveys by doe's albuquerque operations office generally had similar observations on access , need to know , and the june 2000 enhancements . an october 2000 report by the office of independent oversight and performance assurance on sandia national laboratory did not cite any problems related to implementation of doe vault or classified computer network access or need - to - know requirements . the report also indicated that the june 2000 security enhancements had been implemented at the sandia national laboratory . a july 2000 albuquerque operations office survey report on the sandia national laboratory similarly had no vault or computer network access or need - to - know findings and found that the laboratory had successfully implemented the doe - mandated enhanced protection measures . in august 2000 , reporting on the los alamos national laboratory , doe's office of independent oversight and performance assurance had no specific recommendations concerning compliance with doe access or need - to - know requirements . the office also found that los alamos national laboratory had completed the former secretary of energy's june 2000 security enhancements . the albuquerque operations office september 2000 security survey at los alamos national laboratory inspected containers storing classified documents and had no findings . that survey did not review the security enhancements . we found that line managers at the laboratories were making and approving need - to - know determinations in accordance with doe's requirements .