( see table 1. ) in addition , fra's regional offices include safety specialists and program managers for highway - rail grade crossing safety and trespass prevention . in contrast , officials from two rail labor organizations we spoke with stated that technological advances , such as the use of automated sensors , should supplement or enhance inspection capabilities and not replace physical inspections . fra supplements oversight of class i railroads through the railroad system oversight program , established in october 2005 . in addition to addressing safety compliance issues , this program addresses safety issues not subject to regulation , such as aspects of worker fatigue . under this program , the agency assigns an fra manager to work with each class i railroad on identifying and resolving safety issues . in addition , the volpe national transportation systems center is conducting a study of trespasser problems in west palm beach , florida . railroads also face a variety of ongoing adverse weather conditions that affect safety for railroad crews , passengers , and the communities they serve and run through . extreme heat or cold , floods , tornadoes , wildfires and hurricanes can affect rail operations and infrastructure . for example , during periods of extreme heat , railroad tracks ( especially newer “continuously - welded” railroad tracks ) can expand out of alignment without warning causing train derailments . during periods of extreme cold , tracks may contract causing the rails to break as well . to counter these threats , fra has certain regulations related to weather conditions , such as standards related to bridge safety and track safety , when adverse weather events such as fires , floods , and extreme heat conditions could affect the rail infrastructure . railroads we spoke with have also established procedures for weather - related risks , including very specific operating practices to be followed during or prior to these adverse weather events . for example , railroads we interviewed commonly reduce speeds during periods of extreme heat or cold to avoid derailments due to track misalignment or broken rails ( see fig . 5 below for examples of the effects of adverse weather on railroad track ) . fra has worked with the railroad industry through the rsac process to determine what measures need to be taken to prevent the effects of adverse weather on continuous welded rails . fra faces an emerging challenge in dealing with expected increases in freight rail traffic . fra has estimated that the amount of freight shipped in the united states would increase by 1.1 billion tons ( about 9 percent ) across all modes from 2010 to 2020 , with about 176 million tons of the increased amount shipped by rail . according to the association of american railroads , this includes the rapid increase in freight rail traffic related to energy production , both in the transport of materials such as sand for use in hydraulic fracturing and the shipment of crude oil from oil fields . for example , crude oil shipments by rail increased from 9,500 carloads in 2009 to almost 234,000 carloads in 2012 .