will be reported annually . refers to the street / delivery address for the asset or the latitude and longitude coordinates . either of the following will be provided for the constructed asset or parcel of land: street address ; or latitude and longitude ( if no security concerns ) . a code that is unique to an item of real property that will allow for linkages to other information systems . ( app . ii contains information on selected enhanced real property authorities for major real property - holding agencies. ) provides the two - digit glc for the state associated with the reported main location in which the land parcel , building , or structure is located . provides the three - digit glc for the country associated with the reported main location in which the land parcel , building , or structure is located . provides the three - digit glc for the county associated with the reported main location in which the land parcel , building , or structure is located . provides the value for the congressional district associated with the reported main location in which the land parcel , building , or structure is located . provides the five - digit zip code associated with the reported main location in which the land parcel , building , or structure is located and , if known , the additional four - digit zip code suffix . installation / subinstallation identifier headquarters installations – land , buildings , other structures , and facilities , or any combination of these . examples of installations are a national forest , national park , hydroelectric project , office building , warehouse building , border station , base , post , camp , or an unimproved site . it is important to note that real property data contained in the financial statements of the u.s. government have also been problematic . the cfo act , as expanded by the government management reform act , requires the annual preparation and audit of individual financial statements for the federal government's 24 major agencies . the department of the treasury is also required to compile consolidated financial statements for the u.s. government annually , which we audit . in march 2006 , we reported that — for the ninth consecutive year — certain material weaknesses in internal control and in selected accounting and financial reporting practices resulted in conditions that continued to prevent us from being able to provide the congress and the american people with an opinion as to whether the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government were fairly stated in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles . we also reported that the federal government did not maintain effective internal control over financial reporting ( including safeguarding assets ) and compliance with significant laws and regulations as of september 30 , 2005 . while agencies have made significant progress in collecting the data elements from their real property inventory databases for the frpp , data reliability is still a problem at some of the major real property - holding agencies and agencies lack a standard framework for assessing the validity of data used to populate the frpp .