we believe that we have done so . as we noted in our report , we did not make direct analytical comparisons between compensation and benefits offered by dod to deployed federal civilian and military personnel because such comparisons must account for the demands of the military service , such as involuntary relocation , frequent and lengthy separations from family , and liability for combat . dod provided other technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . the department's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix iii . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking minority member , senate committee on armed services ; the chairman and ranking minority member , house committee on armed services ; the chairman and ranking minority member , subcommittee on defense , senate committee on appropriations ; and the chairman and ranking minority member , subcommittee on defense , house committee on appropriations ; and other interested congressional parties . we are also sending copies to the secretary of defense and the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness . we will make copies available to other interested parties upon request . copies of this report will also be made available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or by e - mail at melvinv@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . to assess the extent to which dod has established force health protection and surveillance policies for dod federal civilians who deploy outside of the united states in support of contingency operations , and how the components ( military services and the defense contract management agency ) have implemented those policies , we reviewed pertinent force health protection and surveillance policies and discussed these policies with the following offices or commands: u.s. central command ; joint chiefs of staff , manpower and personnel ; under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness ( including the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs , deployment health support directorate ; civilian personnel policy ; and civilian personnel management services ) ; the surgeons general for the army , navy , and air force ; and the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) . our review focused on dod federal civilians who ( 1 ) deployed to afghanistan or iraq for 30 continuous days or more between june 1 , 2003 , and september 30 , 2005 , and ( 2 ) returned to the united states by february 28 , 2006 . because dod had difficulty identifying the total number of federal civilians who deployed to afghanistan or iraq , we assessed the implementation of dod's deployment health requirements at eight component locations that were selected using a number of approaches . given that dod components have flexibility in where they conduct deployment processing , we selected locations for our review accordingly .