( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the secretary of the department of homeland security and the administrator of the federal emergency management agency for review and comment . fema denied the appeal in august 2017 . state emergency management officials we interviewed provided an additional example wherein a small town had applied for pa grant funding to rebuild a retaining wall and roadway following damage caused by hurricane irene . dhs estimated that this effort would be completed by february 28 , 2019 . regarding our third recommendation , that fema develop a detailed workforce plan for hiring , training and retaining key appeals staff , dhs stated that by december 31 , 2018 , paab will produce a workload flow assessment on second - level appeals staffing and determine whether appeal timeliness issues still exist . if paab determines that significant response timeliness issues on second - level appeals still exist after most paab appeal analyst staff have at least one year of experience , a detailed paab workforce plan will be completed and finalized by december 31 , 2019 . paab will also complete an assessment of first - level appeal inventory and timeliness issues . if paab determines that significant regional response inventory and timeliness issues on first - level appeals still exist , fema will create a working group to prepare a detailed regional workforce plan . dhs estimated that this effort would be completed by december 31 , 2019 . regarding our fourth recommendation that fema work with regional administrators to establish and use performance goals and measures for processing first - level appeals , dhs stated that paab has begun developing a methodology for establishing , measuring , and reporting on first - level appeals processing goals and performance progress , and that paab would work with the regions to complete and finalize this methodology . dhs estimated that this effort would be completed by august 31 , 2018 . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security and interested congressional committees . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or bawdena@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report reviews aspects of the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) management of the public assistance ( pa ) appeals process . the objectives of this review were to determine: ( 1 ) the extent to which fema ensures quality in its data on appeals and what fema data show about its appeals inventory and timeliness for appeals decisions ; ( 2 ) what steps fema has taken to improve its management of the appeals process and what challenges , if any , remain ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which fema has developed goals and measures to assess the appeal program's performance .