the tribal court was established in 1959 . the navajo nation criminal code was created in 1959 and has been amended as necessary . the legislative council , within the legislative branch , is responsible for updating the code . the court system has rules of judicial conduct , criminal procedure , as well as rules of evidence . to what extent have doi and doj components collaborated with each other to support tribal justice systems ? to identify the challenges facing tribes in adjudicating criminal matters in indian country and federal efforts that exist to help address those challenges , we met with tribal justice officials such as judges , prosecutors , law enforcement officers , and court administrators from a nonprobability sample of 12 federally recognized tribes in arizona , new mexico , north dakota , and south dakota . we selected the tribes based on several considerations such as reservation and land size , types of tribal court structures , and number of indian country criminal matters referred to the usao . given the breadth of public safety and justice issues underlying the requests for this work as well as the recently enacted tloa , we focused on criminal rather than civil law matters within the tribes selected for review . while the results of these interviews cannot be generalized to reflect the views of all federally recognized tribes across the united states , the information obtained provided us with useful information on the perspectives of various tribes about the challenges they face in adjudicating criminal matters . additionally , we reviewed existing law , including the recently enacted tloa , to identify federal efforts to help support tribes' efforts to adjudicate criminal matters in indian country . what challenges do tribes face in adjudicating crime in indian country and what federal efforts exist to help address those challenges ? we also interviewed officials and obtained documents from the bia and various doj components such as the fbi , the executive office of u.s . to assess the extent to which doi and doj collaborate with each other to support tribal justice systems , we identified practices that our previous work indicated can help enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies . in this report , we primarily focused on tribal courts and , to some extent , tribal detention programs . we compared the two agencies' efforts to share information on their tribal justice programs to select criteria in standards for internal control in the federal government as well as select criteria on effective interagency collaboration . we also analyzed doi and doj documents — such as tribal consultation and coordination plans — that describe the two agencies' efforts to consult and coordinate with each other on public safety and justice issues . further , we interviewed officials from doi and doj components including doi's office of justice services and doj's office of tribal justice and office of justice programs ( ojp ) to determine the extent to which they had ( 1 ) implemented the practices we identified for effective interagency collaboration , and ( 2 ) identified and shared information that could be beneficial in addressing public safety and justice in indian country .