in some possible . however , in general , we were able to match the baker & o'brien fuel with these regulations . frequency o our other data were either monthly or quarterly , so we had to parse out th lower frequency observations accordingly . f data . except for our weekly wholesale gasoline price data , geographic level of a but some of the data we used were at a more aggregated geographic leve we used capacity utilization and inventory - sales ratio data at the padd level . we did not have a measure of city - level sales data to determine the e to a local market , nor is there a relevant size of inventories relativ measure of capacity utilization at city - level , therefore , padd - level d were used. we addressed the following questions during our review: ( 1 ) how have refinery outages affected u.s. wholesale gasoline prices since 2002 ? ( 2 ) to what extent do available federal data allow for the evaluation of the impacts of refinery outages on petroleum product prices , and do these data reflect emerging trends in petroleum product markets that may be important to future analytical needs ? for the purposes of this report , we define the various types of outages as follows: planned outages are p processing units or possibly the entire refinery to perform maintenance , inspection , and repair of equipment or to replace process materials and equipment that have worn out or broken , in order to ensure safe and efficient operations . eriodic shutdowns of one or more refinery unplanned outages are events where an entire unit or refinery must be brought down immediately and without advance notice and are caused by unplanned circumstances such as a fire or a power outage . to determine trends in refinery outages over the time period from 2002 through september 2008 , we purchased data from industrial information resources , inc. ( iir ) that contained detailed information on refinery outages , including the estimated dates of the outages , whether the outages were planned or unplanned , and the amount of reduced production capacity due to each outage . we evaluated the data and found they provide reliable estimates of outages from 2002 onward . in our analysis , we counted an outage event as the halting of production capacity on any piece of equipment at the refinery ; where multiple units such as a crude distillation and one or more secondary processing units were simultaneously down , we counted this as a single outage event in our model . to evaluate how refinery outages have affected u.s. wholesale gasoline prices we obtained and analyzed data from energy information administration ( eia ) 's monthly refinery production survey form , eia - 810 , from 2002 through 2006 , and other eia surveys .