the metric . the department of homeland security provided rates for cocaine , methamphetamine , marijuana , and heroin for fiscal years 2012 through 2016 . limitations none identified . additional information none . additional information and planned actions by the department of homeland security dhs reported that sector - level estimates of unlawful entries and attempts are projected to be available in its 2019 annual border security metrics report to congress . to what extent has dhs reported metrics as outlined in the ndaa using quality information ? to what extent has dhs validated the assumptions and conveyed statistical uncertainty for its unlawful entry metrics ? to determine the extent to which dhs reported metrics outlined in the ndaa using quality information , we first determined which of the 43 metrics dhs included in its first annual report and which it did not . for metrics dhs included , we identified the specific data sources and sets dhs used to develop them , such as administrative data collected by dhs components ( eg , data on apprehensions , poe wait times , drug seizures , and flight hours ) . we also interviewed officials from dhs offices and components involved in developing the metrics , including the office of immigration statistics ( ois ) , u.s. customs and border protection's ( cbp ) office of field operations , u.s. border patrol ( border patrol ) , and air and marine operations ( amo ) ; and the u.s. coast guard ( coast guard ) . in these interviews we obtained information about the methodologies dhs components used to develop the metrics , including any limitations they identified and their plans to update or revise existing metrics in the future . to determine the extent to which dhs reported metrics as outlined in the ndaa , we assessed how , if at all , the metrics dhs presented and the methods dhs used to calculate the metrics were similar to , or different from , the metrics listed in the ndaa . where we identified clear differences between the metrics dhs reported and those described in the ndaa , we reviewed documentation and obtained additional perspectives from dhs officials , as necessary , to determine the reasons for the differences . to determine the quality of the information used for the metrics , we assessed the extent to which dhs has processes to ensure data reliability and quality . specifically , we reviewed any of our ongoing or completed work relevant to the metrics , relevant dhs office of inspector general ( oig ) reports , and the metrics included in dhs's annual performance reports to determine which data we had previously assessed or which had been assessed by the oig or dhs , and the results of those assessments . for data that had not previously been assessed , we collected information from dhs to determine what processes are in place to ensure the overall reliability and quality of the data . we reviewed this information to determine the extent to which dhs's processes are consistent with standards for internal control in the federal government , good practices for verifying and validating performance information we have identified in our prior work , and dhs's management directive on information quality .