awareness . the military service components conduct general awareness advertising to inform members of an audience about the opportunity to serve in the military and the distinct characteristics of each military service . the components typically pursue awareness through traditional advertising formats such as television commercials , print advertisements , and banners at events or signs within a community . engagement . advertising focused on building engagement targets individuals who are aware of the military as a career option and have begun to consider the possibility of enlisting . during this phase , the components seek to provide recruits with additional information to aid in their decision - making process . often this phase of advertising takes place in the digital environment , as components seek to provide informative social media posts and use banner advertisements to attract individuals to visit their websites for more information . figure 2 describes a variety of digital advertising activities conducted by the components . lead generation . lead generation advertising targets individuals who have considered military service and are ready to discuss the possibility of enlistment . as such , lead generation activities seek to encourage these individuals to provide their contact information in order to schedule an opportunity to meet with a recruiter . lead generation is often conducted in person , such as through recruiters' presence at events like career fairs or sports games . lead generation may also be conducted through other means — such as direct mail and online or print classified advertisements — as long as the advertisement features a “call to action” intended to prompt viewers to provide their contact information . further , the military services often employ the use of “mobile assets,” such as large trucks and trailers fitted with equipment and activities intended to draw crowds and encourage and facilitate public interaction with a recruiter at an event in order to generate leads . figure 3 shows some examples of various types of military service advertising used for recruiting purposes , such as mobile assets used at recruiting events to advertise a specific military service , digital advertising on social media , and print brochures . dod has taken steps to coordinate some advertising activities among the military service components . within the military departments , there are seven military service component advertising programs ( see app . ii for more details ) that compete to attract recruits from a relatively small pool of individuals that are eligible for military service . private sector advertising industry experts we spoke to emphasized the importance of maintaining a unique brand and strategy for each of the service components when there is competition for a target audience . according to dod officials , each component works to develop a unique brand that differentiates the military services in order to compete for potential recruits . while industry experts stated that competition is inherent to advertising , these experts also stated that coordination can sometimes be beneficial to increase efficiencies and effectiveness , and that dod could pursue greater coordination in some instances to help address any inefficiencies . despite the competition that exists among the military components' advertising programs , dod has coordinated certain advertising activities .