( see app . in 2013 , phmsa decided not to renew another state pipeline safety agency's interstate agent agreement , citing the state agency's inability to staff its program properly , among other things . while temporary interstate agreements provide an opportunity to participate in interstate pipeline oversight , officials from some state agencies told us that the agreement's limited scope and ad hoc nature can create obstacles to state participation . for instance , in states without an interstate agent agreement , state inspectors' day - to - day work focuses exclusively on intrastate pipeline oversight activities . in the event phmsa requested assistance with certain interstate inspections , state inspectors may be unfamiliar with the interstate pipeline systems and operators . as a result , some state officials said that their inspectors may have a steep learning curve when conducting inspections under a temporary interstate agreement . however , phmsa officials disagreed that most interstate agent states would have such steep learning curve because they currently inspect intrastate transmission pipelines ; the regulations for interstate and intrastate pipelines are for the most part identical . another obstacle some state officials identified relates to the fact that state pipeline safety agencies may not have sufficient inspection staff available , when needed , to participate in ad hoc interstate inspections . due to the limited state role and competing priorities , state pipeline safety agencies rarely enter into temporary interstate agreements . according to officials in five of the 6 states that have that have entered into temporary interstate agreements , the agreements were used for limited , ad hoc inspections that were initiated by phmsa . the sixth temporary interstate agreement was initiated by phmsa in lieu of the virginia pipeline safety agency's 2017 application for an interstate agent agreement for natural gas . phmsa offered to enter into a longer - term , temporary interstate agreement , which would permit the state agency to inspect the installation of two large interstate pipeline systems . the state agency accepted the temporary interstate agreement , which may be extended annually until the completion of the pipeline construction . to meet its new interstate inspection obligations , the state agency told us it hired two additional inspectors . according to state officials , those two inspectors will be dedicated to intrastate pipeline inspection , which will allow two of the state agency's more experienced inspectors to conduct interstate pipeline inspections . current interstate agents do not consider temporary interstate agreements to be an adequate substitute for an interstate agent agreement . according to officials we spoke with that are currently interstate agents , an interstate agent agreement allows state agencies and their inspectors to develop a strong understanding of operators and pipelines within their state . a few state officials stressed that the greatest benefit of interstate agent status was the ability to leverage their local knowledge — such as the proximity and familiarity with interstate pipelines within their states — to allow for quick responses to public concerns and pipeline incidents .