iii ) . the expert panel included former federal officials , academics , and private - sector executives . their suggested improvements are intended to address many of the information security vulnerabilities facing both private and public organizations , including federal agencies . among these improvements are recommendations to develop a national strategy that clearly articulates strategic objectives , goals , and priorities and to establish a governance structure for strategy implementation . due to increasing cyber security threats , the federal government has initiated several efforts to protect federal information and information systems . recognizing the need for common solutions to improving security , the white house , omb , and federal agencies have launched or continued several governmentwide initiatives that are intended to enhance information security at federal agencies . these key initiatives are discussed here . 60-day cyber review: the national security council and homeland security council recently completed a 60-day interagency review intended to develop a strategic framework to ensure that federal cyber security initiatives are appropriately integrated , resourced , and coordinated with congress and the private sector . the resulting report recommended , among other things , appointing an official in the white house to coordinate the nation's cybersecurity policies and activities , creating a new national cybersecurity strategy , and developing a framework for cyber research and development . comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative: in january 2008 , president bush began to implement a series of initiatives aimed primarily at improving the department of homeland security and other federal agencies' efforts to protect against intrusion attempts and anticipate future threats . while these initiatives have not been made public , the director of national intelligence stated that they include defensive , offensive , research and development , and counterintelligence efforts , as well as a project to improve public / private partnerships . the information systems security line of business: the goal of this initiative , led by omb , is to improve the level of information systems security across government agencies and reduce costs by sharing common processes and functions for managing information systems security . several agencies have been designated as service providers for it security awareness training and fisma reporting . federal desktop core configuration: for this initiative , omb directed agencies that have windows xp deployed and plan to upgrade to windows vista operating systems to adopt the security configurations developed by the national institute of standards and technology , department of defense , and department of homeland security . the goal of this initiative is to improve information security and reduce overall it operating costs . smartbuy: this program , led by the general services administration , is to support enterprise - level software management through the aggregate buying of commercial software governmentwide in an effort to achieve cost savings through volume discounts . the smartbuy initiative was expanded to include commercial off - the - shelf encryption software and to permit all federal agencies to participate in the program . the initiative is to also include licenses for information assurance . trusted internet connections initiative: this effort , directed by omb and led by the department of homeland security , is designed to optimize individual agency network services into a common solution for the federal government .