( see fig . in 2013 , we reported that dod had continued to make improvements , particularly by taking steps to establish a portfolio - based approach to reviewing and certifying its defense business systems . however , among other things , we also found that the bea and etp were still missing important content and bea and business process reengineering certifications were not validated . we made additional recommendations in these areas , and the department partially agreed with our recommendations . in addition , our most recent high - risk report noted that , while dod's capability and performance relative to business systems modernization had improved , significant challenges remained . for example , the department had not fully defined and established a family of management controls , such as corporate and component business architectures and business system investment management processes . of these 2,329 business systems , 1,180 are covered by the act's certification and approval requirements . dod currently bears responsibility , in whole or in part , for 15 of the 30 programs across the federal government that we have designated as high risk . seven of these areas are specific to the department , and eight other high - risk areas are shared with other federal agencies . collectively , these high - risk areas relate to dod's major business operations that are inextricably linked to the department's ability to perform its overall mission and directly affect the readiness and capabilities of u.s. military forces and can affect the success of a mission . in particular , the department's nonintegrated and duplicative systems impair its ability to combat fraud , waste , and abuse . consequently , dod's business systems modernization is one of the department's specific high - risk areas and is essential for addressing many of the department's other high - risk areas . for example , modernized business systems are integral to the department's efforts to address its financial , supply chain , and information security management high - risk areas . congress included provisions in the ndaa , as amended , that are aimed at ensuring dod's development of a well - defined bea and associated etp , as well as the establishment and implementation of effective investment management structures and processes . the act requires dod to , among other things , establish an investment approval and accountability structure along with an investment review process , not obligate funds for a defense business system program with a total cost in excess of $1 million unless the approval authority certifies that the business system program meets specified conditions , develop a bea that covers all defense business systems , develop an etp for implementing the architecture , and identify systems information in dod's annual budget submissions . the act also requires that the secretary of defense annually submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the department's compliance with these provisions . dod submitted its annual report to congress in march 2014 , describing steps taken , under way , and planned to address the act's requirements .