vol . vanderhei , jack , “retirement income adequacy for boomers and gen xers: evidence from the 2012 ebri retirement security projection model.” employee benefit research institute , notes , vol . 5 ( may 2012 ) . michael collins ( assistant director ) , mark glickman , shilpa grover , and laura hoffrey made key contributions to this report . what financial resources do workers approaching retirement and current retirees have ? what evidence do studies and surveys provide about retirement security for workers and retirees ? to describe the financial resources of near and current retirees , we examined financial information from the 2013 survey of consumer finances ( scf ) . the scf is a triennial survey of household assets and income from the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) . the 2013 scf surveyed 6,026 u.s. households about their pensions , incomes , asset holdings and debts , and demographic information . the scf is conducted using a dual - frame sample design . one part of the design is a standard , multistage area - probability design , while the second part is a special over - sample of relatively wealthy households . this is done in order to accurately capture financial information about the population at large as well as characteristics specific to the relatively wealthy . the two parts of the sample are adjusted for sample nonresponse and combined using weights to make estimates from the survey data representative of households overall . in addition , the scf excludes people included in the forbes magazine list of the 400 wealthiest people in the united states . furthermore , the 2013 scf dropped 11 observations from the public data set that had net worth at least equal to the minimum level needed to qualify for the forbes list . we found the 2013 scf to be reliable for the purposes of our report . while the scf is a widely used federal data source , we conducted an assessment to ensure its reliability . specifically , we reviewed related documentation and internal controls , spoke with agency officials , and conducted electronic testing . when we learned that particular estimates were not reliable for our purposes – such as estimates of future db income – or had sample sizes too small to produce reliable estimates , we did not use them . nonetheless , the scf and other surveys that are based on self - reported data are subject to nonsampling error , including the inability to get information about all sample cases ; difficulties of definition ; differences in the interpretation of questions ; respondents' inability or unwillingness to provide correct information ; and errors made in collecting , recording , coding , and processing data . these nonsampling errors can influence the accuracy of information presented in the report , although the magnitude of their effect is not known . estimates from the scf are also subject to some sampling error since the 2013 scf sample is one of a large number of random samples that might have been drawn . since each possible sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of the sample results as 95 percent confidence intervals .