outcomes not available at the time of our review . legend: contract met or mostly met the criteria ; contract partially met the criteria ; contract did not meet the criteria . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . my statement is based on our report that is being released today . this report focused on contracts for major investments with complex service acquisitions at the coast guard , customs and border protection ( cbp ) , and the transportation security administration ( tsa ) — three of the dhs components reporting among the highest obligations for performance - based service acquisitions in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 . dhs noted that the contractor met the requirements , but the project did not fully meet dhs's needs and the technology will not be replicated in future sbinet development . contractor exceeded the performance standard for machine downtime with a score 1 hour less than required and operated at cost through the second quarter of fiscal year 2007 . contractor exceeded most performance standards ; for example , threat detection performance and false alarm rates exceeded the quality standards . contractor had cost underrun of 2.2 percent ( $677,000 ) . we conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . over the last decade , the use of federal service contracting has increased and now accounts for over 60 percent of federal procurement dollars spent annually . a performance - based approach to federal service contracting was introduced during the 1990s , representing a shift from specifying the way in which contractors should perform work to specifying acquisition outcomes . regardless of the contracting method , focusing on outcomes and collaboration among multiple stakeholders in the contracting process has been acknowledged as sound contract management . in 2000 , federal procurement law established a performance - based approach as the preferred acquisition method for services . the federal acquisition regulation requires all performance - based service acquisitions to include a performance work statement that describes outcome - oriented requirements in terms of results required rather than the methods of performance of the work ; measurable performance standards describing how to measure contractor performance in terms of quality , timeliness , and quantity ; and the method of assessing contract performance against performance standards , commonly accomplished through the use of a quality assurance surveillance plan .