most carriers are not reviewed . safety audits began in 2003 , and since these audits are targeted at new entrants , they do not affect companies in business earlier than 2003 . fmcsa compliance reviews only reach approximately 2 percent of carriers each year . owner - operators and small carriers are less likely than larger companies to be selected for a compliance review . several associations told us that small carriers may be less likely to comply with the drug testing regulations because they may have less understanding of their responsibilities , and because they have less incentive to comply , given the rarity in which they will be visited by fmcsa or state investigators . oversight of service agents is lacking . except in the case of specific allegations or complaints , fmcsa investigators do not visit or audit collection sites or any other service agents employed by the carrier to observe procedures and enforce compliance with drug testing requirements . fmcsa has a limited number of people to oversee the potentially tens of thousands of sites that can be used to collect urine for dot drug testing . collection sites can be located anywhere — for example , a portable toilet or any toilet in a clinic , hospital , or office building — and can operate during differing hours . few carriers conduct regular oversight of the service agents they employ . one large carrier with whom we spoke tests and verifies that the collection sites it uses are in compliance . smaller carriers are less likely to conduct such oversight , given their more limited resources . representatives from a third - party administrator with whom we spoke told us that it observes some of the collection sites it uses , sometimes at a client's request . if significant problems are found , representatives told us they alert the carriers to discontinue use of that collection site . in addition , representatives told us that some major collection companies internally audit their own sites to ensure the sites comply with all requirements . fmcsa conducts enforcement , but enforcement actions on service agents are limited . a laboratory analyzes the specimen . fmcsa and odapc can initiate a process to disqualify service agents from participating in activities related to dot drug testing programs , known as a public interest exclusion ( pie ) , in cases of serious noncompliance . while a number of pies have been initiated , no pie has been completed or formally issued . typically , the service agent has either corrected the noncompliance or gone out of business before the pie could be completed . there is limited proactive outreach to carriers , service agents , and drivers . while new entrant safety audits are an important tool for educating and informing new carriers , these audits typically do not occur until after a carrier has been operating for 9 to 18 months . new carriers receive little information about drug testing requirements when they register . when a new carrier applies for a dot number , the application includes a question in which the carrier must confirm whether it understands its responsibilities related to drug and alcohol testing .