got it . iras , non - 401 ( k ) s , non - retirement plans – gao investigator: right . company representative: — then , no , you could use them into the account — , and they could be taxable — for whatever , it's not countable as income . but if they are iras , then you would have to cash in the iras and then it would become income . gao investigator: okay . company representative: but the other account , when it's put into the put and keep account — let's say you have three hundred and fifty thousand . a hundred to a hundred fifty goes into the checkbook access . the other two hundred or whatever goes into a put and keep account earning four to six percent . gao investigator: is that like an annuity or something ? company representative: that doesn't earn any interest . that's accessible dollars , liquid dollars , when you need it for emergency . the other account will earn 4 to 6 percent . so it depends on what you want to put into that other account , and how much you want to keep liquid . gao investigator: okay . well , the account that's earning 4 to 6 percent , what is that in ? is that an annuity or what is that ? company representative: it would be an annuity that has accessibility to it , but it's tax - free , it's not being — it's not being taxed . gao investigator: okay . all right . but i wouldn't have access to that money ? company representative: you will have access to that money . each year you have access to it , up to 10 percent free withdrawal , with no penalty . gao investigator: okay . company representative: and if — but that's why we want to keep some of that money out in the trust account checkbook , that is basically accessible , totally liquid . so the software will kick out what we can and can't do . i'm projecting that probably a hundred and fifty of it , up to a hundred and fifty , could be liquid . now you may not need a hundred and fifty liquid . so the more you put into the annuity , the more interest you're going to earn on those funds . gao investigator: uh - huh . company representative: that's a decision you have to make with dad . gao investigator: okay . gao investigator: well , i don't . but , you know , he's pretty — he's pretty lucid . i mean , i — i can probably get it . company representative: well , typically speaking , for people that have had a child or relative assigned a power of attorney , then they've kind of realized that , you know , if something happens , they may need some help . somebody acting in their financial capacity if they get in a situation where they can't perform or somebody to make some medical decisions for them .