we disagree . according to the 2018 sop , the hud oig will be responsible for collecting and reporting statistics for some regional office activities , such as the number of referrals . as discussed in this report , we believe the hud oig could obtain more comprehensive information on additional required regional activities using existing resources , such as through periodic data calls to regions . such assessments of regional office activities are particularly important given that regional offices had not consistently participated in the fugitive felon initiative in the past . accordingly , we believe our recommendation is still warranted . the hud oig also disagreed with our recommendation to determine what information on results of the fugitive felon initiative would be the most useful to share in collaboration with the fbi ( recommendation 4 ) . the hud oig stated that its ability to determine apprehensions and program savings is limited . however , the current mou between the hud oig and the fbi states that the hud oig is to share this information with the fbi . in addition , in may 2018 , hud oig officials stated that hud oig plans to track statistics on apprehensions that occur with hud oig involvement and eventually share these statistics with the fbi . the intent of our recommendation is for the hud oig and the fbi to collaborate to determine what information on results should be shared and then share such information consistently . we believe our recommendation provides sufficient flexibility for the hud oig and the fbi to determine what information on results would be feasible to collect , and maintain that such collaboration could better position the hud oig and the fbi to enhance their ability to identify any areas for improvement and evaluate the effectiveness of the initiative . the hud oig agreed with our recommendation to update the fugitive felon initiative mou to reflect the agencies' current activities and responsibilities ( recommendation 5 ) . in an email received on july 9 , 2018 , an fbi management and program analyst stated that the fbi agreed with our recommendation to determine what information on apprehensions resulting from the fugitive felon initiative would be most useful to share and consistently share this information with the hud oig ( recommendation 6 ) . the fbi also agreed with our recommendation to update the fugitive felon initiative mou to reflect the agencies' current activities and responsibilities ( recommendation 7 ) . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of the department of housing and urban development , the inspector general of the department of housing and urban development , the attorney general of the united states , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact daniel garcia - diaz at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or garciadiazd@gao.gov , or gretta goodwin at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or goodwing@gao.gov .