passenger boardings . airports that have no scheduled commercial passenger service . primary airports that have at least 1 percent of all annual enplanements . a letter faa issues to airports stating that it will reimburse them for the costs associated with an airport development project according to a defined schedule when funds become available . faa uses this letter when its current obligating authority is not timely or adequate to meet an airport's planned schedule for a project . primary airports that have between .25 percent and 1 percent of all annual enplanements . to what extent did the airport security projects that received aip funding after the events of september 11 , 2001 , meet legislative and program eligibility requirements ? how has the use of aip funding for airport security projects after the events of september 11 , 2001 , affected aip funding for other airport development projects ? the multibillion dollar aip provides grant funds for capital development projects at airports included in the national plan of integrated airport systems ( npias ) . in administering aip , faa must comply with various statutory formulas and set - asides established by law , which specify how aip grant funds are to be distributed among airports ( see app . these projects include preboard screening devices and baggage screening equipment , such as explosives detection systems . in fiscal year 2002 , faa awarded a total of $561 million in aip grant funds for airport security projects , which represents about 17 percent of the $3.3 billion available for obligation . ii for a list of airports that are eligible to receive aip grant funds ) . since the program's inception in 1982 , security projects have accounted for an average of less than 2 percent of the total aip grant funds awarded each year . during fiscal years 1982 through 2001 , aip grant funds awarded to airports for security projects ranged from $2 million in fiscal year 1982 to $122 million in fiscal year 1991 , when airports implemented new security requirements governing access controls . the $561 million faa awarded to airports for security projects in fiscal year 2002 represents more than 800-percent increase over the $57 million for security projects awarded in fiscal year 2001 . as shown in table 2 , among airport types , nearly all of the $561 million awarded in fiscal year 2002 for security projects was awarded to large , medium , small , and nonhub airports , which is consistent with where faa has received the largest number of requests for aip grants for security projects . general aviation and reliever airports received about 1 percent of the $561 million awarded in fiscal year 2002 . based on data provided by faa , all security projects awarded aip grants since september 11 , 2001 , have met legislative and program eligibility requirements . most of these projects would have qualified for aip funding under eligibility requirements in place prior to september 11 , 2001 . for example , as shown in table 3 , perimeter fencing , surveillance and fingerprinting equipment , and access control systems , which together accounted for almost half of aip funding for security projects , qualified under traditional eligibility regulations .