supporting data can be quantitative or qualitative . for example , emissions reductions connected to telework can be measured in metric tons of carbon emissions avoided . cost savings can include reduced spending on transit subsidies or utility bills . qualitative support for benefits might include responses from survey questions or results from focus groups indicating that telework has improved work / life balance . supporting data for benefits from all of the selected agencies are shown in figure 5 . specifically , all of the selected agencies had supporting data for 1 to 7 of the benefits that they identified . dot had supporting data for 1 of the 10 benefits ( reducing environmental impact ) that it identified . the agency reported avoiding approximately 21.7 million kg of carbon dioxide emissions in fiscal year 2014 , which is equal to 1.7 kg on average per employee , per day . epa had supporting data for 1 of the 9 benefits it identified: reduced environmental impact . epa reported avoiding 10,791 telework - related metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions in 2014 as compared to 2011 . fdic had supporting data for 4 of the 8 benefits it identified . fdic conducted a telework survey of managers and employees in 2008 which suggests that telework contributed to retaining employees , work / life balance , and increased productivity . gsa had supporting data for 5 of the 12 benefits it identified: work / life balance , transit subsidies , environmental impact , reduced paid administrative leave , and increased job satisfaction / employee morale . to calculate costs savings for reduced transit subsidies from teleworking , gsa officials obtained a transit subsidy participation list from dot for fiscal year 2013 through fiscal year 2015 and compared it against reported telework hours for the same period to calculate a cost savings of $926,872 in 2015 based on telework - related reduced use of transit subsidies in comparison with 2013 . gsa officials also reported that from fiscal year 2013 through fiscal year 2015 , employees used 45,426 fewer hours of paid administrative leave during worksite closures and they teleworked about 202,886 hours more . according to gsa officials , these figures represent its emphasis on enabling and requiring employees to telework when agency worksites are closed , which previously would have resulted in the use of only paid administrative leave . mspb officials had supporting data for 1 of the 5 benefits identified . an mspb official cited employee satisfaction data related to the impact of telework on work / life balance from the federal employee viewpoint survey . usda had supporting data and corresponding methodologies for 7 of the 10 benefits it identified: employee retention , work / life balance , transit subsidies , utilities , real estate , environmental impact and employee satisfaction . usda provided cost savings from 2011 to 2014 information for 4 of these benefits , as shown in figure 6 . for example , usda identified at least 32 cases of employees who accepted full - time telework arrangements in place of retirement , allowing the agency to retain experienced employees and saving an estimated $1.5 million from reduced or eliminated commuter costs and reduced salaries due to changes in locality pay , among other things .