gao - 08-552t . washington , d.c.: march 4 , 2008 . space acquisitions: space based infrared system high program and its alternative . gao - 07-1088r . space acquisitions: stronger development practices and investment planning needed to address continuing problems . gao - 05-891t . washington , d.c.: july 12 , 2005 . defense acquisitions: stronger management practices are needed to improve dod's software - intensive weapon acquisitions . gao - 04-393 . washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2004 . defense acquisitions: risks posed by dod's new space systems acquisition policy . gao - 04-0379r . washington , d.c.: january 29 , 2004 . defense acquisitions: improvements needed in space systems acquisition policy to optimize growing investment in space . gao - 04- 253t . washington , d.c.: november 18 , 2003 . best practices: better matching of needs and resources will lead to better weapon system outcomes . gao - 01-288 . washington , d.c.: march 8 , 2001 . appendix i further discusses our scope and methodology . dod initiated the sbirs program to meet all military infrared surveillance requirements through a single , integrated system , and to provide better and timelier data to the unified combatant commanders , u.s. deployed forces , u.s. military strategists , and u.s. allies . sbirs is to replace the existing infrared system , the defense support program , which has provided early missile warning information since the 1970s . the sbirs program was originally conceived as having high - and low - orbiting space - based components and a ground segment for mission - data processing and control to improve current capabilities . in 2001 , the sbirs low component was transferred from the air force to the missile defense agency and renamed the space tracking and surveillance system . the air force continued developing sbirs high ( herein referred to as “sbirs” ) . it , along with its associated ground segment , is one of dod's highest priority space programs . the sbirs program originally consisted of four satellites to operate in geosynchronous earth orbit ( geo ) , plus one spare , an infrared sensor placed on two host satellites in highly elliptical orbit ( heo ) — known as “heo sensors” — and a ground segment for mission - data processing and control . the sbirs geo satellite is designed to support two infrared sensors — a scanning sensor and a staring sensor . the first geo satellite is commonly referred to as geo 1 . figure 1 shows the geo satellite that is to operate in space . as a result of past technical and program difficulties experienced during sensor and satellite development , the sbirs program has encountered cost and schedule increases . these difficulties have led dod to restructure the program multiple times , including revising program goals in 2002 , 2004 , and 2005 . for example , in 2002 , the program faced serious problems with software and hardware design progress and , in the conference report accompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2002 , conferees recommended cutting advance procurement funding due to concerns about program developments and the unclear status of the sbirs program .