the test did not find a difference . however , this was a limited test of only one variable . but as of june 24 , 2010 , irs had not produced an approved plan on how it intended to analyze the pilot study data even though it had worked about three - fourths of the cases selected for the pilot . according to irs officials , progress in developing an analysis plan for the pilot study had been delayed by efforts to implement consolidated decision analytics ( cda ) . among other things , cda is to implement new models to better predict the collection potential of unpaid tax debt cases to help ensure the best use of irs's collection resources . officials said that any plan for analyzing the pilot study's data would need to ensure that the pilot study results will be useful given irs's plans to more fully implement cda in january 2011 . beyond not knowing how the pilot study data will be analyzed , irs had not clarified its criteria on how it would use the results of any analyses to make a decision about assigning more pca - type cases to be worked in irs . specifically , irs had no documentation on the criteria that officials would use in making this decision and what factors , if any , beyond the analyses of the pilot study data would contribute to those criteria or that decision . developing criteria would be important to ensure that the variables measured in the study would be useful in supporting the decision on whether to change case selection criteria to regularly pursue such cases . as we concluded our review , the status of the pilot study and whether or how pca - type cases would be included in active collection case inventory became less clear . irs provided conflicting information about determining whether pca - type cases have sufficient collection potential to be included in its collection inventory . on one hand , officials said that cda models were built by tracking the characteristics and collection potential of actual collection cases . on the other hand , pca - type cases generally have not been worked by collection staff , which is why irs began its pilot study of pca - type cases to determine their collection potential . in its comments on our draft report , irs said that the cda models that would be implemented in january 2011 had overtaken the need to complete the pilot study . examining the cda models was outside the scope of our review . therefore , we had not reviewed documentation on what types of data were used in developing the cda models . however , in response to our direct question about whether pca - type case results were used in developing the cda models to be implemented in january 2011 , an irs official said that they had not been used . irs's march 2009 announcement ending the pdc program said that irs anticipated hiring more collection staff in fiscal year 2009 and referred to support from the administration and congress for increased irs enforcement resources . according to irs officials , irs's acs staff could work on the pca - type cases .