this approach has contributed to a number of issues . for example , fps faces difficulty ensuring the quality and timeliness of fsas and adequate oversight of its 15,000 contract security guards . in addition , in our 2008 report , we found that representatives of several local law enforcement agencies we visited were unaware of fps's transition to an inspector - based workforce and stated that their agencies did not have the capacity to take on the additional job of responding to incidents at federal facilities . in april 2007 , a dhs official and several fps inspectors testified before congress that fps's inspector - based workforce approach requires increased reliance on state and local law enforcement agencies for assistance with crime and other incidents at gsa facilities and that fps would seek to enter into memorandums of agreement ( moa ) with local law enforcement agencies . however , according to fps's director , the agency decided not to pursue moa with local law enforcement officials , in part because of reluctance on the part of local law enforcement officials to sign such moas . in addition , fps believes that the moas are not necessary because 96 percent of the properties in its inventory are listed as concurrent jurisdiction facilities where both federal and state governments have jurisdiction over the property . nevertheless , these moas would clarify roles and responsibilities of local law enforcement agencies when responding to crime or other incidents . fps does not fully ensure that its contract security guards have the training and certifications required to be deployed to a gsa building . fps maintains a contract security guard force of about 15,000 guards that are primarily responsible for controlling access to federal facilities by ( 1 ) checking the identification of government employees , as well as members of the public who work in and visit federal facilities and ( 2 ) operating security equipment , including x - ray machines and magnetometers , to screen for prohibited materials such as firearms , knives , explosives , or items intended to be used to fabricate an explosive or incendiary device . we reported in july 2009 , that 411 of the 663 guards ( 62 percent ) employed by seven fps contractors and deployed to federal facilities had at least one expired certification , including a declaration that the guards have not been convicted of domestic violence , which makes them ineligible to carry firearms . we also reported in july 2009 , that fps guards had not received adequate training to conduct their responsibilities . fps requires that all prospective guards complete about 128 hours of training including 16 hours of x - ray and magnetometer training . however , in one region , fps has not provided the x - ray or magnetometer training to its 1,500 guards since 2004 . nonetheless , these guards are assigned to posts at gsa buildings . x - ray training is critical because guards control access points at buildings . in addition , we also found that some guards were not provided building - specific training , such as what actions to take during a building evacuation or a building emergency .