iii. ) in responding to our draft report , hhs noted that we found the cms methodology adequate for estimating the fiscal year 2004 national medicare ffs error rate . hhs also noted that cms is continually committed to refining the processes to estimate , as well as lower , the level of improper payments in the medicare ffs program . in its comments , hhs noted improvement in the national medicare error rate from fiscal years 2004 to 2005 . the department attributed the decline in the error rate to marked improvement in the nonresponse ( which cms now calls “no documentation” ) and the insufficient documentation error rates . commenting on the adequacy of the fiscal year 2005 methodology was beyond the scope of our work ; however , as we noted in the draft report , changes in the methodology may affect the estimation of the error rates and thus the comparability of these error rates over time . these error rates are then aggregated by contractor type . these changes primarily affected hhs's processes for calculating an annual error rate estimate for the medicare ffs program . this may represent a refinement in the program's estimation methodology rather than improved accountability over program dollars . the national medicare error rates for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 provided by hhs in its comments are not comparable to the error rates cited in this report for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 . hhs provided gross error rates , which were calculated using gross dollars paid in error . these annual reviews examine whether the cert program and hpmp contractors have appropriate controls in place to ensure that the medical record reviews and quality assurance reviews were performed in accordance with established procedures . we reviewed oig's annual reviews of the cert program and the hpmp for fiscal year 2004 . our analysis of provider nonresponse within the cert program relied on two oig studies of cms's actions to reduce nonresponse implemented for the cert program for fiscal year 2004 . for the hpmp , we also reviewed four intra - clinical data abstraction center ( cdac ) reports and two inter - cdac reports , which were quality assurance reviews intended to assess the consistency of review decisions both within and across cdacs . to conduct our analysis of cms's statistical methods , we reviewed the oig contractor's computer programming code , which replicated cms's estimation of the error rates for carriers , durable medical equipment regional carriers ( dmerc ) , and fiscal intermediaries ( fi ) , as calculated by the cert program subcontractor responsible for statistical analysis of the error rates for fiscal year 2004 . for the hospital payment monitoring program ( hpmp ) , we reviewed the program manual and the hpmp computer programming code that generated the sample to verify that the sample was taken in accordance with the procedures outlined in the manual . additionally , we reviewed the oig contractor's comparison of the june 2003 sample and a re - created version of the june 2003 sampling frame , or population , for the hpmp .