gao - 19-127r . washington , d.c.: november 2 , 2018 . air force materiel command . air force materiel command conducts research , development , test , and evaluation , and provides acquisition management services and logistics support necessary to keep air force weapon systems ready for war . one of six centers within air force materiel command , the air force nuclear weapons center is the nuclear - focused center synchronizing all aspects of nuclear materiel management on behalf of the air force materiel command commander . naval sea systems command and naval air systems command . naval sea systems command's affiliated program executive offices — including the program executive office for submarines and the program executive office for the ohio - class ssbn and its replacement , the columbia - class ssbn — are responsible for life - cycle management of their assigned programs . similarly , naval air systems command provides full life - cycle support of naval aviation aircraft , weapons , and systems . dod continues to make progress in implementing the recommendations from the 2014 nuclear enterprise reviews and the 2015 nc3 report , but the key tracking tools used to provide visibility on the status of the recommendations from these reviews do not provide current and complete information . ( see app . i for a complete list of offices we met with during our review. ) the performance audit upon which this report is based was conducted from november 2018 to october 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we subsequently worked with dod from december 2019 to february 2020 to prepare this unclassified version of the original classified report for public release . this public version was also prepared in accordance with these standards . the dod nuclear enterprise includes strategic and nonstrategic nuclear forces and the supporting infrastructure and personnel to build , maintain , and control these assets . the strategic nuclear forces include a triad of air force icbms ; air force nuclear - capable bomber aircraft ; and navy submarine - launched ballistic missiles carried by ssbns ; as well as associated nuclear munitions ; air refueling ; and nc3 capabilities . nc3 capabilities are a key part of the defense nuclear enterprise , used to support planning , situation monitoring , and communication of force direction between the president and nuclear forces . consistent with the new strategic arms reduction treaty ( new start ) , the united states has limited the number of deployed delivery systems for each of the three legs of the strategic nuclear triad ( see fig . the 2018 nuclear posture review states that the triad's synergy and overlapping attributes help ensure the enduring survivability of deterrence capabilities against attack and the capacity to hold at risk a range of adversary targets throughout a crisis or conflict .