according to a cbo analysis of h.r . 2454 , most of the allowance value given to local distribution companies would benefit business customers . the analysis also estimates that 63 of percent allowance values conferred to businesses would ultimately benefit the highest earning 20 percent of households , since these households are more likely to be shareholders . in addition , the way in which benefits are conveyed to customers — for example , through lower prices , investments in energy efficiency , or other means — will depend on the state public utility commissions that regulate the ldcs . while some organizations have expressed concern that past regulation has been uneven , several economists and state officials we spoke with expressed confidence that the existing regulatory structure could effectively ensure that customers received the benefits . revenues generated through allowance auctions could also be directed toward climate - related programs or activities , including the research and development of low - carbon technologies , programs to promote energy - efficiency , or mitigation and adaptation activities abroad . beyond their environmental benefits , such programs could also convey efficiency gains , if they lowered the cost of emissions reductions . the development of renewable energy sources , for example , could ultimately lower covered entities' total expenditures on emissions allowances . funding for efficiency programs could also offset costs for households through reduced energy demand . some research organizations have also suggested that funding in these areas could create job opportunities , and in the long run could help ensure greater economic stability due to energy security . economic research suggests that an emissions price , on its own , will go some way toward promoting low - carbon technologies and the efficient use of energy . however , economists we spoke to said that there are certain instances — known as “market failures” — where opportunities for reduction may not be captured . for example , builders and owners of rental properties may not have incentives to consider energy efficiency in the construction and renovation of these properties , since they may not be responsible for paying electricity and heating costs . in these cases , subsidies for efficient construction or renovation may be appropriate . in addition , certain technologies — such as carbon capture and storage — may face cost barriers that could be mitigated through grants or subsidies . other technologies may need nationwide infrastructure that could require additional funding at the federal level — for example , an enhanced transmission grid to transmit renewable energy . while many economists we spoke with said funding such activities could be beneficial , several also cautioned that selecting , implementing and evaluating these programs could pose challenges . from a power plant's emissions , transporting it to an underground storage location , and then injecting it into a geologic formation for long - term storage . result , several economists we spoke with recommended allocating part of the allowance revenues for research and development to help overcome these cost barriers . however , several also noted that it is difficult to determine how to allocate such funds effectively .