available . however , as described in the report , in addition to the meta - analyses of over 400 studies related to detecting deception conducted over the past 60 years that we reviewed , we also reviewed several documents on behavior detection research that dhs officials provided to us , including documents from an unclassified and a classified literature review that dhs had commissioned . finally , in stating its nonconcurrence with the recommendation to limit future funding in support of its behavior detection activities , dhs stated that tsa's overall security program is composed of interrelated parts , and to disrupt one piece of the multilayered approach may have an adverse impact on other pieces . as we reported in november 2013 , tsa has not developed the performance measures that would allow it to assess the effectiveness of its behavior detection activities compared with other screening methods , such as physical screening . as a result , the impact of behavior detection activities on tsa's overall security program is unknown . further , not all screening methods are present at every airport , and tsa has modified the screening procedures and equipment used at airports over time . these modifications have included the discontinuance of screening equipment that was determined to be unneeded or ineffective . therefore , we concluded that providing scientifically validated evidence that demonstrates that behavioral indicators can be used to identify passengers who may pose a threat to aviation security is critical to the implementation of tsa's behavior detection activities . consequently , we added a matter for congressional consideration to the november 2013 report . specifically , we suggested that congress consider the findings in the report regarding the absence of scientifically validated evidence for using behavioral indicators to identify aviation security threats when assessing the potential benefits of behavior detection activities relative to their cost when making future funding decisions related to aviation security . such action should help ensure that security - related funding is directed to programs that have demonstrated their effectiveness . chairman hudson , ranking member richmond , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared testimony . i look forward to answering any questions that you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact steve lord at ( 202 ) 512-4379 or lords@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement include david bruno ( assistant director ) , nancy kawahara , elizabeth kowalewski , susanna kuebler , grant m. mallie , amanda k. miller , linda s. miller , and douglas m. sloane . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . dhs did not concur with our recommendation .