until april 2005 , cbp managed this program . dhs's program to deploy radiation detection equipment at u.s. ports of entry has two goals . the first is to use this equipment to screen all cargo , vehicles , and individuals coming into the united states . the second is to screen this traffic without delaying its movement into the nation . dhs's current plans call for completing the deployment of radiation portal monitors at u.s. ports of entry by september 2013 . the current technology portal monitors , known as plastic scintillators or pvts , cost about $55,000 per unit , while the advanced spectroscopic portal monitors , known as asps , will cost around $377,000 per unit . in july 2006 , dhs announced that it had awarded contracts to three asp vendors to further develop and purchase $1.2 billion worth of asps over 5 years . congress , however , provided that none of dndo's appropriated funds for systems acquisition could be obligated for full procurement of asps until the secretary of dhs certifies through a report to the committees on appropriations for the senate and house of representatives that asps would result in a significant increase in operational effectiveness . dhs is developing new portal monitors , known as asps that , in addition to detecting nuclear or radiological material , can also identify the type of material . in 2005 , dndo conducted side - by - side testing at the nevada test site ( nts ) on 10 asp systems and 3 pvt systems developed by private sector companies , including the pvt systems currently deployed . dhs requested that the national institutes of standards and technology ( nist ) provide assistance by conducting an independent analysis of data acquired during the last phase of developmental testing of asps to help dhs determine the performance of asp portal monitors being proposed by private sector companies . based on nist's assessment of the performance data , the asp prototypes ( manufactured by the three companies that won dndo's recent asp procurement contract ) tested at nts identified bare heu only 70 to 88 percent of time . performance tests also showed that asps' ability to identify masked heu fell far short of meeting the 95 percent goal established for the cost - benefit analysis . according to dndo , identifying masked heu is the most difficult case to address . doe officials told us that benign radiological materials could be used to hide the presence of heu . nist reported that the best asp prototype dndo tested in nevada during 2005 , and which won a procurement contract , was able to correctly identify masked heu and depleted uranium ( du ) only 53 percent of the time . similarly , the asp prototypes submitted by the other two companies that won dndo asp procurement contracts were able to identify masked heu and du only 45 percent and 17 percent of the time . despite these results , dndo did not use the information from these tests in its cost - benefit analysis .