( see fig . for a cost - estimating process to support the creation of reliable cost estimates , it should substantially or fully meet each of the four characteristics in gao's cost guide — comprehensive , well - documented , accurate , and credible — based on the extent to which the procedures incorporate the underlying best practice steps for each characteristic . we found that va's cost - estimating procedures for major medical leases fully met the comprehensive characteristic , substantially met the well - documented characteristic , and partially met the accurate and credible characteristics . our finding that va's cost - estimating process partially met the characteristics for producing reliable cost estimates is based on the following: comprehensive: va's cost - estimating process fully met the comprehensive characteristic because its procedures include both the best practice steps of developing an estimating plan and determining the estimating structure . well - documented: va's process substantially met the well - documented characteristic because its procedures incorporate a large number of related best - practice steps , such as defining the estimate's purpose and presenting the estimate for approval . accurate: va's process partially met the accurate characteristic because the procedures incorporate some elements of the two associated best practice steps . specifically , va's process includes the best practice step of developing a point estimate and comparing it to an independent estimate , which is based on the market rental rate determined by a market survey that va conducts and the cost of specific improvements required for va's intended medical purposes . va applies several standard and variable adjustments to the market rental rate to determine the rental portion of the estimated first - year lease cost to include in the va's prospectuses to congress . ( see table 2. ) this best practice step normally includes comparing the estimate to an independent cost estimate , which va does not obtain . because of the standardized nature of the adjustments to the rent rate and pricing for improvements for major - medical facilities' lease cost estimates , obtaining an independent cost estimate for these inputs would likely yield little new information ; accordingly , we consider the rating for this best practice step to be substantially met . the procedures also include updating the estimate , another best practice step supporting this characteristic , but va does not update it with actual costs as the best practice step requires . estimates are updated during the development process to calculate whether actual costs are likely to rise more than 10 percent above the prospectus - estimated cost . for leases executed under gsa authority , the estimated maximum cost provided in a prospectus may be increased for construction or alterations but may not exceed 10 percent . after leases are executed va does not update the estimate with actual costs . updating the estimate with actual costs is a best practice step because it enables a “lessons learned” analysis , which can strengthen estimates going forward . credible: va's process partially met the credible characteristic because va's procedures incorporate some elements of the three associated best practice steps .