pt . 330 , agencies are not required to comply with the regulations regarding the career transition assistance plan ( ctap ) , reemployment priority list ( rpl ) , and interagency ctap ( ictap ) because these regulations do not apply to excepted appointments . agencies have the discretion , without opm approval , to use the authority granted by opm under 5 c.f.r . § 213.3102 to fill senior - level positions , as well as positions at lower levels . under appropriate circumstances , opm may also authorize agencies to use a senior - level position allocation to appoint an individual under this section ( 5 c.f.r . agencies have the authority to appoint candidates directly when opm determines there is a critical hiring need , or a shortage of candidates , for particular occupations , grades ( or equivalent ) , geographic locations , or some combination of the three . this authority can be governmentwide or limited to one or more specific agencies depending on the circumstances . opm has granted governmentwide direct - hire authority for gs - 0602 medical officers , gs - 0610 and gs - 0620 nurses , gs - 0647 diagnostic radiologic technicians , and gs - 0660 pharmacists , at all grade levels and all locations , and for gs - 2210 information technology specialists ( information security ) positions at gs - 9 and above , at all locations , in support of governmentwide efforts to carry out the requirements of the government information security reform act and the federal information security management act . opm also approved a direct - hire authority that permits agencies to immediately appoint individuals with fluency in arabic or other middle eastern languages to positions in support of the reconstruction efforts in iraq . agencies have the discretion , without opm approval , to give individuals in the categories , occupations and specialties , and grades listed above competitive service career , career - conditional , term , temporary , emergency indefinite , or overseas limited appointments , as appropriate . in all cases , agencies must adhere to public notice requirements in 5 u.s.c . §§ 3327 and 3330 and ictap requirements . if agencies believe they have one or more occupations for which an agency - specific direct - hire authority may be appropriate in support of emergency relief and recovery efforts , they are to contact their opm human capital officer . to meet a bona fide , unanticipated , urgent need , agencies have the authority under 5 c.f.r . § 317.601 to make senior executive service limited emergency appointments of career employees , without opm approval . opm approval is required to appoint individuals who are not current career employees and opm cannot delegate this authority ; however , opm will process such requests on a priority basis and will also consider temporary position allocations for agencies that identify the need as essential to deal with the emergency . agencies have the discretion , without opm approval , to employ retirees to deal with an emergency , to replace employees called to active duty military service , or both . agencies may immediately offer reemployment to retirees under any applicable appointing authority .