mr . chairmen , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittees may have . for additional information about this testimony please contact orice m. williams on ( 202 ) 512-8678 or at williamso@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include lawrence d. cluff , assistant director ; tania calhoun ; emily chalmers ; rudy chatlos ; chir - jen huang ; barry kirby ; and melvin thomas . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . exclusions under the flood policy include damages caused by wind or a windstorm . in summary , based on our preliminary review , nfip does not collect the information it needs to help evaluate whether it has paid only what it is obligated to pay under the flood policy for properties subjected to both high winds and flooding , such as those damaged by hurricanes katrina and rita . while some of the reinspection files included documentation as to whether or not damage was caused by a combination of wind and flooding , most did not . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . limited information is collected by nfip to understand both the wind and flood damage determinations made for hurricane - damaged properties , limiting nfip's ability to know whether claims paid under the flood policy were always limited to only flood damages . for a given hurricane - damaged property , because nfip does not know how much of the damages were caused by wind and how much were caused by flooding , nfip cannot determine whether the amount it paid accurately represents payment only for flood damage . this information is lacking even when the same property - casualty insurance company serves as both the nfip wyo insurer and the wind insurer . for properties experiencing both wind and flood damages , nfip does not consistently collect information that would enable it to determine , either at the time the nfip claim was paid or later , whether the amount paid on a flood damage claim reflects only the damages caused by flooding . claims data collected by nfip from wyo insurers , including those that sell and service both the wind and the flood policies , do not include information on total damages to the property from all perils — that is , they do not report the existence of wind damage nor the amount of damage caused by wind when servicing a flood claim on the same property .