thank you . for further information on this testimony , please contact orice williams brown at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or williamso@gao.gov , or richard j. hillman at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or hillmanr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include cody j. goebel , assistant director ; sonja j. bensen ; emily r. chalmers , patrick s. dynes ; marc w. molino ; jill m. naamane ; and paul thompson . as a result of significant market developments in recent decades that have outpaced a fragmented and outdated regulatory structure , significant reforms to the u.s. regulatory system are critically and urgently needed . the following framework consists of nine elements that should be reflected in any new regulatory system . this framework could be used to craft proposals , or to identify aspects to be added to existing proposals to make them more effective and appropriate for addressing the limitations of the current system . goals should be clearly articulated and relevant , so that regulators can effectively carry out their missions and be held accountable . key issues include considering the benefits of re - examining the goals of financial regulation to gain needed consensus and making explicit a set of updated comprehensive and cohesive goals that reflect today's environment . financial regulations should cover all activities that pose risks or are otherwise important to meeting regulatory goals and should ensure that appropriate determinations are made about how extensive such regulations should be , considering that some activities may require less regulation than others . key issues include identifying risk - based criteria , such as a product's or institution's potential to create systemic problems , for determining the appropriate level of oversight for financial activities and institutions , including closing gaps that contributed to the current crisis . mechanisms should be included for identifying , monitoring , and managing risks to the financial system regardless of the source of the risk . given that no regulator is currently tasked with this , key issues include determining how to effectively monitor market developments to identify potential risks ; the degree , if any , to which regulatory intervention might be required ; and who should hold such responsibilities . a regulatory system that is flexible and forward looking allows regulators to readily adapt to market innovations and changes . key issues include identifying and acting on emerging risks in a timely way without hindering innovation . effective and efficient oversight should be developed , including eliminating overlapping federal regulatory missions where appropriate , and minimizing regulatory burden without sacrificing effective oversight . any changes to the system should be continually focused on improving the effectiveness of the financial regulatory system . key issues include determining opportunities for consolidation given the large number of overlapping participants now , identifying the appropriate role of states and self - regulation , and ensuring a smooth transition to any new system .