12 , ch . additionally , any adjustments made to cost's standard settings are flagged and must be accompanied by an explanatory note that details why information was changed , and these situations are reviewed by dod comptroller officials . furthermore , best practices also require that previous cost factors and data are stored after updates so that an estimation process is repeatable and can be later verified . the estimating methodology and rationale used to derive each cost breakdown structure element's cost are described in detail . the estimate's level of detail ensures that cost elements are neither omitted all cost - influencing ground rules and assumptions are detailed . the cost breakdown structure is defined and each element is described in a the estimate is unbiased , not overly conservative or overly optimistic , and based on an assessment of most likely costs . it has few , if any , mathematical mistakes ; those it has are minor . it has been validated for errors like double counting and omitted costs . it has been compared to the independent cost estimate for differences . cross - checks have been made on cost drivers to see if results are similar . it is updated to reflect changes in technical or program assumptions and new phases or milestones . estimates are replaced with the earned value management estimate at completion and the independent estimate at completion from the integrated earned value management system . major assumptions are varied and other outcomes recomputed to determine how sensitive outcomes are to changes in the assumptions . risk and uncertainty analysis is performed to determine the level of risk the results are cross - checked and an independent cost estimate is developed to determine if other estimating methods produce similar results . to better understand how the department of defense ( dod ) develops a global war on terrorism ( gwot ) budget request and the use of the contingency operations support tool ( cost ) and other methods of developing an estimate , we asked dod to demonstrate how the services used cost and other methods to develop the $6.3 billion budget estimate for military operations that was included as part of dod's october 2007 $42.3 billion amendment to the fiscal year 2008 gwot supplemental request for emergency funding . dod justification materials for the amendment describe this $6.3 billion portion as needed to support the continued sustainment and redeployment of the five army brigades and two marine corps infantry battalions that were considered part of the troop surge . this portion of the amendment was also requested to support the simultaneous deployment of combat support forces augmenting these combat forces and other costs related to the presence of the troop surge . table 3 presents dod's estimate for this $6.3 billion portion of the amendment meant to fund additional operations , broken into the cost - generated portion and the portion that was estimated by other means . typically , service budget officials develop cost estimates for gwot , but officials stated that time constraints for this specific estimate required that joint staff and dod comptroller officials develop the initial estimate using both cost and other processes outside of cost as necessary .