, project delivery provisions ) . most of the provisions apply to both types of projects . based on our review , we grouped the provisions into four general categories: accelerated nepa review , administrative and coordination changes , nepa assignment , and advance planning ( see table 1 ) . we had a 100 percent response rate . based on the survey results , we conducted follow - up interviews with officials from 10 state dots to discuss their perceived effects of the provisions in greater detail . we selected these state dots to include geographically diverse states and states that reported varying levels of use of the provisions and effects . to determine use and the perceived effects of the provisions applicable to selected transit projects , we selected 11 transit agencies and interviewed officials at those agencies . we selected these agencies based primarily on the number of times they issued a notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement ( eis ) in the federal register from 2005 through 2016 to identify those transit agencies that may have experience preparing eiss or some another nepa review and experience using transit project delivery provisions . we also considered other factors , such as ridership and geographic location , to select the 11 transit agencies . the results of the states' and transit agencies' interviews are not generalizable . to evaluate the extent to which dot has assigned nepa authority to states , and the effects states have reported from assuming nepa authority , we identified the states that have been assigned nepa authority , based on information from fhwa , and interviewed state dot officials in those states . however , we did not include one of these states because that state did not assume nepa authority until november 2017 . for the states we included , we interviewed state dot officials and reviewed relevant documentation including memorandums of understanding and analyses the state dots conducted on nepa assignment authority , such as methodologies for calculating nepa assignment time savings . in addition , we interviewed fhwa officials about procedures to oversee the performance of nepa assignment states and interviewed fhwa division officials from those states . we compared fhwa's procedures to oversee nepa assignment states against standards for information and communication contained in standards for internal control in the federal government . to determine available information on the number and percentage of the different nepa reviews and costs of conducting nepa reviews for highway and transit projects , we reviewed relevant publications , documents , and analyses , and discussed these with fhwa and fta officials . for all objectives , we interviewed agency officials and stakeholders involved in highway and transit projects including fhwa , fta , and relevant transportation and environmental organizations . we conducted this performance audit from august 2016 to january 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .