stations . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 04-628t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact robert f. dacey at ( 202 ) 512-3317 or daceyr@gao.gov . control systems — which include supervisory control and data acquisition ( scada ) systems and distributed control systems — perform vital functions across many of our nation's critical infrastructures , including electric power generation , transmission , and distribution ; oil and gas refining and pipelines ; water treatment and distribution ; chemical production and processing ; railroads and mass transit ; and manufacturing . in october 1997 , the president's commission on critical infrastructure protection highlighted the risk of cyber attacks as a specific point of vulnerability in our critical infrastructures , stating that “the widespread and increasing use of scada systems for control of energy systems provides increasing ability to cause serious damage and disruption by cyber means.” in my testimony today i will discuss the results of our recent report , which is being released today . as you requested , this report identifies ( 1 ) significant cybersecurity risks associated with control systems , ( 2 ) potential and reported cyber attacks against these systems , ( 3 ) key challenges to securing control systems , and ( 4 ) efforts to strengthen the cybersecurity of control systems . in preparing our report , we analyzed research studies and reports , as well as prior gao reports and testimonies on critical infrastructure protection ( cip ) , information security , and national preparedness , among others . we analyzed documents from and met with private - sector and federal officials who had expertise in control systems and their security . our work was performed from july 2003 to march 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . dramatic increases in computer interconnectivity , especially in the use of the internet , continue to revolutionize the way our government , our nation , and much of the world communicate and conduct business . the benefits have been enormous . vast amounts of information are now literally at our fingertips , facilitating research on virtually every topic imaginable ; financial and other business transactions can be executed almost instantaneously , often 24 hours a day , and electronic mail , internet web sites , and computer bulletin boards allow us to communicate quickly and easily with an unlimited number of individuals and groups . however , this widespread interconnectivity poses significant risks to the government's and our nation's computer systems and , more important , to the critical operations and infrastructures they support . for example , telecommunications , power distribution systems , water supplies , public health services , national defense ( including the military's warfighting capability ) , law enforcement , government services , and emergency services all depend on the security of their computer operations . if they are not properly controlled , the speed and accessibility that create the enormous benefits of the computer age may allow individuals and organizations to eavesdrop on or interfere with these operations from remote locations for mischievous or malicious purposes , including fraud or sabotage .