these documents are as follows . fiscal year 2005 performance budget overview . this is the overview of dhs's congressional budget justification for fiscal year 2005 and serves as the overview of dhs's fiscal year 2005 annual performance plan , in compliance with gpra . the document describes the performance levels associated with the department's fiscal year 2005 president's budget to congress . for each strategic goal it includes means and strategies , as well as performance goals , measures , and targets . in addition , this document identifies the program and lead organization responsible for each performance goal . dhs's fiscal year 2005-2009 future years homeland security program ( fyhsp ) . developed pursuant to section 874 of the homeland security act , the fiscal year 2005-2009 fyhsp , dated may 2004 , is a 5-year resource plan that outlines departmental priorities and the ramifications of program and budget decisions . the fyhsp includes a general discussion of the nation's threats and vulnerabilities , including a description of current and future terrorist techniques and tactics ; types of weapons and threats terrorists may use ; and potential terrorist targets and timing of an attack . in addition , the fyhsp includes a brief discussion of the inflation factors and economic assumptions based on underlying guidance provided by omb . the fyhsp lays out projected resource requirements through fiscal year 2009 for each strategic goal and includes a table aligning programs to the strategic goals . finally , the fyhsp includes a description of performance priorities for each strategic goal . dhs's 2006-2010 fyhsp was issued to congress on march 4 , 2005 . it is designated “for official use only,” and is thus not publicly available . dhs expects to update the fyhsp annually . our review of planning materials included the strategic plan , fiscal year 2005 performance budget overview , fiscal year 2005-2009 future years homeland security program , milestones report , and themes and owners papers . in addition , we reviewed the national strategy for homeland security . to meet our first objective , we relied on requirements contained in gpra and accompanying committee report language and planning practices based on prior gao work , guidance to agencies from the office of management and budget ( omb ) for developing strategic plans , and dhs internal planning guidance . we then reviewed dhs's planning documents to identify where the gpra - required elements could be found . to meet our second objective , we reviewed these planning documents to determine if they addressed both dhs's homeland security and non - homeland security mission responsibilities . in addition , we interviewed officials at omb , as well as dhs officials responsible for agencywide planning in its office of the deputy secretary and office of program , analysis and evaluation . we also interviewed officials responsible for planning in dhs's directorates and component agencies . specifically , we met with officials in the border and transportation security directorate , the science and technology directorate , the federal emergency management agency ( part of the emergency preparedness and response directorate ) , the coast guard , the secret service , the transportation security administration , the u.s .