mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . investigative staff also have some responsibility for selecting cases . the office of enforcement identifies national priorities — areas critical to the well - being of employee benefit plan participants and beneficiaries nationwide — in which all regions must target a portion of their investigative efforts . currently , ebsa's national priorities involve , among other things , investigating defined contribution pension plan and health plan fraud . officials in the office of enforcement said that national priorities are periodically re - evaluated and are changed to reflect trends in the area of pensions and other benefits . on the basis of its national investigative priorities , the office of enforcement has established a number of national projects . currently , there are five national projects pertaining to a variety of issues including employee contributions to defined contribution plans , employee stock ownership plans ( esop ) , and health plan fraud . ebsa's increasing emphasis on defined contribution pension plans reflects the rapid growth of this segment of the pension plan universe . in fiscal year 2004 , ebsa had monetary results of over $31 million and obtained 10 criminal indictments under its employee contributions project . participant leads are still the major source of investigations . to supplement their investigations , the regions conduct outreach activities to educate both plan participants and sponsors . the purpose of these efforts is to gain participants' help in identifying potential violations and to educate sponsors in properly managing their plans and avoiding violations . the regions also process applications for the voluntary fiduciary correction program ( vfcp ) through which plan officials can voluntarily report and correct some violations without penalty . ebsa attempts to maximize the effectiveness of its enforcement efforts to detect and correct erisa violations by targeting specific cases for review . in doing so , the office of enforcement provides assistance to the regional offices in the form of broad program policy guidance , program oversight , and technical support . in developing regional projects , each regional office uses its knowledge of the unique activities and types of plans in its jurisdiction . for example , a region that has a heavy banking industry concentration may develop a project aimed at a particular type of transaction commonly performed by banks . we previously reported that the regional offices spend an average of about 40 percent of their investigative time conducting investigations in support of national projects and almost 25 percentage of their investigative time on regional projects . ebsa officials said that their most effective source of leads on violations of erisa is from complaints from plan participants . case openings also originate from news articles or other publications on a particular industry or company as well as tips from colleagues in other enforcement agencies . computer searches and targeting of form 5500 information on specific types of plans account for only 25 percent of case openings . in 1994 , we reported that ebsa had done little to test the effectiveness of the computerized targeting runs it was using to select cases .