woods . trust portal . ost completed the implementation of its trust portal in may 2006 . ost's trust portal provides employees with a single point of access to applications and other resources , such as the trust funds receivable system and the intranet . currently , the trust portal is available to ost employees and some bia employees . in addition , interior provided comments to improve the draft report's technical accuracy , which we have incorporated as appropriate . to examine ost's progress in implementing the american indian trust fund management reform act of 1994 , we reviewed ( 1 ) the 1994 act and its legislative history ; ( 2 ) interior's appropriations legislation ; and ( 3 ) relevant interior documents , including secretarial orders and ost's march 2003 comprehensive trust management plan and prior strategic plans that provide the basis for ost's current reform efforts . we also reviewed various documents showing ost's progress in implementing trust reforms and interviewed ost and bia officials regarding the status of trust reform efforts . however , we did not analyze the adequacy of ost's efforts to ensure that the reforms will result in an integrated computer system with complete and accurate information . in addition , to gain insight into the concerns that tribal organizations have expressed about ost's trust reform performance , we interviewed executives of the intertribal monitoring association on indian trust funds , the national congress of american indians , the great plains tribal chairman's association , the united south and eastern tribes , and the affiliated tribes of northwest indians . although the tribal organizations we selected reflect some variation in geography and their members include numerous individual indian tribes , our selections were not intended to be representative of all tribes . to examine ost's use of contractors in implementing its trust reforms , we obtained specific data elements for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 from the general services administration's fpds - ng database . these data elements include the amount obligated , the types of goods or services purchased , and various vendor characteristics . fpds - ng does not include ( 1 ) assistance actions , such as grants and cooperative agreements ; ( 2 ) imprest fund transactions , training authorizations , and micropurchases valued at $2,500 or less that were obtained through the use of a government purchase card ; ( 3 ) interagency agreements with other federal agencies and organizations ; or ( 4 ) actions involving transfer of supplies within and among agencies . finally , total dollars for fiscal year 2006 are incomplete and were not included in this report . to ensure the completeness and accuracy of the fpds - ng contracting data , we examined nbc contracting documents and interviewed contracting officers at bia and nbc's denver and fort huachuca branches as well as selected contracting officer's technical representatives at ost . we obtained data from fpds - ng by searching on ost as the funding agency . however , because nbc officials told us this field was not always completed , we also obtained fpds - ng data by searching on nbc's contracting office and identifying , by the product or service description , contracts most likely associated with trust reform efforts .