we did not make any recommendations to the department . ( see fig . 3 and table 2. ) table 2 shows whether projects received oversight reviews , as well as reported reasons why no review was performed , where applicable . agencies provided several reasons why the 13 projects did not receive oversight reviews , including some which were not consistent with sound management practices: one defense project's funding was below the financial threshold required for a review by the department - level irb , consistent with the agency's guidance . however , in may 2007 and may 2009 , we reported that dod's guidance and practices did not provide for sufficient oversight and visibility into component - level investment management activities , including component reviews of investments such as this project . we made recommendations to dod to address these weaknesses , which dod has yet to fully implement . another defense project was reportedly being rebaselined ( meaning that its cost , schedule , and performance goals were being modified to reflect a change in the scope of the work ) and therefore had not received a review by the department - level irb . this project , however , continues to be funded and therefore could have benefited from a department - level oversight review . according to the department of education , the two projects we reviewed did not receive oversight reviews by the department - level irb because they were under the oversight of the federal student aid executive leadership team . as noted earlier , in written comments on a draft of this report , the department stated it plans to bring all of its it investments under the department - level board's oversight . while dhs provided evidence that a lower - level board had agreed to submit the dhs - infrastructure project to the department - level irb for review , the agency did not provide evidence that this review had been performed . the department also stated that sbinet and us - visit projects had received an oversight review by the department - level irb , but did not provide sufficient evidence to support this , including information presented to the board for review . in march 2009 , however , dhs officials told us that they had recently made changes to their investment review process and , as part of these changes , were planning to improve the documentation associated with department - level irb reviews . a nuclear regulatory commission project should have received a review by the department - level irb according to the agency's guidance , but officials told us that , in practice , this board only gets involved when the lower - level board elevates issues . however , agency officials were unable to provide us with any examples where the lower - level board had elevated issues about the project to the irb . the department of the treasury's projects did not receive a department - level irb oversight review because this board was not active during the time frame we considered during our review . the department , however , has since then reestablished its department - level irb .