 frc caseloads . in an effort to improve the management of frcs' caseloads , we recommended that the frcp complete the development of a workload assessment tool , which would enable the program to assess the complexity of services needed by enrollees and the amount of time required to provide services . as of september 2011 , the frcp has implemented a workload intensity tool within the program's data management system , and frcs began using it for all new referrals in september 2011 . according to the acting executive director for the frcp , the frcp will be monitoring the effectiveness of the workload intensity tool and will be making modifications to it as needed .  staffing needs and placement decisions . we recommended that the frcp clearly define and document the decision - making process for determining when va should hire frcs , how many it should hire , and that the frcp develop and document a clear rationale for frc placement . in september 2011 , va reported that the frcp has documented the formula that the program currently uses to determine the number of frc positions required . in addition , the frcp is developing a systematic analysis to better inform decisions about the future placement of frcs . this analysis considers referrals received by the program , client location upon reintegration into the community , and requests from programs or facilities for placing frcs at particular locations . according to the acting executive director for the frcp , the frcp will report updated information about staffing and placement processes annually in its business operation planning document . although our recommendations to improve the management of the frcp were directed to the secretary of va , both dod and va were asked to provide a response to this subcommittee about how the departments could jointly implement the recommendations . dod has provided limited assistance to va with the implementation of our recommendation regarding enrollment . specifically , according to dod and va officials , an e - mail communication was sent on june 30 , 2011 , to the commanders of the military services' wounded warrior programs stating that they should refer all severely wounded , ill , and injured servicemembers who could benefit from the services of an frc to the program for evaluation . despite this effort , va officials stated that they have not noticed any change in referral numbers or patterns from dod since the e - mail was sent . dod and va have made little progress reaching agreement on options to better integrate the frcp and rcp , although they have made a number of attempts to address this issue . most recently , dod and va experienced difficulty jointly providing potential options for integrating these programs in response to this subcommittee's may 26 , 2011 , request to the deputy secretaries , who co - chair the dod and va wounded , ill , and injured senior oversight committee ( senior oversight committee ) . the subcommittee requested that the co - chairs provide a written response to the subcommittee by june 20 , 2011 .