va agreed with our recommendation . consistent with our guidance on estimating program costs , an important aspect of planning for it projects , such as vbms , involves developing a reliable cost estimate to help managers evaluate a program's affordability and performance against its plans , and provide estimates of the funding required to efficiently execute a program . in 2011 , vba submitted to the office of management and budget a life - cycle cost estimate for vbms of $934.8 million . this estimate was intended to capture costs for the system's development , deployment , sustainment , and general operating expenses through the end of fiscal year 2018 . however , as of july 2015 , the program's actual costs had exceeded the 2011 life - cycle cost estimate . specifically , vbms received approximately $1 billion in funding through the end of fiscal year 2015 and the department has requested an additional $290 million for the program in fiscal year 2016 . a significant concern is that the program management office has not reliably updated the vbms life - cycle cost estimate to reflect the program's expanded scope and timelines for completion of the system . this is largely attributable to the fact that the office has developed cost estimates for 2-year project cycles that are used for vbms milestone reviews under the office of information and technology's project management accountability system . when asked how the program management office arrived at the cost estimates reported in the milestone reviews , program officials stated that they developed rough order of magnitude estimates for each business need based on expert knowledge of the system , past development and engineering experience , and lessons learned . this was to be accomplished by the end of fiscal year 2015 . to help reduce the backlog and meet these claims processing goals , vba engaged in efforts to replace its paper - based claims process with vbms — a system intended to streamline the disability claims process by providing claims processors with an electronic , paperless environment in which to maintain , review , and make rating decisions for veterans' claims . the agency took an incremental approach to developing and implementing vbms and , as of june 2013 , claims processors had begun using an initial version of the system at all 56 regional offices . since that time , the agency has continued its efforts toward completing the system and , through fiscal year 2015 , had received approximately $1 billion in funding for the initiative . in september 2015 , we issued a report documenting the results of a study of vbms that we undertook at this committee's request . my remarks today summarize key findings from that study , which ( 1 ) assessed va's progress toward completing the development and implementation of vbms and ( 2 ) determined to what extent users reported satisfaction with the system . for the september 2015 report , we reviewed relevant program documentation and interviewed appropriate va officials . we also administered a web - based survey to a nationally representative stratified random sample of vbms users . more detailed information on our objectives , scope , and methodology can be found in the issued report .