dod has satisfied this requirement under the act . on march 19 , 2005 , the deputy secretary of defense issued a memorandum that delegated the authority in accordance with the criteria specified in the act , as described above . our research and evaluation of agencies' investment management practices have shown that clear assignment of senior executive investment management responsibilities and accountabilities is crucial to having an effective institutional approach to it investment management . the fiscal year 2005 national defense authorization act also required dod to establish investment review structures and processes , including a hierarchy of irbs , each with representation from across the department , and a standard set of investment review and decision - making criteria for these boards to use to ensure compliance and consistency with dod's business enterprise architecture . in this regard , the act required the establishment of the dbsmc — which serves as the highest ranking governance body for business system modernization activities within the department . as of april 2006 , dod identified 3,717 business systems and assigned responsibility for these systems to irbs . table 1 shows the systems by the responsible irb and component . tc - aims ii . in december 2005 , we reported that the army had not economically justified its investment in tc - aims ii on the basis of reliable estimates of costs and benefits . tc - aims ii was intended to be the single integrated system to automate transportation management function areas for the military services . as noted in our report , the most recent economic justification included cost and benefit estimates predicated on all four military services using the system . however , the air force and the marine corps have stated that they do not intend to use tc - amis ii . defense travel system ( dts ) . as we reported in january 2006 , dts continues to face implementation challenges , particularly with respect to testing key functionality to ensure that the system will perform as intended . our analysis of selected requirements for one key area disclosed that system testing was not effective in ensuring that the promised capability was delivered as intended . for example , we found that dod did not have reasonable assurance that flight information was properly displayed . this problem was not detected prior to deployment of dts because dod did not properly test the system interfaces through which the data are accessed for display . as a result , those travelers using the system may not have received accurate information on available flights , which could have resulted in higher travel costs . our report also identified key challenges facing dts in becoming dod's standard travel system , including the development of needed interfaces and underutilization of dts at sites where it has been deployed . one approach requires legacy accounting systems to submit detail - level accounting transactions that are to be converted to sfis - equivalent data elements . the second approach applies to business feeder systems and will require incorporation of sfis data elements within systems that create the business transactions . logistics modernization program ( lmp ) .