( app . iii provides a complete list of the performance measures. ) plans and specifications do not need major revisions during the construction process because of significant architectural or engineering errors or omissions made prior to or during the application process . problems do not arise during the construction period because of significant inconsistencies between contract documents . preconstruction meetings are thorough and do not precipitate delays in application processing for our customers . monthly inspection reports support the items and amounts included in monthly draws . change orders are documented and recommendations are supportable . length of time between the team's receipt of monthly requisition package and submission of the team's analysis and payment recommendation to hud . number of compliments received for hhs staff's helpfulness , timeliness , courtesy , understanding , etc . preliminary information is provided within 2 business days of inquiry . time from receipt of complete application to decision letter . process 75% of complete applications within 120 days of receipt . there are no instances of incomplete applications being received because applicant was not informed of application requirements . soundness of analysis . hud may consider the following evidence that the team's analysis was flawed: ( 1 ) deterioration , within 2 yrs of the recommendation for approval , of the financial condition of an approved applicant due to conditions that should have been detected in the review , or ( 2 ) the ability of a disapproved applicant to subsequently obtain insurance elsewhere on similar terms and conditions within 6 months of the recommendation for disapproval . hospital construction project is completed on time and within budget , unless mitigating factors outside hhs's control prevent this from happening . services ( hhs ) administration ( fha ) ? length of time between completion of construction and recommendation for final endorsement . hhs accomplishes all activities in a timely manner and provides assistance and works with the hospital and contractor so as to minimize the length of time between completion of construction and recommendations for final endorsement . final recommendation package is complete , documented , and supportable if any issues or challenges are raised in relation to the construction phase of the project . customers with a weakening financial position should be identified early enough to allow time for the account executive ( ae ) to provide technical assistance and undertake default prevention measures before a situation becomes an emergency . each ae will develop and maintain a file in hhs's office on each customer with all pertinent information needed to evaluate the customer's condition . ae's should not be "blindsided" by local , state , and national developments that affect the viability of customers . each customer meeting the conditions above for inclusion on the priority watch list ( pwl ) should be included on the pwl reports provided to hud . hhs's work should assist hud's goal of zero claim payments . time from receipt of request to recommendation to hud . performance target is to process at least 75% of complete loan modification requests within 30 days of receipt .