we have revised the recommendation to reflect this comment . dod concurred with our two recommendations that the secretary of defense ( 1 ) validate service - established readiness rebuilding goals , strategies for achieving the goals , and metrics for measuring progress , revising as appropriate and ( 2 ) develop a method to evaluate the department's readiness recovery efforts against the agreed - upon goals through objective measurement and systematic analysis . the department stated that it would continue to work with the military services to validate and evaluate their readiness recovery goals and the metrics for measuring their progress . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ; and the secretaries of the air force , army , and navy . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3489 or pendletonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report is a public version of our june 2016 classified report . dod deemed some of the information in that report as secret , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits secret information and data such as readiness trend data , deployment data , and select details of the services' readiness recovery plans . although the information provided in this report is limited in scope , it addresses the same objectives as the classified report ( with the exception of removing the discussion of readiness level from the first objective ) and includes the same recommendations . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to describe the factors that affect reported readiness levels and to identify the steps the department is taking to manage the impact of continued deployments on readiness , we reviewed and analyzed readiness data and information from the office of the secretary of defense , the joint staff , the combatant commands , and each of the military services . our analysis covered data from fiscal year 2008 through fiscal year 2015 to maximize the amount of available and reliable data for us to determine meaningful trends . we also analyzed data from the joint staff on the global demand for forces to document trends in demand from fiscal year 2012 through fiscal year 2016 . we identified the trend in overall demand as identified by the combatant commands and identified the trend in the portion of this overall demand that dod provided forces to support . we evaluated the department's overall strategic - level readiness assessment ( ra ) and the ra of each of the military services to document trends in reported readiness . to determine historical and current readiness levels and key factors that contributed to those levels , we analyzed quarterly readiness reports to congress , joint forces readiness review documents , and the services' readiness assessments .