we interviewed u.s . naval air systems command officials on airworthiness standards as well as the mission system in development by the navy . we visited the air force 309th aerospace maintenance and regeneration group ( amarg ) , located on davis - monthan air force base , to view the 13 c - 27js in storage and interview air force officials in charge of the c - 27js on site , as well as collect flight and maintenance logs regarding past c - 27j operation . we met with u.s. army special operations command officials at fort bragg , interviewed contracted logistics support for the c - 27j , and toured the parts warehouse and viewed some of the c - 27js on site . we also interviewed program office officials and contractor representatives from the coast guard's c - 27j asset project office to gain a better sense of operational challenges and how they are being addressed and toured their respective facilities to discuss issues related to the fielding of the aircraft . we visited l - 3 communications in waco , texas to discuss the progress of the 14th plane , view the plane in its current condition , and interview defense contract management agency officials . to assess the costs of operating and fully equipping the c - 27j for coast guard missions compared to the program of record , we used the coast guard's may 2012 business case for information regarding all of the costs associated with acquiring and operating this asset for the next 30 years — 2013 through 2042 . this estimate , derived in may 2012 by the survivability / vulnerability information analysis center at wright patterson air force base in ohio , used the costs for the hc - 144 and the hc - 130j to estimate the costs of the c - 27j using the relative weights of each aircraft . we also used the same perspective as this analysis , in that we looked at the costs to the coast guard over the next 30 years given the options for fleet composition . we assumed — similar to the 2012 business case — that the coast guard has to purchase the remaining hc - 130js with acquisition funds even though these aircraft have been added by congress to the coast guard's budget in prior years . we changed three assumptions underlying the analysis to better reflect the coast guard's actual data: 1 . flight hours: the business case assumed that the c - 27j and hc - 144 would fly 1,200 hours per year but the coast guard plans to fly each aircraft for 1,000 hours per year . our analysis used the 1,000 hour number because it is the actual planned amount . designed service life: the coast guard's business case assumed that all three of its fixed - wing assets have the same designed service life . however , the hc - 144 has a 40-year designed service life , the c - 27j has a 25-year designed service life , and the hc - 130j is designed for a 30-year life .