changes in housing policies . budget officials noted that changes in housing policies that allow service members to receive the housing allowance who previously were not eligible for the allowance , changes in the number of privatized housing units , or other changes to housing or housing allowance policies affect the accuracy of the services' estimates for the number of personnel and total cost of the housing allowance . the military services have taken some actions that they said should help improve the accuracy of the housing allowance cost estimates . we conducted this performance audit from august 2010 through may 2011 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . by law , housing allowance rates are to be based on the costs of adequate housing for civilians with comparable income levels in the same areas . to do this , the department of defense ( dod ) identified six housing profiles , ranging from a one - bedroom apartment to a four - bedroom single - family detached house and identified a pay grade for each profile — also referred to as an anchor — that matches the type of housing normally occupied by civilians with comparable incomes . using the housing profiles and the local costs of each profile in the geographic areas of the country , dod establishes the allowance rates each year . dod established separate housing profiles for members with and without dependents and established a method to ensure that allowance rates would increase with each pay grade . for example , the one - bedroom apartment profile corresponds to an e - 4 without dependents and the four bedroom single family home profile corresponds to an o - 5 with dependents . dod sets the housing allowance rates for pay grades that are not anchors based on the last anchor plus a percentage of the difference between the last anchor and the next anchor . for example , an e - 7 with dependents receives the same rate as an e - 6 — the anchor for a three - bedroom townhouse — plus 36 percent of the difference between the anchor for a three - bedroom townhouse and three - bedroom single - family detached house . table 1 and table 2 show the housing profiles for each pay grade and the method dod uses to calculate the allowance rates for service members with dependents and without dependents , respectively . dod calculates nearly 20,000 separate allowance rates each year: for each of the 27 military pay grades , ranging from e - 1 ( junior enlisted ) to o - 10 ( general or flag officer ) ; for personnel with and without dependents ( spouse , children , or other dependents ) ; and in each of the 364 dod - established military housing areas . the housing allowance is intended to cover the average costs of rent , utilities , and renter's insurance in private sector housing .