( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for their review and comment . dhs provided written comments , which are noted below and reproduced in full in appendix iv , and technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . consequence is the effect of a successful attack . tsa uses the tssra , a bi - annual risk assessment that considers the three elements of risk to measure the risk of various terrorist attack scenarios , evaluate transportation modes , and identify surface security priorities . surface inspectors conduct a variety of activities to implement tsa's surface transportation security mission , including ( 1 ) regulatory inspections for freight and passenger rail systems , ( 2 ) regulatory twic inspections , and ( 3 ) non - regulatory security assessments and training which surface transportation entities participate in on a voluntary basis . surface inspector activities are , in part , determined by an annual surface work plan that lays out the minimum required number of surface inspector activities to be completed by each field office . specifically , the work plan requirements are designed to take up about one - third of inspectors' available working hours , with the expectation that the other two - thirds of inspectors' time will be used for related activities , such as documentation and follow - up , or other tasks as determined by local afsd - is and fsds in the field . to develop the annual surface work plan , officials from office of security operation's surface compliance branch and ospie meet with each of the rsis once a year to determine the requirements for each office . according to tsa officials , they rely on the previous year's requirements as well as data on surface inspectors' past activities as logged in paris as a starting point to develop the requirements , and adjust the work plan based on their professional judgment of the unique environment in each field office's area of responsibility . tsa officials stated that they consider variables such as the compliance rates for inspections , the amount of tih materials being shipped through an area , and any other relevant risk - related information when they develop the work plan . surface inspectors conduct inspections to enforce several freight and passenger rail security requirements . table 3 provides descriptions of these inspections and appendix ii provides a complete listing of tsa's regulatory activities . tsa also tracks the rate at which the inspected entities comply with the regulations discussed in table 3 . according to tsa data , on average , overall compliance rates for inspections have remained relatively high , and the compliance rates have generally improved over the years as entities have become more familiar with the processes and expectations of each type of inspection . surface inspectors work with the uscg to conduct inspections of twic card holders attempting to access the secured area of maritime facilities regulated by the maritime transportation security act of 2002 ( mtsa ) . tsa first issued the twic regulation in 2007 in cooperation with the uscg , and according to tsa officials , began nationwide implementation of tsa inspection of twics at maritime facilities in fiscal year 2017 .