rams . oaa title iii programs are an invaluable support mechanism for many seniors , providing a varied network of care and services as they age . seniors' needs for the types of services provided through these programs will only increase over time since demographic studies show a larger proportion of americans will be age 60 and older over the next few decades . programs that allow seniors to remain in their own homes and communities afford seniors the independence and dignity they desire . as current fiscal stress and looming deficits continue to constrain available resources , it will be increasingly important for all elements of the home and community - based service network to focus services on those in greatest need . ( 2 ) how have agencies coped with increasing requests in the current economic environment ? our analysis is based on preliminary responses to a gao web - based survey of a random national sample of 125 local area agencies on aging . as of july 30 , 2010 , our response rate was 54 percent . these agencies are the frontline administrators of title iii services for seniors , and our survey asked them about fiscal year 2009 . we also reviewed 51 aging plans from states and the district of columbia , reviewed relevant statutory provisions , conducted site visits to 4 states , and interviewed national , state , and local officials involved in title iii programs . this testimony is part of ongoing work for a report requested by the special committee on aging and scheduled to be issued in early 2011 in which we intend to estimate need for and potential gaps in title iii services , and provide results from our completed survey . we discussed our preliminary results with aoa and incorporated their comments as appropriate . for more information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from december 2009 to august 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions . the purpose of title iii of the oaa is to help seniors maintain independence in their homes and communities by providing appropriate support services and promoting a continuum of care for the vulnerable elderly . the oaa laid the foundation for the current aging services network . this network is comprised of 56 state units on aging ( sua ) , 629 area agencies on aging ( aaa ) , 244 tribal and native american organizations , and 2 organizations serving native hawaiians , as well as nearly 20,000 local service provider organizations . these organizations are responsible for the planning , development , and coordination of a wide array of home and community - based services within each state under title iii of the oaa . this testimony focuses on three categories of services — those provided under parts b , c , and e of title iii of the oaa .