we do not agree . in the vcs conversions we reviewed , nfs workers typically continue working until they leave through normal attrition including retirement , moving to other jobs in va , or leaving va voluntarily . thus , no special separation costs are incurred . fourth , va states that training costs could reduce our estimated savings . va said these training costs would be for ( 1 ) nfs workers who leave food service to take other va jobs , ( 2 ) vcs employees who replace nfs employees , and ( 3 ) part - time workers providing food service . we do not agree that these costs would reduce our estimated savings . as previously discussed , in vcs conversions nfs workers are expected to leave through normal attrition such as retirement , voluntarily leaving for other va jobs , or voluntarily leaving for jobs outside va . the training for nfs employees taking other jobs would be required whether nfs or non - nfs employees were hired for those jobs . similarly , training for vcs employees replacing nfs employees would be required whether the replacements were vcs or other employees . finally , both vcs and nfs already use many part - time workers and va indicates it will continue this strategy . as a result , these training costs would be required in any event and are not additional costs . competitivesourcing . although va concurred with our recommendation to consider competitive sourcing as an option in providing food services , va raised concerns about the opportunities to use contractors in va's inpatient settings . we agree , as stated in the report , that va may not offer the most attractive business opportunity for food contractors because of va's unique structure for providing inpatient and retail food services separately at its locations and because of the small inpatient workload at most locations . because of these and other uncertainties we could not estimate the number of locations that could benefit from competitive sourcing or the potential savings . nonetheless , we believe that competitive sourcing should be considered because of its potential to increase efficiency . as previously discussed , our work in other areas has shown that the competitive sourcing process reduces costs through increased efficiency whether the government or a contractor wins the competition to provide services . afge opposed all three options we included for study in our recommendations , expressing a number of concerns regarding these options . afge's overarching concern is whether va should focus its cost containment strategies on efforts that , in its view , could further impoverish current workers or compromise food quality . while we understand and appreciate afge's legitimate concerns about current workers' wages and employment and the quality of food provided to veterans , we believe va can adequately address these concerns when implementing our recommendations . in the past , va has demonstrated the ability to implement comparable options without adversely affecting food service workers . further , our discussions with va officials indicate that they remain sensitive to the importance of taking appropriate steps to prevent adverse effects on current food service workers . we discuss afge's specific concerns below . employingvcsworkers .