applications . section 400.27 states that the board shall apply the criteria set forth therein . according to section 400.27 , the board must first review the threshold factors and after its review , if there is a basis for further consideration of the application , must consider all of the listed economic factors when determining the net economic effect of the proposed activity . additionally , the board is to take the threshold factors and economic factors into account in considering the significant public benefit ( s ) that would result from the production activity . federal register comments . the board regulations require the executive secretary to invite public comments in response to a federal register notice , unless the executive secretary determines , based on the notification's content , to recommend further review without inviting public comment . the board procedures instruct staff to publish a notice in the federal register after determining that the notification is complete . agencies' reviews . the board regulations do not require that industry specialists review notifications . the board procedures instruct staff to request industry specialists at commerce and , as appropriate , at other agencies to review the notifications . cbp comments . the board regulations do not require board staff to request cbp comments for notifications . the board procedures instruct staff to prepare a letter to the cbp port director . according to cbp officials and guidance , cbp provides comments regarding its ability to oversee the proposed production activity to help ensure ftz program rules and regulations are followed if it is approved . in general alignment with the regulations , the board's procedures for evaluating production notifications include steps to guide staff in considering the information collected and in preparing a recommendation to the board regarding whether to approve the notification . review of comments and other relevant factors . the board regulations require that the executive secretary's recommendation to the board consider any comments submitted in response to the federal register notice ; guidance from specialists within the government ; and other relevant factors based on board staff's assessment of the notification in the context of the criteria , including threshold and economic factors listed in section 400.27 . the board procedures require staff evaluating notifications to consider any public comments submitted in response to the federal register notice and comments from industry specialists and cbp recommendations and memos . similarly , the board procedures require board staff to notify the applicant of the board's decision . evaluation time frames . the board regulations and procedures specify time frames for notification evaluation . for example , under the regulations , the executive secretary shall submit to the board a recommendation on whether further review of all or part of the activity subject to the notification is warranted within 80 days of receipt of the notification . similarly , the procedures state that board staff will ensure that the recommendation is finalized so that the recommendation and memos can be sent to the board members within 80 days of receipt of the notification . in addition , the regulations and procedures require that the applicant be informed of the board's decision about the notification within 120 days .