payments . broker - dealers , or banks ) ( broker - dealers , banks , or nonfinancial firms ) sells fund shares , including customer payments . for fund securities and cash . ( broker - dealer , bank , or ( banks ) other financial institution ) . sec has primary responsibility for overseeing the various participants in the u.s. securities industry , including broker - dealer and mutual fund firms . it promulgates regulations , performs examinations , and initiates enforcement actions against alleged violators of the securities laws . before conducting business with the public , broker - dealers are required to register with sec and must also join and submit to oversight by an sro . these sros , which include nasdr and nyse , oversee members' compliance with their own rules , rules enacted by sec , and the securities laws . federal regulators of depository institutions have oversight responsibilities for banks , thrifts , and their holding companies . prior to the passage of glba in 1999 , banks conducting securities activities directly were subject to regulation and supervision by their respective banking regulators rather than sec . after glba is fully implemented , banks and thrifts conducting certain securities activities will have to do so in entities registered as broker - dealers subject to oversight by sec and securities industry sros . the role of the depository institution regulators , with regard to the securities activities of the entities that they regulate , now involves sharing information with sec , although under certain circumstances these regulators may conduct examinations of the subsidiaries . under current legislation governing money laundering , the secretary of the treasury has a variety of responsibilities . these include issuing anti - money laundering regulations applicable to financial institutions and other organizations , such as banks , broker - dealers , casinos , and money transmitters . within treasury , the authority to issue and administer these regulations has been delegated to the director of the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) . fincen was established in 1990 to support law enforcement agencies by collecting , analyzing , and coordinating financial intelligence information to combat money laundering . although the extent to which broker - dealers and mutual funds are being used to launder money is not known , law enforcement officials were concerned that the securities industry would increasingly be a target for potential money launderers . all financial sectors , and even commercial businesses , could be targeted by money launderers . the securities industry has characteristics similar to other financial sectors but also has some significant differences . criminals seeking to convert their illegal proceeds to legitimate assets have targeted banks , which take cash for deposit , as a means to initially introduce illicit income into the financial system . law enforcement and securities industry officials said that because securities activities generally do not involve cash , broker - dealers and mutual funds are not as vulnerable as banks during the initial placement stage of the money laundering process .