we received documentation from 17 of the 20 medical centers . we conducted follow - up with the three medical centers that did not provide documentation but did not receive the requested materials from them . we did not evaluate the quality of the language needs assessments or language access policies provided by the 17 medical centers or from the 6 medical centers we visited or reviewed in depth . the information we collected from our sample of 17 medical centers is not generalizable to all va medical centers . in addition to interviews we conducted with va officials , we also interviewed officials from the department of justice ( doj ) , as well as experts in the field of language access services and the provision of culturally competent health care services . we conducted this performance audit from february 2007 through march 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . eo 13166 , improving access to services for persons with limited english proficiency , requires that all federal agencies take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to their programs and services for people with lep . doj has issued guidance that spells out four factors agencies need to consider in determining whether they are taking reasonable steps in this regard: ( 1 ) the number or proportion of lep persons in the eligible service population ; ( 2 ) the frequency with which lep individuals come in contact with the program ; ( 3 ) the importance of the services provided by the program ; and ( 4 ) the resources available . reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access could include developing language access services and guidance for implementing these services . the eo required that each federal agency create a plan outlining steps it will take consistent with doj guidance to ensure meaningful access to its services by lep individuals . the eo did not require doj to evaluate the plans or to monitor the implementation of these plans . in 2002 , in response to eo 13166 , va created and implemented vha directive 2002-006 . it provided a framework for va medical centers to assess and determine if there was a need to develop language assistance policies and language access services . the medical centers retain flexibility to determine exactly how they will comply with the eo , but they must do so in accordance with the four factors as outlined by doj and reiterated in the lep directive . other national organizations also recognize the importance of culturally appropriate care and have established standards or recommendations for its provision . for example , the joint commission has standards related to culturally appropriate health care that must be met by hospitals , including va medical centers , to receive accreditation . va medical centers are implementing va's lep directive in terms of assessing the language needs of its veteran service population , and , if necessary , developing language assistance policies .