consultants . command officials told us that the new 5-year contract provides for greater standardization and a more consistent approach to language training and improves the way language training services are acquired throughout the command . specifically , the new contract offers a universal , standardized training curriculum , an ability to customize instruction to meet specific needs ; a way to attain language proficiencies faster ; and a consistent monitoring of instruction and individual performance . the contractor , a business franchise of berlitz international , plans to use its parent's worldwide resources to provide sof personnel with a variety of instruction services ( such as classroom instruction , tutoring , and total immersion training in a live or virtual environment ) . command officials also believe that the instruction method used by the contractor offers a way for sof personnel to attain proficiency faster . to fully realize the benefits of the new contract , the command has required each of its service components and their units to use the contract to meet all their language - training needs , except when they take advantage of other government language resources , such as the defense language institute . contract costs are higher than those in previous contracts because the command awarded the new contract on the basis of “best value” and gave management and technical factors higher consideration than price . a soflo official estimated that the annual contract cost is currently about $5.5 million to $6 million . if this figure remains the same each year , the total cost of the 5-year contract is projected to be about $30 million . a soflo official said that the total amount could be higher if sof service components utilize more of the contract's language services . this could happen as the service components and their units become more familiar with the contract services and as more sof personnel return from current deployments and are able to access language training . the official also said that some costs are higher than those in prior contracts for such language - training services as total immersion , in which students practice a language while living in another country or in a language - controlled isolated environment . command officials believe the improved quality and delivery of language training outweigh any increased cost . consultants appears to be meeting the expectations , including having its beginning language students meet their proficiency goals , set out in its contract with the command . at the command's initial quarterly contract review in march 2003 , which covered the first 5 months of implementation , command and contractor officials focused on provisions in the contract and on procedural aspects , such as scheduling training , providing materials , and developing contacts . command officials brought up several issues largely related to the cost and implementation of immersion training , classroom requirements for instructors and materials , and the delivery of tactical language training . on the basis of discussions among attendees and our observations at the review , none of the issues discussed appeared irresolvable , and most of them could be addressed by improved communications and more experience in understanding and executing the contract . for example , b.i.b .