ondcp concurred with our recommendation and has implemented it . in july 2014 , ondcp published an assessment of drug abuse prevention and treatment programs in its fiscal year 2015 budget and performance summary , which was released with the annual strategy . ondcp reported that it conducted this assessment by ( 1 ) preparing an inventory of federal agency drug abuse prevention and treatment program activities , starting with those in our report ; ( 2 ) mapping the beneficiaries and services provided by each program activity to determine the extent of overlap ; and ( 3 ) reviewing overlapping programs to assess the level of coordination activities , among other steps . the assessment found that these programs generally serve distinct beneficiaries in distinct settings , which helps prevent overlap and duplication . in the cases where overlap could occur , ondcp's review of grant awards made under the programs determined that duplication did not occur over a 3-year period ending in 2013 . further , according to the assessment , the agencies managing overlapping programs have coordinated through interagency collaboration , coordinated grant applications , and other activities . however , ondcp found that programs that provide drug abuse prevention and treatment services to support efforts to address homelessness would benefit from greater coordination . in august 2014 , ondcp stated that it is working to ensure additional coordination in this area by , for example , providing guidance to relevant agencies during the office's budget and oversight review process on improving coordination of grant programs that offer similar treatment and recovery support services to homeless clients . ondcp's assessment states that the office will continue to monitor the programs that overlap , as well as any new federal programs that are added to prevent and treat substance use disorders . according to the assessment , this monitoring is to include requiring regular reporting from the agencies as a part of interagency drug abuse prevention and treatment working group meetings and working with the agencies to ensure greater coordination and opportunities to consolidate programs as a part of the annual budget process . as a result of ondcp's actions in response to our recommendation , the office will be better positioned to help ensure that federal agencies undertaking similar drug abuse prevention and treatment efforts better leverage and more efficiently use limited resources . the hidta program is focused on counternarcotics . this survey collected information on services provided and coordination efforts . in addition , we interviewed officials from ondcp and selected federal drug control agencies . in performing the work for our april 2013 report , we selected eight urban areas for review where one of each of five types of field - based information sharing entities — hidta investigative support centers , joint terrorism task forces , federal bureau of investigation field intelligence groups , regional information sharing system ( riss ) centers , and state and major urban area fusion centers — was either physically located or had jurisdiction and collected information from the entities in those areas on their analytic and investigative support services . we compared the entities' descriptions of their activities and identified overlap among them .