this concludes my prepared testimony . i would be happy to respond to any questions that members of the subcommittee may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8816 . john mortin , assistant director ; amy bernstein ; frances cook ; odi cuero ; richard hung ; amanda miller ; james r. russell ; and jonathan tumin made key contributions to this testimony . the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 originally required the development of an automated entry and exit control system to collect a record of departure for every alien departing the united states and match the record of departure with the record of the alien's arrival in the united states ; make it possible to identify nonimmigrants who remain in the country beyond the authorized period ; and not significantly disrupt trade , tourism , or other legitimate cross - border traffic at land border ports of entry . it also required the integration of overstay information into appropriate databases of the immigration and naturalization service and the department of state , including those used at ports of entry and at consular offices . the system was originally to be developed by september 30 , 1998 ; this deadline was changed to october 15 , 1998 , and was changed again for land border ports of entry and sea ports to march 30 , 2001 . the immigration and naturalization service data management improvement act ( dmia ) of 2000 replaced the 1996 statute in its entirety , requiring instead an electronic system that would provide access to and integrate alien arrival and departure data that are authorized or required to be created or collected under law , are in an electronic format , and are in a database of the department of justice or the department of state , including those created or used at ports of entry and at consular offices . the act specifically provided that it not be construed to permit the imposition of any new documentary or data collection requirements on any person for the purpose of satisfying its provisions , but it further provided that it also not be construed to reduce or curtail any authority of the attorney general ( now secretary of homeland security ) or secretary of state under any other provision of law . the integrated entry and exit data system was to be implemented at airports and seaports by december 31 , 2003 , at the 50 busiest land ports of entry by december 31 , 2004 , and at all remaining ports of entry by december 31 , 2005 . the dmia also required that the system use available data to produce a report of arriving and departing aliens by country of nationality , classification as an immigrant or nonimmigrant , and date of arrival in and departure from the united states . the system was to match an alien's available arrival data with the alien's available departure data , assist in the identification of possible overstays , and use available alien arrival and departure data for annual reports to congress .