below are selected examples from those counties . clay county , alabama ( population 14,092 ) has had seven flood declarations . this option has several advantages . first , it could reduce flood losses by ensuring that more homes were better protected from flooding through mitigation , whether it was through elevation , relocation , or demolition . because many repetitive loss properties have subsidized premiums — that is , rates that do not reflect their actual risk of flooding — increased mitigation could reduce the claims payments the program makes on these properties and could ultimately reduce taxpayer exposure in the long term . as the congressional findings in the bunning - bereuter - blumenauer flood insurance reform act of 2004 noted , and as fema officials concurred , mitigating repetitive loss properties through buyouts , elevations , relocation , flood - proofing , or regrading and other engineering projects would produce savings for policyholders and for federal taxpayers through reduced flood insurance losses and federal disaster assistance . second , denying subsidies to those who refuse or do not respond to mitigation offers could increase the number of property owners paying full - risk rates and encourage mitigation . third , fema could build upon its existing mitigation programs and thus continue targeting those properties that have been most costly in terms of claims paid while maintaining current subsidy rates . as we have noted , subsidies have been used to encourage participation in the program . local officials generally support increased mitigation efforts . reducing flood risk generally increases property values and , as a consequence , the local tax base . and as we have seen , participation from local communities is critical for successful mitigation efforts . however , there are several disadvantages associated with this option . first , because subsidized rates do not reflect a property's actual flood risk , subsidized property owners might not be motivated to undertake mitigation efforts that would reduce the risk of flood and their premium rate . second , substantially increasing mitigation efforts would be costly and would require increased funding for fema's mitigation programs . as stated earlier , about 1.2 million policies received subsidized rates in 2007 , including approximately 7,000 severe repetitive loss properties . fema estimates that the average mitigation cost would range from about $143,000 to about $176,000 per residential property . buyouts and relocations would be more costly in areas of the country with relatively expensive real estate . applying fema's mitigation cost range per property to the number of severe repetitive loss properties results in an estimated cost range of approximately $1 billion to approximately $1.2 billion . applying the same calculation to the rest of the repetitive loss properties would add over $17 billion to over $22 billion to the estimate . however , mitigation costs would have to be weighed against the possible savings from a decrease in flood damage that would result from mitigation . third , the mitigation process is often lengthy , and mitigating a large number of properties could take a number of years to complete , and until then , subsidized premium rates would continue to negatively affect the program's financial health .