suppression . when a fire starts , interagency policy calls for the agencies to consider land management objectives — identified in land and fire management plans developed by each land management unit — and the structures and resources at risk when determining whether or how to suppress the fire . a wide spectrum of strategies is available to choose from , and the land manager at the affected local unit is responsible for determining which strategy to use — from conducting all - out suppression efforts to monitoring fires within predetermined areas in order to provide natural resource benefits . when a fire is reported , the agencies are to follow a principle of closest available resource , meaning that , regardless of jurisdiction , the closest available firefighting equipment and personnel respond . in instances when fires escape initial attack and grow large , the agencies respond using an interagency system that mobilizes additional firefighting assets from federal , state , and local agencies , as well as private contractors , regardless of which agency or agencies have jurisdiction over the burning lands . the agencies use an incident management system under which specialized teams are mobilized to respond to wildland fires , with the size and composition of the team determined by the complexity of the fire . federal agencies typically fund the costs of these activities from their wildland fire suppression accounts . fuel reduction . fuel reduction refers to agencies' efforts to reduce potentially hazardous vegetation that can fuel fires , such as brush and “ladder fuels” ( i.e. , small trees and other vegetation that can carry fire vertically to taller vegetation such as large trees ) , in an effort to reduce the potential for severe wildland fires , lessen the damage caused by fires , limit the spread of flammable invasive species , and restore and maintain healthy ecosystems . the agencies use multiple approaches for reducing this vegetation , including setting fires under controlled conditions ( prescribed burns ) , mechanical thinning , herbicides , certain grazing methods , or combinations of these and other approaches . the agencies typically fund these activities from their fuel reduction accounts . risk is an inherent element of wildland fire management . federal agencies acknowledge this risk , and agency policies emphasize the importance of managing their programs accordingly . for example , forest service guidance states that “the wildland fire management environment is complex and possesses inherent hazards that can — even with reasonable mitigation — result in harm.” according to a 2013 forest service report on decision making for wildfires , risk management is to be applied at all levels of wildfire decision making , from the individual firefighter on the ground facing changing environmental conditions to national leaders of the fire management agencies weighing limited budgets against increasingly active fire seasons . for example , the report explains that , during individual wildland fires , risk can be defined as “a function of values , hazards , and probability. congress , the office of management and budget , federal agency officials , and others have raised questions about the growing cost of federal wildland fire management .