appraisals . the three bank regulators and ncua received more than 160 comments during the 2017 egrpra process related to appraisal requirements . the commenters included banks and others that sought to raise the size of the loans that require appraisals , and a large number of appraisers that objected to any changes in the requirements according to the egrpra report , several professional appraiser associations argued that raising the threshold could undermine the safety and soundness of lenders and diminish consumer protection for mortgage financing . these commenters argued that increasing the thresholds could encourage banks to neglect collateral risk - management responsibilities . in response , in july 2017 , the regulators proposed raising the threshold for when an appraisal is required from $250,000 to $400,000 for commercial real estate loans . the regulators indicated that the appraisal requirements for 1-4 family residential mortgage loans above the current $250,000 would not be appropriate at the this time because they believed having such appraisals for loans above that level increased the safety of those loans and better protected consumers and because other participants in the housing market , such as the department of housing and urban development and the government - sponsored enterprises , also required appraisals for loans above that amount . however , the depository institution regulators included in the proposal a request for comment about the appraisal requirements for residential real estate and what banks think are other factors that should be included when considering the threshold for these loans . as part of the 2017 egrpra process , the regulators also received comments indicating that banks in rural areas were having difficulty securing appraisers . in the egrpra report , the regulators acknowledged this difficulty and in may 2017 , the bank regulators and ncua issued agency guidance on how institutions could obtain temporary waivers and use other means to expand the pool of persons eligible to prepare appraisals in cases in which suitable appraiser staff were unavailable . the agencies also responded to commenters who found the evaluation process confusing by issuing an interagency advisory on the process in march 2016 . evaluations may be used instead of an appraisal for certain transactions including those under the threshold . frequency of safety and soundness examinations . as part of the 2017 egrpra process , the agencies also received comments requesting that they raise the total asset threshold for an insured depository institution to qualify for the extended 18-month examination cycle from $1 billion to $2 billion and to further extend the examinations cycle from 18 months to 36 months . during the egrpra process , congress took legislative action to reduce examination frequency for smaller , well - capitalized banks . in 2015 , the fast act raised the threshold for the 18-month examination cycle from less than $500 million to less than $1 billion for certain well - capitalized and well - managed depository institutions with an “outstanding” composite rating and gave the agencies discretion to similarly raise this threshold for certain depository institutions with an “outstanding” or “good” composite rating .