cdc . since 2014 , cdc has published a series of guidance documents — called the core elements of antibiotic stewardship ( core elements ) — to promote the appropriate use of antibiotics in health care . the core elements are tailored to hospitals , nursing homes , outpatient settings , small and critical access hospitals , and low - and middle - income countries with limited resources . common elements in these guidance documents include ( 1 ) leadership commitment , ( 2 ) implementation of policies and interventions to improve antibiotic use , ( 3 ) tracking and reporting antibiotic use , and ( 4 ) education to providers on appropriate antibiotic use . for more information on mips , see gao , health care quality: hhs should set priorities and comprehensively plan its efforts to better align health quality measures , gao - 17-5 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 13 , 2016 ) and medicare: small and rural practices' experiences in previous programs and expected performance in the merit - based incentive payment system , gao - 18-428 ( washington , d.c.: may 31 , 2018 ) . other sources . in particular , cdc has focused its efforts to expand antibiotic use data collection from hospitals , where an estimated one in two patients receives an antibiotic for at least one day during an average hospital stay . cdc launched its au option in 2011 as a voluntary , electronic reporting tool added on to the pre - existing nhsn . the au option allows the nation's 6,849 hospitals that are already reporting to the nhsn to submit their antibiotic use data in a standardized format . cdc then aggregates such data to calculate national benchmarks and allows hospitals to compare their actual antibiotic use against those benchmarks . in addition , cdc has periodically conducted prevalence surveys through the eip to gather data on health care - associated infections and antibiotic use in about 200 hospitals and 161 nursing homes in 10 states . with regard to outpatient settings , cdc has acquired , through a proprietary source , 8 years of pharmacy data on antibiotic prescriptions since 2011 , which the agency is using to better characterize patterns in outpatient prescribing and to develop targeted interventions for high - prescribing areas . federal agencies have developed training on antibiotic stewardship , as follows: cdc . in 2018 , cdc launched a free , online training course for various types of clinicians — including physicians , dentists , pharmacists , physician assistants , and nurses — to inform them about proper antibiotic prescribing and strategies for communicating with patients . clinicians can receive credit for partial completion ( at least 50 percent ) or full completion of this training as improvement activities under mips in 2019 . cms . in addition , cdc officials stated that the agency's collection of antibiotic use data through the eip nursing homes prevalence survey has been limited in scope and frequency due to insufficient resources . in addition , cdc and the office of global affairs launched the antimicrobial resistance challenge at the united nations general assembly in september 2018 to catalyze global action against antibiotic resistance .