ssa agreed with all our recommendations . ssa stated that it will evaluate the feasibility of using the aero process . in addition , ssa stated that it will review the efficacy of matching federal salary payment records with ssa disability files of di beneficiaries and ssi recipients . we encourage ssa to follow through on these recommendations . ssa also expressed concern that the overall message of our report is misleading and in some cases factually incorrect . dot stated that it did not have comments on the report . ssa's comments , along with our responses , are reprinted in appendix iv , and its technical comments were incorporated throughout the report as appropriate . the remainder was other federal civilian employees . according to ssa officials , ssa currently does not obtain payroll records from the federal government to identify ssa disability beneficiaries or recipients who are currently working . ssa officials stated that they have not conducted a review to determine the feasibility of conducting such a match . however , ssa acknowledged that these payroll records may be helpful in more quickly identifying individuals who are working so that work cdrs could be performed to evaluate whether those individuals should have their disability payments suspended . our analysis of data from dot on commercial drivers and from ssa on disability beneficiaries found that about 600,000 individuals had been issued cdls and were receiving full social security disability benefits . the actual number of ssa disability beneficiaries with active cdls cannot be determined for two reasons . first , states maintain the current status of cdls , not dot . second , possession of a cdl does not necessarily indicate that the individual returned to work . because federal regulations require interstate commercial drivers to be examined and certified by a licensed medical examiner to be able to physically drive a commercial vehicle once every 2 years , we selected a nonrepresentative selection of 12 states to determine how many ssa disability beneficiaries had cdls issued after their disabilities were determined by ssa . of the 600,000 cdl holders receiving social security disability benefits , about 144,000 of these individuals were from our 12 selected states . as figure 2 shows , about 62,000 of these 144,000 individuals , or about 43 percent , had cdls that were issued after ssa determined that the individuals met the federal requirements for full disability benefits . as a result , we consider the issuance of cdls to be an indication that these individuals may no longer may no longer have serious medical conditions and may have returned to work . work cdrs can also be triggered by other events . for example , ssa requires beneficiaries to undergo periodic medical examinations to assess whether they continue to be considered eligible for benefits . during such reviews , ssa's staff sometimes discovers evidence that a beneficiary may be working and usually forwards the case to an ssa field office or program service center for earnings / work development . additional events that may trigger a work cdr include reports from state vocational rehabilitation agencies , reports from other federal agencies , and anonymous tips .