( fig . 1 shows the distribution of these sites by state. ) dod officials acknowledge that they will not have a firm inventory for several years . for example , as of september 30 , 2002 , the army had not completed a detailed inventory of closed ranges at 86 percent of active installations ; the 105 sites identified by the army represented sites on only 14 percent of the army's installations . the army is working to identify sites on the remaining installations and plans to have 40 percent of its installations accounted for by the next defense environmental restoration program annual report to congress in spring 2004 . similarly , the corps recently identified 75 additional sites to be included in the inventory as a result of its effort to reevaluate sites previously determined not to need further action after the initial evaluation . because not all of the sites have been identified , dod has only a preliminary idea of the extent of cleanup that will be needed . to help complete the identification process , dod has developed a web site that stakeholders , such as states , tribes , and federal regulators , can use to suggest additions and revisions to the inventory . dod plans to update the inventory in its future defense environmental response program annual report to congress using , in part , the information collected from this web site . of the 2,307 sites identified , dod has determined , based on an initial evaluation , that 362 do not require any further dod action ( see fig . however , these 362 sites are formerly used defense sites , and the corps' evaluation of these sites was less comprehensive than other evaluations conducted by dod under the cercla process . in making its determinations , the corps conducted a preliminary assessment of eligibility and determined that the potential for military munitions hazard was not present . as a result of this determination , the sites were not evaluated further . the corps is in the process of reviewing these determinations with local stakeholders to ensure that there was a sound basis for the original determination . it has recently decided that some of these sites need to be reassessed to determine if cleanup is needed . of the 1,945 sites that required further action , dod has either not begun or has not completed its study , or has determined that further study is needed , for 1,387 sites ( see fig . for example , 241 air force and 105 army sites at closed ranges on active installations have not been evaluated . for other sites , primarily formerly used defense sites , dod has completed its initial evaluation and determined that further investigation is needed . dod has completed its assessment of 558 sites , nearly all of which are ranges on formerly used defense sites or closing installations , and determined that no cleanup action was needed for 475 ; the remaining 83 sites required some level of cleanup action . of the 83 sites that required cleanup action , 60 have cleanup action planned or under way and 23 are complete .