a portion of u.s . reservation 357 at whitehaven parkway , nw transfer of administrative jurisdiction from the district to the architect of the capitol ( aoc ) ( section 201 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( a ) ) 1 . additional land over i - 395 ( see #8 above ) a. northernmost 0.249 acres to nps with approval of the aoc ( for special needs parking ) b . remaining portion to the aoc transfers of administrative jurisdiction from the secretary of the interior to the district ( section 201 ( b ) ) 1 . what is the status of the conveyances and transfers of the properties identified in public law 109-396 ? to answer each of the four questions , we reviewed and analyzed documents showing basic property data — such as maps , agency reports and public law 109-396 — and conducted site visits to key properties . we also reviewed and analyzed planning documents , such as a summary of the properties created by the district government ; area master plans ; and development proposals . we interviewed senior officials from the district government , nps , the u.s. park police ( uspp ) , gsa , and the aoc as well as members of stakeholder groups , including advisory neighborhood commission 6 , the capitol hill restoration society , the earth conservation corps , the anacostia economic development corporation , the national capital planning commission , and the u.s. commission of fine arts . we conducted this performance audit from august 2007 through june 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the federal and district of columbia government real property act of 2006 was intended to provide the district with property for economic development to help expand its tax base and decrease the district's financial dependence on the federal government . expanding the district's tax base should help reduce the district's structural fiscal imbalance . a structural fiscal imbalance exists when the cost of providing an average level of public services exceeds the amount of revenue a government raises by applying average tax rates . we highlighted this structural imbalance in a 2003 report , finding that the district's public service costs far exceeded that of the average state fiscal system , and these costs were largely beyond its control , due to factors such as its large low - income population . the report estimated that the imbalance likely exceeded $470 million annually and could have been as high as $1.1 billion , depending on the assumptions used . our analysis indicated that the cost of delivering an average level of services per capita in the district exceeded that of the average state fiscal system by approximately 75 percent ( or $2.3 billion more annually than if it faced average cost circumstances ) and was over one third more than the second - highest cost fiscal system , new york .