see figure 5 . after providing his urine specimen to the collector , the investigator observed that the collector only filled one specimen bottle rather than the two required under dot's split specimen protocols . this site had a 15-item checklist outlining dot protocols hanging on the wall . our investigator observed the technician using the checklist while conducting the collection of the urine specimen . dallas / fort worth , site 6: this collection site allowed the employee access to water by not securing the toilet lid in the collection room — leaving the employee an opportunity to use the clear un - blued water to potentially dilute the specimen . also in the collection room was an automatic spray disinfectant on the wall . a tested employee could have used this spray to dilute or adulterate his or her specimen . see appendix i for a site - specific breakdown , by protocol , of the results of our testing in the new york / northern new jersey area . we determined that drug - masking products were widely available for purchase over the internet and used this method to purchase adulterants and synthetic urine for our tests . as discussed above , we submitted specimens containing adulterants at four of the collection sites and at another four sites we used synthetic urine without being caught by site collectors , demonstrating that these products could easily be brought in and used during a test . in every case that investigators used adulterants or substitutes during the drug test , the drug - masking products went undetected during lab testing , lab validation , and mro review of the labs' results . we also determined that publicly available regulations provide details on how drug testing labs test and validate urine specimens . companies that sell drug - masking products can access this information and update their products to prevent them from being detected by the laboratory . in performing internet searches , we found drug - masking products that the public can easily obtain and that are marketed as products that can be used to pass urine drug tests . a simple internet search using a phrase such as “pass drug test” resulted in over 2 million web site hits . we determined that these types of web sites contained various adulterants and urine substitutes available for purchase , including accessories that would allow an employee to conceal the product on their body when taking a test . we used these types of web sites to purchase drug - masking products for our testing of selected urine collection sites . samhsa is aware of these products and revised the mandatory guidelines for federal workplace drug testing programs in 2004 to require that specimen validity tests be conducted on all urine specimens , noting that there was a recent increase in the number of chemical adulterants that are marketed on the internet and in certain magazines . dot did not adopt this update in their regulations - - - - - - so currently drug testing laboratories are only authorized , not required , to perform validity testing for all dot required commercial motor carrier drug tests .