key contributors to this report are listed in the appendix . the costs associated with the training are shown in figure 3 below . the largest cost factor in this task order was the cost of the flight school itself , which accounted for 68.4 percent ( or $8.2 million ) of the total cost , according to contracting officials . the flight school included ground school , simulation , advanced instruments , and flying hours training , and it represented a cost per each of the 13 students who actually attended the training . the flight school also included the cost of housing , electronic books / manuals , and campus security , some of which costs were negotiable , according to officials . other costs , such as the defense security cooperation agency 3.5 percent surcharge and contract administration services 1.2 percent surcharge , were established based upon rates current at the time of the letter of offer and acceptance . according to officials , the contractor's profit was established at the time of award of the contract in 2007 . officials stated that the costs that could be negotiated were limited and included costs associated with travel , lodging , and adding more advisors to augment the training . according to contracting officials , these limitations were not unique to this asff training but applied broadly to all asff training task orders they executed under wff . in 2018 dod decided to replace wff , which was nearing expiration , with a series of new contracts . dod has begun to transition work previously performed under wff to these new contracts , the first of which was awarded in 2018 . we reviewed and analyzed guidance on the processes for identifying and requesting funding for training needs . we interviewed dod officials involved in the process , including those from combined security transition command - afghanistan ; train advise assist command – air , program executive office for simulation , training , and instrumentation ; and army contracting command . for our second objective , we reviewed guidance on the process for developing and executing asff training contracts , as well as the contracting process . the united states currently has two primary missions in afghanistan: the u.s - led counterterrorism mission and the nato - led resolute support mission to train , advise , and assist the andsf . for u.s. purposes , both of these missions are a part of operation freedom's sentinel , commanded by u.s. forces - afghanistan . combined security transition command - afghanistan is the command under nato's resolute support mission that conducts the train , advise , and assist mission in afghanistan . these efforts are carried out via the regional train advise assist commands ( taacs ) that collectively cover all of afghanistan . specifically , train advise assist command – air ( taac - air ) focuses on developing and advising the afghan air force . the asff is generally a 2-year appropriation that is used to provide assistance , with the concurrence of the secretary of state , to the security forces of afghanistan , including the provision of equipment , supplies , services , training , facility and infrastructure repair , renovation , construction , and funding .