in response to p.l . 106-107 , omb created grants.gov , a central grant identification and application website for federal grant programs . the grants.gov oversight and management structure includes hhs , the managing partner agency , the grants.gov program management office , which is housed within hhs and responsible for day - to - day management , and formerly the geb which provided leadership and resources . the gpc was also involved because of its role in streamlining pre - award policies and implementing p.l . established to support the development of a government - wide solution to support end to - end grants management activities that promote citizen access , customer service , and agency financial and technical stewardship . in 2005 , omb selected the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and the national science foundation ( nsf ) to jointly lead the effort . later , nsf took over the leadership role . in fiscal year 2012 , it became part of the financial management line of business . transparency this act required omb to establish a free , publicly accessible website containing data on federal awards and subawards . omb began providing data on federal awards on usaspending.gov in december 2007 and phased in reporting on subawards in 2010 . transparency congress and the administration built provisions ( such as quarterly use and outcome reporting ) into the recovery act to increase transparency and accountability over spending . the recovery act called for a website ( recovery.gov ) for the public to access reported data . a second website ( federalreporting.gov ) was established so grant recipients could report their data . the recovery act also established the recovery accountability and transparency board to coordinate and conduct oversight of funds distributed under the act in order to prevent fraud , waste , and abuse . type transparency this board , established by an executive order , provides strategic direction for enhancing the transparency of federal spending and advance efforts to detect and remediate fraud , waste , and abuse in federal programs . it is charged to work closely with the existing recovery board to extend its successes and lessons learned to all federal spending . this council replaced the gpc and geb in october 2011 . omb charged cofar with identifying emerging issues , challenges , and opportunities in grants management and policy and providing recommendations to omb on policies and actions to improve grants administration . cofar is also expected to serve as a clearinghouse of information on innovations and best practices in grants management . cofar is made up of the omb controller and the chief financial officers from the largest eight grant - making agencies and one of the smaller federal grant - making agencies . the latter serves a rotating 2-year term . in february 2012 , omb published an advanced notice of proposed guidance detailing a series of reform ideas that would standardize information collection across agencies , adopt a risk - based model for single audits , and provide new administrative approaches for determining and monitoring the allocation of federal funds .