weeks . the rates review also found that an additional 64 employees should be deauthorized from auo , because they did not report the required minimum number of auo hours . according to the rates review report , ice field offices were to adjust these auo rates by july 13 , 2014 , or within 4 pay periods of the review . however , we found that ice did not do so for 22 percent ( 140 of 629 ) of the employees identified for a rate decrease across more than 20 ice field offices . in addition , ice did not adjust the auo rate to 0 percent for 55 percent ( 35 of 64 ) of the employees identified for deauthorization . we determined that as a result of not adjusting auo rates , ice paid about $76,000 to these employees using auo as opposed to compensating them with more appropriate forms of overtime , as applicable . we include ocso in our scope when we refer to dhs components throughout this report . we selected this time frame because the office of special counsel ( osc ) first raised allegations of auo abuse within dhs in 2007 . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , u.s. secret service ( usss ) , and the office of the chief security officer ( ocso ) . we omitted the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) and dhs's office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) because they previously used auo on a limited basis to fewer than 10 employees , for about 1 year . according to ice officials , field office management — which is responsible for implementing auo rates adjustments — has not regularly lowered auo rates in response to these rates reviews , and ice human capital officials did not have a mechanism in place to track the disposition of rates reviews . as a result , ice did not have reasonable assurance that it was paying the appropriate auo rate to applicable employees . these data included auo payments to individual employees within each component per pay period as well as occupational characteristics such as grade , series , position title , salary , location , and program office . these data allowed us to calculate , for each component and in aggregate for dhs , the total amount of auo paid per fiscal year ; the average amount of auo pay per employee ; the number of recipients of auo ; and the counts of auo recipients by location , grade , and position title . we assessed the reliability of the auo payments data by ( 1 ) interviewing agency officials about the data sources , the systems' controls , and any quality assurance steps performed by officials before data were provided from the systems and ( 2 ) testing the data for missing data , duplicates , negative dollar amounts or payments , entries with values beyond expected ranges , or other entries that appeared to be unusual . we identified limitations to the data including incomplete duty location information for cbp , incomplete date ranges for nppd , as well as missing auo payments and other variables for several components .