, defendable ) . the coast guard considers some overlap or redundancy to be necessary , to account for such things as operational challenges , boat maintenance downtime , personnel training requirements , and the need for surge capacity to respond to certain incidents . cutters carry boats that can directly rescue mariners in distress . cutters with flight decks can serve as launch platforms for helicopters , which can help with sar operations . the coast guard generally allocates boats to stations based on the needs and conditions of those stations . the coast guard also has other types of boats in its inventory that are used for a variety of missions that may include sar missions . table 3 provides details of selected boats used for search and rescue . figures 9 through 12 show the extent of search and rescue coverage by u.s. coast guard ( coast guard ) boat stations in the contiguous united states and selected coast guard districts reported in september 2013 . the extent of coverage in 2017 was the same as the coast guard's 2013 contractor study reported . table 4 provides details of selected u.s. coast guard ( coast guard ) stations recommended for permanent or seasonal closure and the search and rescue ( sar ) caseloads they reported for fiscal years 2010 through 2016 , as well as estimated fiscal year 2015 annual operating costs . our analysis of coast guard sar single - boat response case data from fiscal years 2010 through 2016 found that the 18 stations recommended for closure reported an average of about 15 single - boat sar responses annually , compared to an annual average of about 41 single - boat responses for all boat stations . these numbers are based on station reported data in the coast guard's marine information for safety and law enforcement ( misle ) case management system , and only include cases in which a single boat was launched to conduct a sar mission . some sar missions result in multiple stations launching due to factors such as close proximity of stations , case complexity such as weather conditions , or other factors such as boat availability or training . including multilaunch cases could result in double counting of sar cases and therefore these cases were excluded from our analysis . due to flexibility in how coast guard stations report sar responses , some seasonal stations , which are detached subunits of larger parent stations , report the number of cases to which they respond in combination with the parent station . because we could not disaggregate this information , we do not report on individual cases from these stations . table 5 provides details of selected stations recommended for permanent or seasonal closure and the sar caseloads they reported during the winter months , for fiscal years 2010 through 2016 . in addition to the contact above , dawn hoff ( assistant director ) , andrew curry ( analyst - in - charge ) , chuck bausell , dorian dunbar , michele fejfar , peter haderlein , eric hauswirth , tracey king , john mingus , claire peachey , and christine san all made key contributions to this report .