this process has several steps . first , to adjust for differences in costs , each of the three rvus is multiplied by the appropriate gpci . second , these adjusted rvus are added together . third , that sum is converted into dollars using a conversion factor — a dollar amount cms calculates that translates each service's rvus into a payment amount . the result equals the medicare payment for that service in that payment locality . for example , to determine the medicare payment for a mid - level office visit in south carolina in 2007 , first , the three rvus — work , practice expense , and malpractice expense — are multiplied by the appropriate gpci ( see fig . second , these adjusted rvus are summed together to total 1.57 . third , this sum is multiplied by the conversion factor ( $37.8975 ) , resulting in a medicare payment of $59.50 for this service . in the district of columbia , total adjusted rvus for a mid - level office visit sum to 1.88 , which the conversion factor translates into a payment of $71.25 . physicians practicing in the district of columbia payment locality receive a higher overall payment for the same service because of the higher costs of operating a private medical practice compared with physicians practicing in the south carolina payment locality . since the work , practice expense , and malpractice expense rvus for a single service are the same in every payment locality , the geographic variation in the medicare payment for a service mirrors the variation in the gpcis across payment localities . cms is required to review the gpcis at least every 3 years and , based on that review , may revise them using the most recent data available . the agency last updated the gpcis in 2005 and is scheduled to review and , if necessary , update them again in 2008 . the data used for the different gpcis are updated on different intervals . specifically , the decennial census , which is the major data source used in calculating the gpcis , provides new data once every 10 years . these data are used in calculating the work and practice expense gpci . hud data , which are also used in calculating the practice expense gpci , are updated annually . cms collects state insurance department and private insurer data , which are used in calculating the malpractice expense gpci , when the gpcis are reviewed every 3 years . in addition , cms is required to review the rvus at least every 5 years and last updated them in 2007 . gpcis can be summarized by the gaf , which broadly illustrates differences in costs across physician payment localities . the gaf is an average of the gpcis , with each of the three gpcis weighted by the percentage of costs accounted for by its corresponding rvu . specifically , on average , across all services , work represents 52.5 percent of costs , practice expense represents 43.7 percent , and malpractice expense represents 3.9 percent .