pt . 73 ( select agents and toxins ) ( new policy in draft ) centers for disease control and prevention ( continued ) designation: contractor access restricted information basis for designation: 41 u.s.c . ยง 401 ; federal acquisition regulations 1.102 ; executive order 11222 ( may 8 , 1965 ) ( new policy in draft ) definition: unclassified information that involves functions reserved to the federal government as vested by the constitution as inherent power or as implied power as necessary for the proper performance of its duties . designating authority: not specified policies or procedures for specialized training for designators: no systematic review process: no designation: for official use only basis for designation: foia , as amended ( new policy in draft ) definition: this designation is applied to unclassified information that is exempt from mandatory release to the public under foia . designating authority: not specified policies or procedures for specialized training for systematic review process: no designators: no designation: law enforcement sensitive basis for designation: not specified ( new policy in draft ) definition: the designation is used for law enforcement purposes . information that could reasonably be expected to interfere with law enforcement proceedings , would deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or impartial adjudication , could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy of others , disclose the identity of a confidential source , disclose investigative techniques and procedures or could reasonably be expected to endanger the life or physical safety of any individual is to be marked law enforcement sensitive . systematic review process: no designation: operations security protected information basis for designation: national security decision directive 298 , ( january 1988 ) . ( new policy in draft ) definition: the designation is applied to unclassified information concerning cdc mission , functions , operations , or programs that require protection in the national interest , or security of homeland defense . centers for disease control and prevention ( continued ) designation: sensitive security information basis for designation: homeland security act of 2002 ( pub . l. no.107-296 ) ; maritime transportation security act of 2002 ( pub . pt.1520 ( may 2004 ) ; management directive ( md ) 11056 ( december 2005 ) . department of homeland security ( continued ) . department of justice ( continued ) systematic review process: no designation: for official use only basis for designation: intelligence policy manual ( august 2005 ) definition: the designation is used for information that may be exempt from mandatory release to the public under the freedom of information act ( foia ) , 5 u.s.c . designating authority: any fbi employee or contractor in the course of performing assigned duties may designate information as fouo . policies or procedures for specialized training for systematic review process: no designators: no designation: law enforcement sensitive basis for designation: intelligence policy manual ( august 2005 ) definition: the designation is used to protect information compiled for law enforcement purposes . les is a subset of fouo . designating authority: any fbi employee or contractor in the course of performing assigned duties may designate information as les .