sarel , michael . “nonlinear effects of inflation on economic growth,” imf staff papers 43 ( 1996 ) . “does inflation matter for growth ? ,” japan and the world economy 13 ( 2001 ) . *khan , mohsin s. and abdelhak s. senhadji . “threshold effects in the relation between inflation and growth,” imf staff papers 48 ( 2001 ) . *kochar , kalpana and sharmini coorey . “economic growth: what has been achieved so far and how ? ” , in hugh bredenkamp and susan schadler ( eds ) , economic adjustment and reform in low - income countries ( washington , d.c.: international monetary fund , 1999 ) . *kremer , stephanie , alexander bick and dieter nautz , “inflation and growth: new evidence from a dynamic panel threshold analysis,” sonderforschungsbereich discussion paper 649 , humboldt university , berlin , germany ( 2009 ) . *kremer , stephanie , alexander bick and dieter nautz , “inflation and growth: new evidence from a panel data threshold analysis,” goethe university working paper , frankfurt ( 2008 ) . *pollin , robert and andong zhu , “inflation and economic growth: a cross - country non - linear analysis,” journal of post keynesian economics 28 , no . *sepehri , ardeshir and saeed moshiri . “inflation - growth profiles across countries: evidence from developing and developed countries,” international review of applied economics 18 , no . *vaona , a. and s. schiavo , “nonparametric and semiparametric evidence on the long - run effects of inflation on growth,” economics letters 94 , no . we reviewed the following empirical studies in the crisis “early warning system” literature written since 1998 . for each study , we documented the variables that were predictive of an economic crisis . where possible , we used a conservative standard for identifying key predictor variables . under the signals method , we selected only variables that had a noise - to - signal ratio ( ntsr ) of 0.5 or less ( less than 1 indicates more signal than noise ) . noise indicates an incorrect prediction while a signal indicates a correct prediction , so a ntsr of less than one implies more correct than incorrect predictions . under traditional regression methods , we selected only variables whose coefficients had p - values less than 0.05 . ( several studies we reviewed reported coefficients that were statistically significant at the 10 percent level. ) berg , andrew and catherine patillo . “predicting currency crises: the indicators approach and an alternative,” journal of international money and finance 18 ( 1999 ) . borio , claudio and philip lowe . “assessing the risk of banking crises,” bis quarterly review ( december 2002 ) . burkart , oliver and virginie coudert . “leading indicators of currency crises for emerging countries,” emerging markets review 3 ( 2002 ) . bussiere , matthieu and marcel fratzscher . “towards a new early warning system of financial crises,” journal of international money and finance 25 ( 2006 ) . ciarlone , alessio and giorgio trebeschi . “designing an early warning system for debt crises,” emerging markets review 6 ( 2005 ) . davis , e. philip and dilruba karim . “comparing early warning systems for banking crises.” journal of financial stability 4 ( 2008 ) .