the numbers just do not add up . the fiscal gap is too great for any realistic expectation that the country can grow its way out of the problem . the failure to reexamine the retirement and health care programs driving the long term will put the nation on an unsustainable fiscal course , absent major changes in tax and / or spending policies . in addition , the failure to reprioritize other claims in the budget will make it increasingly difficult to finance the rest of government , let alone respond to compelling new priorities and needs . as figure 1 below shows , overall budgetary flexibility has been shrinking for some time . in the last 2 decades , mandatory spending — excluding net interest — has jumped by nearly 10 percentage points to consume more than half of the federal budget . *omb current services estimate . this year , however , omb has introduced a formal assessment tool into the deliberations . the part — the program assessment rating tool — is the central element in the performance budgeting piece of the president's management agenda . our long - term budget simulations continue to show that to move into the future with no changes in retirement and health programs is to envision a very different role for the federal government — a government that does little more than mail checks to the elderly and pay interest on the debt . figure 2 below shows the picture if the tax reductions enacted last year are not permitted to sunset and discretionary spending keeps pace with the economy . , whether a program is meeting its long - term and annual goals ) . in addition to the general questions that apply to all , programs are subjected to more specific questions depending on which of seven mechanisms or approaches are used for delivery . omb arrives at a profile for each program by reviewing information from budget submissions , agency strategic and annual performance plans , program evaluations , and other sources . omb also makes an overall assessment whether the program is “effective” or “ineffective.” while the part's program - by - program approach fits with omb's agency - by - agency budget reviews , it is not well - suited to addressing cross - cutting issues or to looking at broad program areas in which several programs address a common goal . although the evaluation of programs in isolation may be revealing , it is often critical to understand how each program fits with a broader portfolio of tools and strategies to accomplish federal missions and performance goals . such an analysis is necessary to capture whether a program complements and supports other related programs , whether it is duplicative and redundant , or whether it actually works at cross - purposes with other initiatives . in such areas as low - income housing or health care , the outcomes achieved by federal policy are the result of the interplay of a complex array of tools including those on the spending side of the budget as well as the tax code and regulations .