section i . addressing uncertainty regarding the likelihood and amount of existing and potential liabilities related to environmental contamination issue statement: companies may not be providing enough information about environmental liabilities in their financial statements because of uncertainties about ( 1 ) whether they have a liability that must be disclosed and ( 2 ) if so , how to estimate the amount of the liability . 0.0 concern #2: the standards and guidance applicable to estimating the amount of environmental liabilities are not specific enough to help companies deal with the uncertainties inherent in deriving the estimates . such uncertainties include the extent to which cleanup costs might be shared with other responsible parties or offset by insurance recoveries , the extent of contamination and required cleanup , the state of the art of available cleanup technology , and the stringency of environmental cleanup standards . do you share this concern ? does the lack of specific standards and guidance for estimating the amount of environmental liabilities contribute to inadequate disclosure of environmental information ? please provide any additional comments you have , or further elaboration on your responses for section i , “addressing uncertainty regarding the likelihood and amount of existing and potential liabilities related to environmental contamination,” in the space below . issue statement: companies may not be providing environmental information in their sec filings that would be considered material by “reasonable investors.” background: applicable regulations and guidance generally define materiality in terms of information that is important to investors' investment decisions or necessary for the fair presentation of the financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles . for example , sec's regulations define material information as “matters about which an average prudent investor ought reasonably to be informed.” as another example , guidance issued by the financial accounting standards board states that the omission or misstatement of an item in a financial report is material if , in the light of surrounding circumstances , the magnitude of the item is such that it is probable that the judgment of a reasonable person relying on the report would have been changed or influenced by the inclusion or correction of the item . sec's regulations and guidance generally do not establish numeric thresholds for determining materiality . however , sec regulation s - k , item 103 “legal proceedings” contains two exceptions: ( 1 ) losses resulting from any administrative or judicial proceeding involving federal , state , or local environmental laws , if the amount of the losses exceeds 10 percent of the company's current assets and ( 2 ) monetary sanctions greater than $100,000 , if a governmental authority is a party to the proceeding . concern #3: the regulations and guidance issued by sec and other standard - setting bodies are not specific enough to ensure adequate disclosure of material information , environmental or otherwise . for example , the regulations and guidance lack any metrics that could serve as minimum thresholds for materiality and do not sufficiently emphasize intangible , nonquantifiable factors in materiality determinations ( for example , the impact of environmental contamination on a company's reputation ) . do you share this concern ?