borders . gao - 13-414t . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2013 . gao schedule assessment guide: best practices for project schedules . gao - 12-120g ( exposure draft ) . washington , d.c.: may 2012 . border security: opportunities exist to ensure more effective use of dhs's air and marine assets . gao - 12-518 . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2012 . u.s. customs and border protection's border security fencing , infrastructure and technology fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan . gao - 12-106r . washington , d.c.: november 17 , 2011 . dhs concurred with this recommendation . in response to our recommendation , dhs stated that ice's office of the chief information officer will develop a program to facilitate , coordinate , and maintain ice's deployed radio systems , and will ensure that the agency establishes the proper documentation of resource needs , defines program goals , and establishes measures to monitor performance by january 31 , 2016 . we also concluded in march 2015 that cbp and ice could do more to ensure the agencies are meeting the training needs of all cbp and ice radio users . we reported that cbp provided training to its agents and officers on upgraded radio systems in each southwest border location that received upgrades . however , 8 of 14 cbp radio user groups we met with suggested that radio users be provided with additional radio training to enhance their proficiency in using radio systems . further , we found that cbp does not know how many radio users are in need of training . we recommended in march 2015 that cbp ( 1 ) develop and implement a plan to address any skills gaps for cbp agents and officers related to understanding the new digital radio systems and interagency radio use protocols , and ( 2 ) develop a mechanism to verify that all border patrol and office of field operations radio users receive radio training . dhs concurred with these recommendations and estimated a completion date of march 31 , 2016 . we also found that ice provided training on the upgraded radio systems in one location , but 3 of the 4 ice radio user groups we met with in field locations stated that additional training would help address challenges experienced by radio users . further , ice officials stated that they did not track the training that the agency provided . we recommended in march 2015 that ice ( 1 ) develop and implement a plan to address any skills gaps for ice agents related to understanding the new digital radio systems and interagency radio use protocols , and ( 2 ) develop a mechanism to verify that all ice radio users receive radio training . dhs concurred with these recommendations . in response to these recommendations , dhs stated that ice will propose an increase in training for new agents and will develop a mechanism to verify that all ice radio users receive radio training by march 31 , 2016 . our march 2012 report on oam assets highlighted several areas the agency could address to better ensure the mix and placement of assets is effective and efficient .