ii. ) the total estimated cost for these repairs is $5.8 billion . for 11 of the 16 dams the corps applied its major rehabilitation authority . at 9 of these 11 dams , the potential failure mode was determined to be embankment or foundation erosion through seepage , and the corps implemented dam safety repair projects under its major rehabilitation authority consistent with its regulation . sponsors for these dams are to pay their full cost share , estimated at $574 million of the total $4.2 billion in repairs . for the 5 remaining dams , the corps applied its dam safety assurance authority because repairs were determined to be the result of new hydrologic or seismic data indicating the potential inability of these dams to safely pass excess water during expected maximum flood conditions or to withstand the expected maximum earthquake . the sponsors for these dams are to pay 15 percent of their cost share — which cumulatively total an estimated $31 million of the total $1.6 billion in repairs for these dams . while the corps applied the dam safety assurance authority to 5 of 16 dams in our review based on the availability of new hydrologic or seismic data , it did not apply the dam safety assurance authority's state - of - the - art provision to any of these dam safety repair projects . according to asa ( cw ) officials , the corps has not applied the state - of - the - art provision since enactment of the enabling legislation ( wrda of 1986 ) . when asked why the corps had not applied this provision , asa ( cw ) officials said that they would consider applying the state - of - the - art provision on a case - by - case basis , but they have never been presented with a case that they determined to have merited it . additionally , asa ( cw ) officials were unable to define the conditions under which the provision could apply or to provide a hypothetical example of a dam safety issue that would lead them to use it . the corps' 1997 regulation states that dam safety repairs required due to state - of - the - art changes would be decided on a case - by - case basis , but does not identify criteria for how the cases would be selected . however , in 2011 , and again in the 2014 update , the corps' safety of dams regulation discusses application of dam safety assurance authority only with regard to new hydrologic or seismic data , stating that the state - of - the - art provision would not be applied . specifically , the 2014 regulation notes the difficulty of defining the state - of - the - art provision and states that because the state - of - the - art “terminology makes it difficult to define the kinds of repairs that would be applicable , it is not used.” the same 2014 regulation states that use of the state - of - the - art provision must be decided on a case - by - case basis by the asa ( cw ) .