settled costs . doe's ig and contractor internal auditors have the ability to question costs they find to be potentially unallowable under the terms of a contract . once costs have been questioned , doe must ultimately make a determination whether to allow or disallow those costs . before disallowing costs , the federal acquisition regulation requires agencies to “make every reasonable effort” to reach a satisfactory settlement with the contractor . in one settlement agreement we reviewed , the contractor agreed to reimburse doe for $10 million in questioned costs , referring to them as “potential unallowable costs.” because those costs are not explicitly identified as unallowable in the settlement agreement , doe does not consider them improper under ipera and therefore does not disclose them in its reporting . doe officials told us that their reporting of current year known improper payments in their agency financial report is consistent with omb guidance . we recognize that doe is reporting more information than is required . however , citing an amount of improper payments without further explanation is potentially misleading to external stakeholders , including congress and the public . according to federal standards for internal control , effective communications should occur in a broad sense with information flowing down , across , and up the organization.should ensure there are adequate means of communicating with , and obtaining information from , external stakeholders that may have a significant impact on the agency achieving its goals . by not disclosing more information in its ipera reporting about total known improper payments , doe does not allow readers , including congressional and public stakeholders , to fully understand what the total known improper payments amount represents and the extent to which this improper payments total could potentially be more pervasive . recognizing the importance of assessing the risks of improper payments , doe issued new guidance in 2014 to address payment processes involving non - m&o contractors , to clarify the way payment sites address risk factors , and to consider inherent risks of improper payments due to the nature of the agency's programs / operations . these are positive steps , but further efforts could help to more fully assess doe's risk of improper payments and make more effective use of doe and contractor resources . specifically , doe's 2014 guidance directs doe field sites to consider the payment processes of the non - m&o contractors they oversee when completing required risk assessments . however , the guidance does not specify that those sites should address the eight risk factors as they relate to the non - m&o sites . we found that risk assessments for non - m&o payment sites were not always conducted in fiscal year 2011 . without directing in its guidance that sites address the eight risk factors as they relate to the non - m&o contractor risk assessments , the sites cannot fully assess the risk of improper payments , and doe cannot fully understand its risks for improper payments and take corrective actions to mitigate such risks in the future . in addition , doe's 2014 guidance directs payment sites to include a brief explanation for each risk factor supporting the risk rating .