insecticides . as figure 12 shows , the united states exported approximately $1.2 billion in goods to ghana in 2011 , six times its exports in 2001 . top u.s. exports in 2011 included machinery and transport equipment , mainly machinery for minerals extraction and motor vehicles , and mineral fuels , primarily refined oil . figure 12 shows u.s. and chinese exports to ghana by key categories . increased its imports of ores from 2001 to 2011 and also began importing crude oil in 2011. duty exemptions under china's trade preferences for least developed countries . from 2006 to 2011 , total u.s. trade in services with ghana averaged about $1.2 billion annually , with u.s. imports of services averaging about $644 million per year and u.s. exports of services averaging about $546 million per year . the largest sector for u.s. imports of services was travel and passenger fares . the largest sectors for u.s. exports of services were business , professional , and technical services ; and travel and passenger fares . no comparable data are available for china's trade in services , in part because china does not publish country - specific information on its trade in services . u.s. and chinese firms generally have not competed in similar sectors in ghana for donor - funded contracts . according to data on millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) – funded projects in ghana for which u.s. and chinese firms won contracts in 2007 through 2012 , all mcc contracts implemented by chinese firms were for construction projects . furthermore , officials who oversaw procurement for mcc - funded contracts in ghana said that u.s. firms did not bid on any mcc construction contracts ( see table 2 ) . implementation of mcc's 5-year , $547 million compact with ghana began in 2007 , with a focus on reducing poverty through agribusiness development . as table 2 shows , u.s. firms won 11 mcc contracts totaling nearly $32 million ( 6 percent of the value of mcc contracts in ghana ) , all for consulting services . chinese firms won 7 contracts totaling approximately $112 million ( 22 percent of the value of mcc contracts in ghana ) , nearly 40 percent of which funded construction of a section of the national “n1” highway in accra ( see fig . because of the higher values of construction contracts , chinese firms' contracts were larger ( 5 of the 10 largest mcc contracts ) than u.s. firms' ( 1 of the 10 mcc largest contracts ) . the majority of chinese - implemented mcc construction projects were transportation projects ; the remaining projects were agriculture - related infrastructure , such as irrigation systems . chinese firms competed . chinese firms primarily provided electrical equipment and construction services and materials , while u.s. firms primarily provided information technology equipment , management and technical advice , and policy and strategy consulting services . telecommunications , computers and information technology , and transportation sectors . u.s. firms competed against firms of other nationalities in sectors that included telecommunications and aerospace . for construction projects . additionally , according to mcc data , chinese contractors working on mcc - funded projects in ghana hired seven local workers for every chinese worker .