this initiative is to be completed by june 2012 . although air education and training command has identified 18 positions to be eliminated , this effort was initially designed to eliminate 40 positions . air education and training command has informed air force leadership that some of these personnel were performing safety - and compliance - related inspections and could not be eliminated ; therefore air force leadership is considering adjusting the number of positions that may be removed . this is an army initiative to reduce , eliminate and re - scope services and programs across the army's installations , with an estimated cumulative savings of $1.1 billion ( $456 million in fiscal year 2015 and $667 million in fiscal year 2016 ) . services and programs to be reviewed include human resources , information technology , logistics , public works , and security , and other services provided on army installations . on august 29 , 2011 , the army established the installation management reform task force — which includes representatives of the army commands and organizations , such as the army installation management command — to assist in streamlining installation management and reducing overhead costs , among other things . specifically , the representatives of the task force are responsible for conducting a detailed analysis of the services provided on army installations . in september 2011 , the army began its holistic review of installation services and infrastructure costs to evaluate opportunities to develop efficiencies , among other things . we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following two actions . to further dod's efforts to reduce overhead - related costs in light of the recent changes in dod's strategic priorities , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretaries of the military departments and the heads of the dod components to continue to examine opportunities to consolidate or eliminate military commands that are geographically close or have similar missions , and to seek further opportunities to centralize administrative and command support services , functions , or programs . dod fully concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the secretaries of the military departments and the heads of the dod components to continue to examine opportunities to consolidate or eliminate military commands that are geographically close or have similar missions , and to seek further opportunities to centralize administrative and command support services , functions , or programs . for example , the instruction directs the department to take certain steps , including maintaining an approved list of major dod headquarters activities , in order to provide a framework for implementing the dod policy that major dod headquarters activities shall be organized and staffed in a manner that permits the effective accomplishment of assigned responsibilities with a minimum number of personnel . additionally , the department expressed concerns about revising the definition of major dod headquarters activities in dod instruction 5100.73 because there are references to that definition in statute . however , we did not recommend that the department revise the definition .