dot issued its guidance in 2001 . this guidance was generally consistent with doj's guidance but included three additional factors , as well as the four factors previously outlined , suggesting that funding recipients should also consider ( 1 ) the level of services provided to fully english - proficient people ; ( 2 ) whether lep persons are being excluded from services , or are being provided a lower level of services ; and ( 3 ) whether the agency has adequate justification for restrictions , if any , on special language services . the guidance states that such restrictions would be accepted only in rare circumstances . on the basis of public comments , dot subsequently revised its guidance , and the revised guidance was approved by doj on august 25 , 2005 . dot's lep guidance , and many of the available federal resources , can provide some assistance to transit agencies and mpos when facing these challenges and making decisions about the level of language access to provide ; however , the absence of local agency awareness of the existence of these resources limits their usefulness . in addition , for some transit agencies and mpos , the available assistance was not effective in helping them answer some of the difficult questions previously outlined , because the assistance does not provide much information on what a good language and needs assessment contains , or how one is done . it also does not provide templates or examples of effective language access plans , nor does it provide much help in determining how to monitor and judge the effectiveness of agencies' language access activities . given the lack of data available on the effectiveness of services , the availability of such assistance takes on greater importance . more direct dissemination of the lep guidance and available assistance , and the development of additional assistance related to conducting assessments , developing plans , and monitoring the effectiveness of language access activities could help connect local agencies with information and resources that may help them improve access to their services for lep persons . while complaints concerning language access are rare , transit agencies' and mpos' language access efforts are often perceived by community groups to be lacking in certain areas , particularly with regard to the inclusion of such communities in decision - making processes , thus opening up the potential for further complaints against these agencies for not providing reasonable language access . at present , however , monitoring and oversight activities conducted by fta and , to a lesser extent , fhwa , are not likely to remedy perceived gaps in the provision of language access , due to the inconsistencies in scope and criteria for what constitutes a deficiency .