( app . iv cites dod - reported actions related to land - mine and uxo concerns . because it was beyond the scope of this report , we did not evaluate dod's progress in these areas. ) in gulf war lessons - learned and other documents , dod and the services reported that u.s. conventional nonself - destructing land mines were obsolete and dangerous to use and that the newer self - destructing land mines also posed safety concerns to users . for example , one army after - action report recommended that u.s. conventional antitank and antipersonnel land mines be replaced because of safety concerns . ( 2 ) to what extent did land mines cause u.s. casualties ? ( 3 ) what concerns and related actions were identified in lessons - learned and other reports about the use of land mines ? in addition , you asked us to provide information on the quantity of land mines in the current u.s. stockpile and the planned u.s. use of land mines for the defense of the republic of south korea . we are providing information on the current u.s. land mine stockpile in appendix i . we will later provide information on the u.s. use of land mines for the defense of south korea . because land mine issues are in some ways related to issues regarding unexploded ordnance ( uxo ) on the battlefield , we also discuss unexploded ordnance as it relates to u.s. casualties and troop mobility . this report does not assess the military utility or effectiveness of land mine warfare , the use of land mines by u.s. allies or the enemy in the gulf war , the utility of nonland - mine “submunition” weapons , the services' casualty - reporting systems , post - conflict humanitarian issues , or dod's current actions to address land mine and unexploded ordnance issues . ( see app . iv. ) because many records on the use of land mines and u.s. casualties during the gulf war had been destroyed or lost , were incomplete or contradictory , or were archived and not easily accessible , we compiled records and documents from various sources and different dod locations and interviewed a wide range of cognizant officials . military service officials believe that service - provided data regarding u.s. land - mine , casualty , and unexploded ordnance issues are as accurate as available dod records permit and that our coverage of u.s. casualties is based on the most complete analysis by service casualty officials to date . ( see app . v for a detailed discussion of this report's scope and methodology. ) land mines in the u.s. inventory are of two distinct types: the first consists of conventional land mines that are hand - emplaced and are termed nonself - destruct , or sometimes “dumb,” because they remain active for years unless disarmed or detonated . they can therefore cause unintended post - conflict and civilian casualties . they are conversely called “smart” because they remain active for preset periods of time after which they are designed to self - destruct or deactivate , rendering themselves nonhazardous . according to dod , smart land mines have a 99.99-percent self - destruct reliability rate .