iii ) . hhs concurred with all six of our recommendations and indicated that while resource availability may impact the extent of certain actions , hrsa is already in the process of planning and implementing many of the recommendations . for example , hhs indicated that hrsa is in the process of enhancing the electronic evaluation tool , known as the program analysis and recommendations tool , which project officers use to conduct and document annual compliance reviews . hrsa is also working on issuing additional policies , procedures , and guidance documents to better ensure that project officers are consistently assessing grantee compliance and documenting noncompliance . while hhs concurred with our recommendations and indicated that the report's findings were helpful in informing ongoing efforts to improve oversight of the health center program , it did not concur with what it characterized as some of the central conclusions drawn from the report's findings . first , hhs indicated that it did not concur with what it characterized as our conclusion that hrsa's process for identifying noncompliance is insufficient because annual compliance reviews do not identify all instances of noncompliance . hhs indicated that hrsa's active monitoring of grantees is not limited to the project officer's annual compliance review , but is accomplished through a variety of available resources including , but not limited to , the review of grantee data reports , independent annual audit reports , quarterly conference calls , site visits , and correspondence from the grant recipient . we agree with hhs's statement , and our report reflects that hrsa uses multiple methods to oversee grantees . however , we believe that hhs mischaracterized the nature of our conclusion . our conclusion that hrsa's oversight of health center grantees is insufficient was not based solely on our assessment of hrsa's annual compliance reviews , but rather was based on our assessment of several key oversight methods described throughout our report including hrsa's use of site visits , the consistency of project officers' oversight , and the use of programwide data to aid oversight across grantees . hhs also did not concur with what it characterized as our conclusion that hrsa's process for identifying noncompliance is insufficient because hrsa's project officers do not consistently identify and document grantee noncompliance . in explaining its concerns , hhs focused on instances where project officers cannot definitively determine whether or not grantees are complying with program requirements . for example , hhs noted that when project officers are uncertain about compliance , hrsa's standard operating procedures require project officers to record these areas of uncertainty for follow - up action . however , our findings about the lack of consistency in the identification and documentation of grantee noncompliance are not limited to instances when project officers are uncertain about compliance . rather , as the report indicates , we found that project officers we interviewed did not have consistent interpretations of the criteria for assessing compliance and what should therefore result in the placement of a condition on a health center's grant .