incumbents . when the congress passed the 1996 act , existing telephone carriers that were members of neca were designated as incumbent carriers for their service areas . these incumbents subsequently received etc status . competitors can provide service without receiving cetc status or high - cost program support . to what extent does the program have performance goals and measures ? to what extent does the program have mechanisms in place to prevent and detect fraud , waste , and abuse ? to respond to the objectives of this report , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from fcc and usac . we also interviewed officials from industry associations , national wireline and wireless carriers , the national exchange carrier association ( neca ) , and other individuals with knowledge of the high - cost program . to develop an understanding of how the program works in specific locations , we conducted site visits in six states: alabama , iowa , montana , oklahoma , oregon , and wisconsin . we chose these six states on the basis of such criteria as the extent of rural population , geographic diversity , and the number of wireline and wireless carriers present in the state . within each state , we interviewed the state regulatory commission , rural and nonrural incumbent carriers , and competitive carriers . to test our structured interview and site selection methodology , we also conducted site visits in the following states: arizona , maine , massachusetts , new hampshire , and new mexico . for additional information about the types of mechanisms in place for preventing waste , fraud , and abuse , we conducted a survey of state regulatory commissions . the survey sought information pertaining to the state's regulation of telephone service and the state's internal control procedures for incumbent and competitive carriers receiving high - cost program support in the state . the survey was available online to officials in the 50 states and the district of columbia on a secure web site . we received complete responses from 50 of the 51 commissions surveyed , for an overall response rate of 98 percent . this report does not contain all the results from the survey . the survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at gao - 08-662sp . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our overall scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from july 2007 through june 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the communications act of 1934 sets forth the nation's telecommunications policy , including making communication services available “so far as possible , to all the people of the united states.” early efforts by fcc , state regulators , and industry to promote universal service generally began in the 1950s .