and authorized positions . nboard numbers dropped below requirements nboard numbers dropped below requirements figure 7 shows the average change in workforce requirements , authoriz figure 7 shows the average change in workforce requirements , authoriz positions , and current onboard enlisted personnel for destroyers from positions , and current onboard enlisted personnel for destroyers from fiscal years 2001 to 2009. fiscal years 2001 to 2009 . ii ) . to address our first objective , we analyzed navy policies and procedures for determining crew sizes as well as various studies and reports on the navy's optimal manning initiative and the manpower requirements process for surface ships . we also interviewed officials from multiple navy offices and met with personnel on board four navy cruisers , six destroyers , and one frigate to discuss crew size , workload , and watchstanding requirements . in addition , we analyzed navy data to determine changes in workforce requirements , authorized positions , and current onboard personnel levels for cruisers and destroyers from fiscal years 2001 to 2009 . to determine what if any impact changes in crew size were having on the material conditions or operations of these ships , we examined the results of cruiser and destroyer inspections conducted by the navy's board of inspection and survey and navy mishap data to assess whether there were any discernable trends over this period . to address our second objective , we reviewed relevant navy instructions on training , studies on the navy's revolution in training initiatives , and prior gao work on assessing strategic training and development efforts . we also interviewed navy training officials to discuss how the navy has measured the impact of its changes to its training programs . furthermore , we met with ship personnel to obtain their views on how the implementation of new training practices has affected shipboard performance . in addition , we analyzed personnel qualification data and the extent that ships are reporting these data . we conducted this performance audit from july 2009 to june 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . additional details on our scope and methodology are in appendix iii . the navy uses a four - step process and considers various factors in crewing its ships . first , it determines the workload of its ships . second , it loads workload data into its manpower requirements system model to generate workforce requirements . third , it determines the proportion of its requirements it can fund and then determines the number of authorized positions for each ship . finally , it assigns individual personnel to its ships . figure 1 shows the four - step process that generates workforce requirements and authorized positions and distributes personnel . to determine the workload aboard a ship , the navy manpower analysis center sends analysts to ships to assess the tasks that must be accomplished and determine who should accomplish them .