the pathways programs . these programs were created to ensure that the federal government continues to compete effectively for students and recent graduates . the current pathways programs consist of the internship program , the recent graduates program , and the presidential management fellows program . initial hiring is made in the excepted service , but it may lead to conversion to permanent positions in the competitive service . veterans - related hiring authorities . these include both the veterans recruitment appointment authority and the veterans employment opportunities act authority . the veterans recruitment appointment authority allows for certain exceptions from the competitive examining process . specifically , agencies may appoint eligible veterans without competition under limited circumstances or otherwise through excepted service hiring procedures . the veterans employment opportunities act authority is a competitive service appointment authority that allows eligible veterans to apply for positions announced under merit promotion procedures when an agency accepts applications from outside of its own workforce . the defense laboratory direct hire authorities . these include the following four types of direct hire authorities granted to the defense laboratories by congress for hiring stem personnel: ( 1 ) direct hire authority for candidates with advanced degrees ; ( 2 ) direct hire authority for candidates with bachelor's degrees ; ( 3 ) direct hire authority for veterans ; and ( 4 ) direct hire authority for students currently enrolled in a graduate or undergraduate stem program . the purpose of these direct hire authorities is to provide a streamlined and accelerated hiring process to allow the labs to successfully compete with private industry and academia for high - quality scientific , engineering , and technician talent . the expedited hiring authority for acquisition personnel . this authority permits the secretary of defense to designate any category of positions in the acquisition workforce as positions for which there exists a shortage of candidates or there is a critical hiring need ; and to utilize specific authorities to recruit and appoint qualified persons directly to positions so designated . the science , mathematics , and research for transformation ( smart ) scholarship - for - service program . this program was established pursuant to 10 usc ยง2192a , as amended , and is funded through the national defense education program . the smart scholarship for civilian service program provides academic funding in exchange for completing a period of full - time employment with dod upon graduation . the labs have used the defense laboratory - specific direct hire authorities more than any other category of agency - specific or government - wide hiring authority . defense laboratory officials we surveyed reported that these direct hire authorities had been the most helpful to the labs' efforts to hire highly qualified candidates for stem positions , and also reported that the use of certain incentives had been helpful in this effort . however , even with access to the authorities , these defense laboratory officials identified challenges associated with the hiring process that affected their ability to hire highly qualified candidates . for fiscal years 2015 through 2017 , the defense laboratories used laboratory - specific direct hire authorities more often than any other category of hiring authorities when hiring stem personnel .