the torit system is being tested on the dbcs . the fsx system is being tested on the afcs . see figure 2 for a picture of the hepa filtration system design at the dulles p&dc / f and figures 3 and 4 are pictures of the fsx and torit hepa air filtration systems being tested at the dulles p&dc / f . both the fsx and torit systems have been installed with the ductwork covering the entire afcs and the dbcs units . the front of the dbcs is covered with plastic , and the back of the cabinet doors have channels cut into them to allow the air to flow up into the ductwork along the entire length of the machine . according to usps officials , this design , as it is configured , presumably collects dust from all of the rollers and belts along the length of the machine and directs airborne dust to the ductwork . however , this design requires a large amount of power to generate enough airflow to move the dust through the machines . as a result , the vice president of engineering is concerned that the amount of energy required to run the hepa filtration systems might overwhelm the power supply at the p&dc / f and may result in an outage if additional power is not provided . he added that the hepa filtration system's impact on the power supply is a serious concern , which the agency plans to address by performing site surveys to determine how much additional power is required for hepa air filtration to operate effectively and to avoid degrading the performance of mail processing equipment . these test results are still being analyzed . while this initial testing is a positive step , we are concerned that the amount of dust collected by the portable hepa vacuums from the mail processing machines with filtration systems will be understated because the data reflect a 24-hour period of operations versus the normal operations , which are between 7 and 16 hours depending on the type of equipment . accordingly , the test may not provide usps with the reliable data necessary to make valid conclusions about the efficiency of the hepa filtration system . given the importance of usps's initiative , it is imperative that reliable tests be performed to confirm whether the use of air filtration systems to clean mail processing equipment is effective . according to our preliminary observations , the hepa filtration systems installed at the dulles p&dc / f are collecting relatively few dust particles and may be causing the dust to settle inside the mail processing equipment . when we visited the dulles p&dc / f , we were shown the trays where some of the dust could settle . the trays contained only rubber bands , paper clips , loose bits of paper , and mail . see figure 1 for the contents of hepa filtration system's tray at the dulles p&dc / f . the dulles p&dc / f maintenance manager stated that when maintenance personnel blew air back through the filters to purge any dust that may be trapped in them , there was no dust dislodged and the filters appeared to be clean .