rec . s4402 , which was adopted following cloture and agreement to several amendments designed to narrow differences between proponents and opponents of the bill . changes to legislative language during the consideration of a bill may support an inference that in enacting the final language , congress intended to reject or work a compromise with respect to earlier versions of the bill . statements made about earlier versions carry little weight . landgraf v. usi film products , 511 u.s. 244 , 255-56 ( 1994 ) . singer , 2a , sutherland statutory construction , § 48:4 . in any event , the plain language of the statute remains controlling where , as we have concluded , the language and the structure of the statute are clear on their face . “the committee intends for the tax exemption for telecommunications services to apply whenever the ultimate use of those telecommunications services is to provide internet access . thus , if a telecommunications carrier sells wholesale telecommunications services to an internet service provider that intends to use those telecommunications services to provide internet access , then the exemption would apply.” at the time the 2003 report was drafted , the sentence of concern in the draft legislation read , “such term does not include telecommunications services , except to the extent such services are used to provide internet access.” as adopted , the wording became , “the term ‘internet access' does not include telecommunications services , except to the extent such services are purchased , used , or sold by a provider of internet access to provide internet access.” the amended language thus focuses on the package of services offered by the access provider , not on the act of providing access alone . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . see the appendix for further explanation . figure 3 shows how the nature and tax status of the internet access services just described differ from the nature and tax status of services that an isp acquires and uses to deliver access to its customers . an isp in the middle of figure 3 acquires communications and other services and incidental supplies ( shown on the left side of the figure ) in order to deliver access services to customers ( shown on the right side of the figure ) . we refer to the acquisitions on the left side as purchases of “acquired services.” for example , acquired services include isp leases of high - speed communications capacity over wire , cable , or fiber to carry traffic from customers to the internet backbone . purchases of acquired services are subject to taxation , depending on state law , because the moratorium does not apply to acquired services .