data sets . the roc obtained access to federal datasets through memorandums of understanding ( mou ) , which neither treasury officials nor roc officials believed could be transferred . instead treasury would have to negotiate new mous with the federal agency that owned a data set treasury wished to use . in july 2015 , treasury's fiscal assistant secretary testified before the house committee on oversight and government reform's subcommittee on government operations and subcommittee on information technology and addressed the point mentioned above that while the data act authorized treasury to transfer the recovery's board's assets , the act did not transfer the recovery board's authorities to treasury . for instance , the recovery board was granted law enforcement authorities available under the inspector general act of 1978 , which allowed the recovery board to negotiate relevant access so that the roc could handle , analyze , and store law - enforcement - sensitive data , including evidence to support grand jury investigations . similarly , the recovery board had special hiring authority that allowed it to select and employ term - limited hires , which provided the recovery board greater flexibility in selecting individuals with specific technical expertise and experience . treasury officials noted that the data act did not transfer the specific mission of the recovery board to treasury , and that , combined with the absence of law - enforcement authority , created a barrier to fulfilling an identical role as that of the roc . although treasury officials identified cost and other practical challenges to transferring roc assets , it has an opportunity to transfer information and documentation that could support treasury's efforts to prevent improper payments — particularly , information on the design of data sharing agreements and requests for software contracts for analytic tools . treasury officials told us that they believe the roc's most - valuable asset is its expertise and said they sought opportunities to informally leverage the roc knowledge base in several ways . these efforts centered on sharing knowledge between the roc and treasury's do not pay center business center ( dnp ) , which assists federal agencies in preventing improper payments and leverages some of the same analytical methodologies as the roc . some of these efforts include the following: leveraging the knowledge of roc staff by applying their skills to similar analytic challenges facing dnp . for example , officials stated that the current director of outreach & business process for dnp is the former assistant director for data and performance metrics at the recovery board . her responsibilities at the recovery board included the assessment and testing of several prototype systems to support the work of the roc and its external users in the oversight community . the capabilities of these systems were very similar to the capabilities of the dnp systems , in that entity names were matched against open - source databases to identify high - risk vendors . officials also noted that another recovery board employee was hired to dnp , where she uses her knowledge of the root causes of improper payments to help agencies utilize dnp services more efficiently . documenting business processes , procedures , and lessons learned .