think about it . each year , the federal government spends more than $2 trillion on a wide range of programs and operations , provides hundreds of billions of dollars in tax preferences , and issues thousands of pages of regulations . and it does all this without having enough knowledge about whether federal policies , programs , and activities are making a real difference . the answer is not much ! it's bad enough that too few agencies adequately show the results they are getting with the taxpayer dollars they spend , but policymakers also frequently do not focus on the long - term impact of new spending and tax proposals before taking action on related legislation . particularly troubling are the enormous commitments that we face in connection with social security , medicare , medicaid , and veteran's health care . down the line , we could also be facing potential federal bailouts of several entities like the pension benefit guaranty corporation . over the years , our federal fiscal debates have gone from millions to billions to trillions . unless you're an economist , a statistician , an actuary , or a cpa , these numbers are mind - boggling . what's a million dollars ? when it comes to the federal government , a million dollars is practically pocket change . last year , the federal government experienced a deficit that averaged more than $1 billion each and every day . that is more than $750,000 a minute . if you're honest about keeping score and include promised but unfunded social security and medicare benefits along with explicit benefit and other commitments , the federal government's obligations , current liabilities and unfunded fiscal commitments are over $43 trillion and rising . in the last year alone , this amount has risen by more than $13 trillion , largely due to the new medicare prescription drug benefit . yes , that's trillions with 12 zeros rather than billions with 9 zeros . to put that number into perspective , even with the recent run up in housing prices , the estimated total net worth of every american , including bill gates and other billionaires , is only about $47 trillion . that means that every american would have to fork over more than 90 percent of their net worth to cover the government's current promises . stated differently , the current burden for every american works out to more than $145,000 . the numbers are even worse for full - time workers , whose share now exceeds $350,000 . that amount is growing every day and it isn't even tax deductible ! keep in mind that the average family income in this country is around $42,000 a year . as bad as these numbers are , it's the real - life consequences of unchecked deficits that are truly frightening . for example , if we continue as we have , higher interest rates are inevitable . it's only a matter of when and how high . as government borrows more and more money to finance its debt , less money will be available for companies to invest to stay competitive in today's global economy .