the department had no comments . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact carolyn l. yocom at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or yocomc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . arizona health care cost containment system: mandatory program for aged , disabled ( children and adults ) , children , low - income adults , those dually eligible for medicare and medicaid ( dual eligibles ) , and foster care children . arizona long term care system: mandatory program for aged , disabled ( children and adults ) , and dual eligibles , all of whom are in need of a nursing home level of care . two - plan model: mandatory and voluntary program in select counties for disabled ( children and adults ) , children , and foster care children . geographic managed care: mandatory and voluntary program in select counties for aged , disabled ( children and adults ) , children , low - income adults , certain dual eligibles , and foster care children . county organized health systems: mandatory program in select counties for aged , disabled ( children and adults ) , children , low - income adults , certain dual eligibles , foster care children , and american indians / alaskan natives . managed medical assistance: mandatory and voluntary statewide program for aged , disabled ( children and adults ) children , low - income adults , dual eligibles , foster care children , and american indians / alaskan natives . bayou health: mandatory statewide program for disabled ( children and adults ) , children , parents , breast and cervical cancer program population ( under 65 ) , low - income adults , foster care children , pregnant women , and aged , blind and disabled adults . comprehensive health care program: mandatory statewide program for aged , disabled ( children and adults ) , children , low - income adults , and foster care children . healthchoices: mandatory statewide program for aged , disabled ( children and adults ) , children , low - income adults , certain dual eligibles , and foster care children . tenncare: mandatory statewide program for aged , disabled ( children and adults ) , children , low - income adults , certain dual eligibles , and foster care children . apple health: mandatory statewide program for aged , disabled ( children and adults ) , children , and low - income adults .