ii. ) the comments described actions planned or being taken that respond to our recommendations . for example , according to the department , the office of information and technology is developing a comprehensive , integrated healthevet project management plan to be completed within 6 months that is to reflect dependencies between resources and establish a single schedule for all va medical information technology projects . as part of this plan , the department noted that it will include the format and schedule for conducting milestone reviews for healthevet projects . in addition , the department stated that it has hired a contractor to conduct an independent financial validation of the healthevet preliminary cost estimate that includes three phases and is to be completed by february 2009 . to address staffing within the office of enterprise development , the department stated that it had posted a vacancy announcement to fill the leadership position for the program management office . lastly , the department said it expects final review and approval of the healthevet governance plan by july 2008 . if the actions that the department has planned or undertaken are properly implemented , they should help ensure success with the development and implementation of healthevet . the department also provided technical comments on the draft report , which we have incorporated as appropriate . as agreed , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and the secretary of veterans affairs . copies of this report will also be made available to other interested parties on request . this report will also be available at no charge on our web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or your staffs have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . as requested , the objectives of our review were to determine ( 1 ) the status of the healthevet initiative , ( 2 ) va's overall plan for completing the initiative , and ( 3 ) how va is providing oversight to ensure the success of the initiative . we conducted our review by reviewing relevant healthevet project and budget documentation and validated our analyses through interviews with knowledgeable va officials . to determine the status of the healthevet initiative , we reviewed individual healthevet documents on system operation and development , time frames , and activities planned . additionally , we researched the department's expenditures on healthevet initiatives through fiscal year 2007 and the department's current estimate of how much it plans to spend in fiscal years 2008 and 2009 . we did not assess the accuracy of the cost data provided to us . we supplemented our analyses with interviews of va personnel involved in the initiative .