i would be happy to answer any questions that you may have at this time . i will conclude with some observations regarding our recommendations and dod's response to our recommendations . our work on that report was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from april 2008 to january 2009 . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . our work included reviews of pertinent documents and structured interviews of the commanders of the 20 alert units at all 18 sites performing asa operations . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for this testimony , we also followed up with dod offices on the status of our recommendations . although norad had performed some risk assessments in response to individual dod leadership inquiries about asa operations , it had not done routine risk assessments as part of a risk - based management approach to determine asa operational requirements . moreover , norad has not conducted similar assessments since 2006 . for example , norad had completed three assessments that we determined could be part of a risk - based management approach . norad completed the first of these assessments after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , when it worked with other federal agencies and determined , based on vulnerabilities and criticality , which sites should be protected by asa operations . however , based on dod's written response , it is unclear the extent to which dod will implement these recommendations . for example , dod partially concurred with our recommendation to employ a risk - based management approach , which would include routine risk assessments to determine asa requirements . however , dod stated that sufficient guidance and a long - standing risk - based process currently guide its decisions on asa operations and , therefore , it does not plan on taking any further action . in our january 2009 report , we recommended that dod take a number of actions to address the issues that we identified during our review . in summary , we recommended that the secretary of defense direct the commander of the u.s. command element of norad to routinely conduct risk assessments to determine asa requirements , including the appropriate numbers of asa sites , personnel , and aircraft to support asa operations . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are lorelei st. james and marc schwartz ( assistant directors ) , tommy baril , grace coleman , greg marchand , terry richardson , bethann ritter , kenneth cooper , and jane ervin . on both of these occasions , norad conducted a cost evaluation , considering aviation security improvements — such as secured cockpits and enhanced passenger screening — that were made by the transportation security administration since 2001 .