ii ) . where appropriate , we incorporated these changes into the report . as agreed with your office , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date of issue , unless you publicly announce its contents . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the director of the district of columbia department of mental health . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7118 or carolyn yocom at ( 202 ) 512-4931 if you have questions about this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . the court determined that the district and the federal government had a joint responsibility to provide the plaintiffs community - based treatment in the least restrictive conditions . this ruling is known as the dixon decree . to comply with the court order , the involved parties drafted a final implementation plan that generally required an assessment of the plaintiff class members and periodic reports on progress in establishing a community - based system . a description of each of these challenges follows . although the final exit criteria measures and performance targets were not approved until december 2003 , dmh began collecting monthly data nonelectronically for 8 of the 17 exit criteria measures from providers in july 2003 . for example , mental health rehabilitative services providers submit nonelectronic monthly reports to dmh on services provided to homeless consumers who are diagnosed with a serious mental illness . the district admitted noncompliance with the fourth plan , and the plaintiffs requested the appointment of a receiver . on september 10 , the court appointed a receiver on the basis that only a receiver provides the court with enough day - to - day authority to force compliance without causing confusion and ambiguity in the administration of the commission . dmh commented that the draft report references only a portion of the requirements of the mental health reform act and the court - ordered plan and does not discuss the development of “systems of care,” which it characterizes as cornerstones of the court - ordered plan and the legislation creating dmh . on march 6 , with agreement of all parties , a new receiver , referred to by the court as a transitional receiver , was appointed and officially assumed this role on april 1 . the transitional receiver was scheduled to return control of the mental health system to the district between january 1 and april 1 , 2001 . on april 2 , the court approved the transitional receiver's final plan and required the district to implement it . the plan provided a policy framework for meeting the dixon mandate , including developmental milestones but not specific service targets . on may 22 , the court found that the district was capable of implementing and was in fact implementing the final plan and thus terminated the receivership .