we have clarified the report where appropriate . omb , the office of the federal environmental executive , gsa , nasa , and the departments of energy and defense's comments and our responses are in appendixes ii - vii . nonetheless , rcra requires such information . to help agencies purchase recycled content products , we recommend that the federal environmental executive and the administrator of epa work with officials at the major procuring agencies to develop a process to provide the procuring agencies with current information on the availability of the designated recycled - content products . in addition , these officials should determine how these products can be more effectively promoted . also , executive orders do not apply to grantees . moreover , most agencies lack data about purchases of recycled - content products by contractors and grantees . these agencies do not have any reliable means of even identifying contracts that call for the use of recycled - content products . in this regard , we support the white house task force recommendation to revise the federal procurement data system to identify such contracts . while this revision will not provide agencies with information on specific purchases , it will enable them to periodically review and monitor their contractors for compliance with the rcra requirements . demonstrating that an agency is meeting the rcra requirements can be administratively difficult . we also contacted the office of the inspector general for each of the federal agencies in our review to identify whether the offices had conducted any formal reviews or audits of the agencies' affirmative procurement programs . finally , we contacted industry and environmental groups to obtain their perspectives and to identify whether any additional data existed related to the procurement of the epa - listed products with recycled content . epa noted that because an environmentally preferable product can have multiple attributes — such as having recycled content , conserving water and / or energy , and / or emitting a low level of volatile organic compounds — defining environmental preferability depends on the product's use . the guidance is not intended to be a step - by - step plan or “how to” guide for agencies' use in deciding to purchase specific products ; nor is it intended to provide a list of products . instead , it is intended to help executive agencies systematically integrate the purchasing of these products into their buying decisions . under the process outlined , the agencies are to use the guidance in choosing which products are environmentally preferable and meet their needs . this process involves assessing a product's life - cycle , which may include a comprehensive examination of a product's environmental and economic aspects and potential impacts throughout its lifetime , including raw material transportation , manufacturing , use , and disposal . epa has also focused on identifying approaches for purchasing environmentally preferable products by encouraging agencies to participate in pilot projects . in selecting pilot projects , agencies are encouraged to use a list that epa has developed of the top 20 product and service categories , which represent a large volume of federal procurement or have significant environmental impacts .