contractors they were responsible for managing . as a result , one office can make changes to requirements for the contractors they manage that might lead to differences among the four types of contractors' requirements , but these changes might not be thoroughly reviewed by all the offices . however , cms's internal coordination strategies have not resolved long - standing differences in requirements across contractor types . ( see app . i for a list of the requirements we analyzed for each type of contractor and each type of correspondence. ) while all four types of contractors met most or all of their adr requirements , compliance sometimes varied by requirement . for example , though representatives of several provider associations have reported that providers do not understand the reason their claims were selected for review , all the mac and ra adrs we reviewed complied with applicable requirements to identify the basis for the claim's selection . all of the contractors' adrs that were required to include instructions for how to submit documentation to support the claim also complied . however , not all contractor adrs complied with a requirement that had the potential to affect the timeliness of providers' responses to the adrs: about 50 percent of the mac adrs , 30 percent of the zpic adrs , and 100 percent of the cert contractor adrs gave providers fewer than the required number of days to submit documentation . similar to adrs , the number of requirements for results letters differed by contractor type . on average , 18 requirements were applicable to each mac results letter , 14 for each zpic results letter , and 8 for each ra results letter . with the requirement to document in the letter a reason for conducting the review or the rationale for good cause for having reopened the claims ; instead , the letters directed the provider to the contractor's website or to the adr sent by the contractor previously . also , 40 percent of the zpics' results letters complied with the requirement to cite a reason for noncoverage or incorrect coding for each claim . contractors' inconsistent compliance with cms's correspondence requirements may lead to provider confusion and increased administrative burden , and is not consistent with federal internal control standards to have control activities to ensure that management's directives are carried out and to monitor the performance of agency activities . for example , several provider associations indicated that it was burdensome to pull together complete documentation quickly . therefore , giving providers response times that are shorter than required in adrs can add to providers' burden . in addition , it can lead to less efficient claims reviews — and potentially unnecessary claims denials — if providers do not submit complete information ( or respond ) within the shorter time frame . when providers are not notified of their rights in results letters as required , they may have more difficulty exercising their rights within required time frames , which could have financial consequences for them . the extent of cms oversight of the content of contractors' postpayment review - related correspondence differs by type of contractor . for macs , cms staff may review correspondence with providers during their annual evaluations of each mac's performance .