is the project for marketing only ? is the project a study only ? does the project involve intermodal services ? is the project primarily a carrier incentive ? is the project primarily air fare focused ? does the project involve a low - fare service provider ? does the proposal shift costs from the local or state level to the federal level ? what is the frequency of flights ? what size aircraft service the community ? has the level of service been increasing or decreasing over the past 3 years ? have enplanements been increasing or decreasing over the past 3 years ? is the metropolitan statistical area population increasing or decreasing ? is the per - capita income increasing or decreasing ? are the number of businesses in the area increasing or decreasing ? what is the proximity to larger air service centers ? what is the quality of road access to other air service centers ? does the community lack service in identified top origin & destination markets ? is the proposal designed to provide: first air service , second carrier service , new destinations , larger aircraft , or more frequencies ? if this is an air service project , has the community selected a carrier that is willing and committed to serve ? if this is an air service project , does the community have a targeted carrier that would serve ? do demographic indicators and the business environment support the project ? does the community have a demonstrated track record of implementing air service development projects ? does the project address the stated problem ? does the community have a firm plan for promoting the service ? does the community have a definitive plan for monitoring , modifying , and terminating the project if necessary ? does the community have a plan for continued support of the project if self - sufficiency or completion is not attained after the grant expires ? if mainly a marketing proposal , does the community have a firm implementation plan in place ? is the applicant a participating consortium ? is the project innovative ? does the project have unique geographical traits or other considerations ? ( continued from previous page ) is the amount of funding requested reasonable compared with the total amount of funding available ? is the local contribution reasonable compared with the amount requested ? can the project be completed during the funding period requested ? is the applicant a small hub now ? is the applicant a large nonhub now ? is the applicant a small nonhub now ? is the applicant currently subsidized through the essential air service program ? does the proposal show that proximity to other service would detract from it ? is the applicant close to a past grant recipient ? dot has recovered all or portions of the grant awarded to the grantee . dot has recovered all or portions of the grant awarded to the grantee . clarksburg / morgantown , wv ( reallocation ) . at the time of the grant application , charleston was served by five major airlines that had scheduled flights to 10 destinations .