ii ) . since 2000 data is the most recent census data available , it reflects the neighborhood conditions at the 1996 hope vi sites , which were at various stages of completion , at that time . finally , not all of the changes in census data from 1990 to 2000 were statistically significant ( see app . iii ) . moreover , at five sites , revitalization work had begun prior to receipt of hope vi funds with various non - hope vi funding sources . as a part of its fiscal year 2001 and 2002 performance goals , hud specified that neighborhoods with substantial levels of hope vi investment would show improvements in such dimensions as household income , employment , homeownership , and housing investment . as a result , we used similar indicators , as well as other indicators generally used by researchers , to analyze neighborhood changes . however , it was not possible to determine the extent to which the hope vi program was responsible for the changes in these neighborhoods . many factors , such as national and regional economic trends , can also affect neighborhood conditions . according to experts , it is extremely rare for any one program or actor to be able to change a neighborhood single - handedly . our analysis of census and hmda data for the 20 1996 hope vi neighborhoods showed the following positive changes: in 18 of the 1996 hope vi neighborhoods , the percentage of the population with a high school diploma or equivalent increased , from a minimum of 4 percentage points in detroit to a maximum of 21 percentage points in baltimore . in 11 of the hope vi neighborhoods , the percentage of the population with an associate's degree or better increased , from a minimum of 3 percentage points in tucson to a maximum of 14 percentage points in san francisco . average household income increased in 15 of the 1996 hope vi neighborhoods , from a minimum of 18 percent in detroit to a maximum of 115 percent in chicago ( henry horner ) . the percentage of the population in poverty decreased in 14 of the hope vi neighborhoods , from a minimum of 4 percentage points in atlanta and detroit to a maximum of 20 percentage points in baltimore . despite these decreases , 9 of the hope vi neighborhoods remained “high - poverty neighborhoods” ( having poverty rates of 30 percent or more ) , and 5 remained “extremely high - poverty neighborhoods” ( having poverty rates of 40 percent or more ) . according to the urban institute , areas where 30-40 percent of the population lives in poverty represent significantly more deteriorated and threatening living environments than those with poverty rates below those thresholds . average housing values increased in 13 of the 20 hope vi neighborhoods , ranging from a minimum of 11 percent in tucson to a maximum of 215 percent in chicago ( henry horner ) . it is generally accepted among researchers that housing values represent the best available index of expectations regarding future economic activity in an area .