b . the facility does not have time or resources to participate . 80 c. facility owners and operators are not willing to sign protected critical infrastructure information express statements due to legal concerns over the protection and dissemination of the data collected . d. the entity that owns / oversees the facility declines to participate as a matter of policy . in addition to the contact named above , john f. mortin , assistant director , and anthony defrank , analyst - in - charge , managed this assignment . the facility does not have time or resources to participate . ( if yes to q5 ) how useful did you find the ecip training ? if you answered "slightly useful" or "not at all useful" , please explain why: 7 . in your opinion , how useful is the ecip initiative program for reducing risk at ci facilities ? please explain your opinion about the usefulness of the ecip initiative program: 8 . in your opinion , how useful is the ecip infrastructure survey tool ( ist ) for reducing risk at ci facilities ? please explain your opinion about the usefulness of the ecip ist: 9 . in your opinion , how useful is the ecip facility dashboard for reducing risk at ci facilities ? how often have you heard each of the following reasons from facilities who declined to participate in an ecip site visit ? ( select one answer in each row. ) the facility does not want to participate in additional facility assessments because it is already subject to federal or state regulation / inspection . e. facility owners and operators have a diminished perception of threat against the facility . f. the facility already received a risk assessment through a private company and participation in the voluntary assessment would be redundant or duplicative . g. identification of security gaps may render the owner of the facility liable for damages should an incident occur . what other reasons , if any , have you heard for facilities declining ecip site visits ? have you found that higher priority facilities ( level 1 or 2 ) are more or less likely to participate in ecip site visits than lower priority facilities ? if you answered somewhat less likely or much less likely , what do you see as the reasons for the lower participation by the higher priority facilities ? what factors do you believe are important to facilities considering participating in an ecip site visit ? how often have you heard each of the following reasons from facilities who declined to participate in an ecip ist ? ( select one answer in each row. ) the facility does not want to participate in additional facility assessments because it is already subject to federal or state regulation / inspection . b . c. facility owners and operators are not willing to sign protected critical infrastructure information express statements due to legal concerns over the protection and dissemination of the data collected . d. the entity that owns / oversees the facility declines to participate as a matter of policy . e. facility owners and operators have a diminished perception of threat against the facility .