award . epa prepares the grant documents and instructs the grantee on technical requirements , and the grantee signs an agreement to comply with all requirements . postaward . after awarding the grant , epa provides technical assistance , oversees the work , and provides payments to the grantee ; the grantee completes the work , and the project ends . closeout of the award . epa ensures that all technical work and administrative requirements have been completed ; epa prepares closeout documents and notifies the grantee that the grant is completed . as part of its oversight of grantee performance , epa conducts in - depth reviews to analyze grantees' compliance with grant regulations and specific grant requirements . epa conducts two types of in - depth reviews . administrative reviews , conducted by the grants management offices , are designed to evaluate grantees' financial and administrative capacity . in contrast , programmatic reviews , conducted by the program offices , are designed to assess the grantees' activities in five key areas: ( 1 ) assessing progress of work , ( 2 ) reviewing financial expenditures , ( 3 ) meeting the grant's terms and conditions , ( 4 ) meeting all programmatic , statutory , and regulatory requirements , and ( 5 ) verifying that equipment purchased under the award is managed and accounted for . both administrative and programmatic reviews are conducted either at the grantee's location ( on - site ) or at epa's office or another location ( off - site ) . furthermore , to determine how well offices and regions oversee grantees , epa conducts internal management reviews of headquarters and regional offices . epa's september 2002 competition policy requires that most discretionary grants be competed . these grants totaled about $719 million of the $4.2 billion in grants awarded in fiscal year 2002 . the policy applies to most discretionary grant programs or individual grants of more than $75,000.the policy also promotes widespread solicitation for competed grants by establishing specific requirements for announcing funding opportunities in , for example , the federal register and on web sites . epa has also appointed a grant competition advocate to coordinate this effort . epa's competition policy faces implementation barriers because it represents a major cultural shift for epa staff and managers , who historically awarded most grants noncompetitively and thereby have had limited experience with competition , according to the office of grants and debarment . the policy requires epa officials to take a more planned , rigorous approach to awarding grants . that is , epa staff must determine the evaluation criteria and ranking of these criteria for a grant , develop the grant announcement , and generally publish it at least 60 days before the application deadline . staff must also evaluate applications — potentially from a larger number of applicants than in the past — and notify applicants of their decisions . these activities will require significant planning and take more time than awarding grants noncompetitively . office of grants and debarment officials anticipate a learning curve as staff implement the policy and will evaluate the policy's effectiveness in 2005 , including the $75,000 threshold level .