pub . weapons are designed and produced to meet dod's military requirements — key operational , nuclear yield , and maintenance requirements — throughout the stockpile - to - target sequence , which is the range of physical environments that could be encountered as the weapon travels from stockpile storage to a potential target . the responsible national laboratories prepare a major assembly release ( mar ) when they determine that a nuclear weapon is satisfactory for release to the military service . among other things , the mar contains a list of the weapon's limitations , which are areas where the weapon may not meet certain military requirements throughout the stockpile - to - target sequence . limitations may specify additional conditions for storing , maintaining , or operating the weapon . according to nnsa and dod officials , identifying limitations is important to stockpile management because it provides a mechanism for explicitly knowing where dod requirements may not be met and suggests strategies to mitigate risk . some limitations are unique to a particular weapon , and other limitations may occur in multiple weapons . nnsa periodically updates a weapon's mar for a variety of reasons , including a completion of a weapon alteration or a life extension program ( referred to in this report as activities ) . a weapon alteration is a material change regarding assembly , maintenance , or storage that does not alter the weapon's operational capability . a life extension program , which can take up to a decade to complete , is a refurbishment intended to extend the lifetime of a weapon for an additional 20 to 30 years . when nnsa updates a weapon's mar , existing limitations may either remain unchanged or be deleted , and new limitations may be added . since 1992 , the united states has observed a moratorium on underground testing of nuclear weapons . in 1995 , the president established an annual stockpile assessment and reporting requirement to help ensure that the nation's nuclear weapons remain safe and reliable without underground nuclear testing . subsequently , congress enacted the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2003 , which requires that the directors of the national laboratories and the commander of stratcom each complete an annual nuclear weapons stockpile assessment report . these reports cover , among other things , issues of particular concern about the nuclear stockpile as a whole , as well as issues of concern for individual weapons . pub . defense committees on its plans to address the 2009 jason recommendation . recognizing the need for a revised surveillance program in the post cold war era , nnsa has conducted management reviews of the surveillance program in 2001 , 2004 , 2007 , and 2010 .