for 2009 , this limit is $54,000 . for example , the airline paid the four ceos a combined total of nearly $500,000 for living and relocation expenses during their tenures . and , as in case 1 , the executives were provided unlimited free transportation on the airline and were reimbursed for any income taxes incurred on such travel . in addition , they received a lifetime benefit of membership in the airline's frequent flyer program , which grants unlimited free first - class travel upgrades . they further received hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of benefits for split - dollar life insurance , and reimbursements for financial planning services and automobile expenses . case 3: in december 1995 , this electronics company's newly hired ceo and chairman of the board stated it was “clear to that the company could achieve meaningful growth.” he announced a broad restructuring plan to improve the company's profitability which eventually resulted in the termination of nearly 3,000 employees . however , the company experienced a net loss for the next 6 years before declaring bankruptcy in october 2001 . when pbgc took over the company's pension plan in july 2002 , it was underfunded by $318 million , though the company had not missed or waived any required contributions . during bankruptcy , pbgc has little power to recover amounts paid as compensation to executives . case 1: in september 2002 , this airline hired a new ceo , who also served as president and chairman of the board , to help lead the company through potentially difficult times ahead . three months later , the company declared bankruptcy and did not emerge until february 2006 . during bankruptcy , the company terminated four pension plans from december 2004 to june 2005 that according to pbgc were underfunded by a total of $7.8 billion . this airline missed or waived nearly $1 billion in required minimum contributions . during this ceo's tenure , through the termination of the company's four pension plans , the ceo and two other executives received a total of $55.5 million in salary , benefits , and other compensation . see table 2 below for the components of compensation received by these three executives . the new ceo received a $3 million signing bonus , and the company established a supplemental retirement trust fund worth $4.5 million in his name “in consideration of retirement benefits foregone as a result of resignation from his former employer.” upon the airline's reorganization , the coo also received $2.6 million to set up an irrevocable trust in his name , along with a separate $100,000 in 401 ( k ) - related payments . all officers were given unlimited free travel on the airline or its subsidiaries , along with a complimentary membership in the company's vip travel club . the company also reimbursed its executives for any income taxes which they might have owed on this free travel . in addition to these travel benefits , according to the company's officer benefits statement , executives would be reimbursed for the cost of “social and business club memberships…where there is a benefit to be realized to the company” and offered payments for financial advisory services .