competition . we found little evidence that auctions affect the competitive environment . many stakeholders told us that auctions generally do not place companies at a competitive or financial disadvantage compared to companies that acquired licenses through other , non - auctioned , means that might not have involved payment for the licenses , such as lotteries . these stakeholders noted that ( 1 ) companies acquired non - auctioned licenses many years ago , ( 2 ) many non - auctioned licenses have subsequently been sold and paid for , and ( 3 ) companies that acquired non - auctioned licenses have subsequently acquired additional licenses via auction . therefore , any competitive advantage these companies gained by obtaining licenses through means other than auctions has dissipated . among our panelists , 11 said that auctions increase the degree of competition , while 3 said that auctions had no effect on competition , and 4 said that auctions decrease competition . entry and participation of small businesses . some industry stakeholders we interviewed stated that auctions limit participation to large companies with extensive financial resources . these stakeholders assert that small companies are unable to acquire the financial resources necessary to successfully compete in fcc's auction process . however , others noted that large companies also tended to dominate the comparative hearing process . in addition , some stakeholders noted that the capital intensive nature of the wireless industry — not the assignment mechanism — makes it difficult for small businesses to participate . expert opinion diverged on this issue: among our expert panelists , eight said that auctions increase entry while another eight said that auctions decrease entry , and three panelists said that auctions had no effect on entry . as mentioned earlier , comparative hearings and lotteries — the two primary assignment mechanisms employed until 1993 — suffered from several problems . comparative hearings were generally time consuming and resource intensive , as entities employed engineers and lawyers to prepare applications and fcc dedicated staff to evaluating applications based on pre - established comparative criteria . further , decisions arising from comparative hearings lacked transparency and often led to protracted litigation . while lotteries were less time consuming and resource intensive , they did not necessarily assign licenses to the entities that were best suited to provide services . thus , several years could pass before the licenses were transferred in the secondary market to entities capable of deploying a wireless system and effectively using the spectrum . further , neither comparative hearings nor lotteries provided a mechanism for the public to financially benefit from commercial entities using a valuable national resource . fcc's implementation of auctions mitigates a number of problems associated with comparative hearings and lotteries . for example: auctions are a relatively quick assignment mechanism . with auctions , fcc reduced the average time for granting a license to less than one year from the initial application date , compared to an average time of over 18 months with comparative hearings . auctions are administratively less costly than comparative hearings . entities seeking a license can reduce expenditures for engineers and lawyers arising from preparing applications , litigating , and lobbying ; and fcc can reduce expenditures associated with reviewing and analyzing applications .