cbp concurred with and has since implemented the recommendations . to what extent are c - tpat members receiving benefits ? given the importance of the c - tpat program and its continued growth in membership , you asked that we review the c - tpat program . in particular , this report addresses the following questions: 1 . to what extent is cbp meeting its security validation responsibilities ? to address the first objective , we requested data from c - tpat's portal 2.0 , the data system designed to maintain c - tpat program data — such as members' certification , security validation , and revalidation records — with the intent of reviewing the data to determine cbp's timeliness and completeness in meeting its security validation responsibilities . however , based on discussions with c - tpat managers , as well as staff members responsible for maintaining the portal 2.0 system , we determined that data from the system were not reliable because of functionality problems , as discussed in more detail later in the report . we also obtained and reviewed cbp documentation describing portal 2.0 system requirements , its development , the nature of portal 2.0 problems c - tpat staff have experienced , and actions that cbp staff are taking to address these problems . further , we conducted interviews with officials from the c - tpat program and cbp's office of information technology at cbp headquarters , as well as c - tpat field office directors , supply chain security specialists ( hereafter referred to as “security specialists” ) , and their supervisors at three of c - tpat's six field offices in los angeles , california ; new york , new york ; and houston , texas . these interviews provided us with additional information about the portal 2.0 problems and the extent to which the problems have affected the security specialists' efforts to ( 1 ) determine which c - tpat members are due for security validations or revalidations , ( 2 ) conduct those security validations or revalidations , and ( 3 ) document the results . while the information gathered from these site visits cannot be generalized to all c - tpat field office directors and security specialists , they provide insights into the nature of the validation process and use of portal 2.0 in conducting security validations . we reviewed documentation and interviewed agency officials to determine how c - tpat officials assured that security validations were identified and conducted , as needed , following the portal 2.0 system problems that occurred in 2015 . we also gathered information on how c - tpat headquarters officials solicit and review the field office director security validation submissions and compared this process to best practices on control activities , information , communication , and monitoring as identified in standards for internal control in the federal government . we then reviewed cbp and c - tpat's efforts to test portal 2.0 prior to deploying it and to address portal 2.0 problems that have arisen since it was deployed in august 2015 .