competition . within our statistical model , we examined whether the extent of competition among fbos had a correlation with fuel pricing in two ways . on - airport competition . security . some airports — particularly those with commercial service — are responsible for implementing security requirements in accordance with their transportation security administration ( tsa ) - approved security programs , notably the security of perimeters and access controls protecting restricted areas of the airport , such as ramps and taxiways . we found that some fbos are responsible for security and access controls on their leased property based on our review of individual lease requirements and the airport security plan . these fbos might require staff on site 24 hours a day to maintain airfield and perimeter security , a requirement that can increase fbo costs . for example , an fbo operating at an airport with commercial service told us that it is responsible for perimeter security on the land it leases from the airport . in addition , it is subject to unannounced security checks by tsa . in contrast , smaller general aviation airports without commercial service are not required to have as many security requirements . selected stakeholders told us that the location of an airport may influence demand for fbo services . economic theory indicates that increased demand for a service will generally result in increased prices , all else equal . in particular , stakeholders cited the following examples of demand factors that may influence prices: busy and congested airports may have higher prices for fbo services due to greater demand . prices may be higher during part of the year in locations with significant seasonal traffic , such as beach resorts with a summer high season and ski resorts with a winter high season . the increased demand at fbos during high seasons results in higher prices than during the off season . an airport's proximity to the central business district may be associated with higher demand and higher prices in such locations . in addition to cost and demand factors , the extent to which the market for fbo services is competitive may also influence prices . according to the stakeholders we interviewed , competition among fbos may lead to lower prices than would be the case when only one fbo provides the service at that airport . in our analysis of faa airport and fbo data , however , we found that nearly 90 percent of npias airports that offer fbo services are served by only one fbo ( see table 1 ) . according to a transportation research board report , a strong indicator of the number of fbos that can be financially viable at an airport can be the amount of fuel sales . for example , two airport managers we spoke to said that there was an insufficient volume of fuel sold at their airports to support more than one fbo . while the majority of npias airports in the contiguous united states have only one fbo , pilots we spoke to said that competition from fbos at nearby airports can also affect prices .