a shipment of u.s . munitions list controlled computers and related items were intercepted before being exported to the sudan . the shipment originated in canada and was seized when transiting through the united states . u.s. - origin armored vehicle spare parts were intercepted when they were shipped from canada to the middle east . the shipment was seized when transiting through the united states without appropriate u.s. export authority . u.s. components for a mobile radar system had originally been exported to canada under the exemption . the radar was then to be exported to taiwan under a canadian license . they were seized before being exported from canada . fifty - eight m - 113 armored vehicles originally sold to the canadian armed forces were exported without state approval , transferred to europe , and then to iran . an iranian intelligence group established a company in canada and attempted to acquire u.s . munitions list controlled klystron tubes , which are specifically used for hawk missile systems . the u.s. government sought extradition , but was denied . the case was eventually dismissed . a chinese national established a canadian company and used the canadian exemption to acquire a focal plane array - long - range infrared camera . the camera was shipped to china from canada without state approval . the same individual subsequently ordered an additional 400 cameras . as in the first instance , the chinese national specified that the canadian exemption could be used . another chinese - owned company established in canada ordered 400 u.s . munitions list controlled infrared cameras from a u.s. company and stated that the canadian exemption should be used , although this would have been an inappropriate use of the exemption . a u.s. company received an order for infrared equipment from a chinese entity . the u.s. company informed the chinese buyer that such equipment was controlled on the u.s . munitions list and restricted from export to china . a decision from state is critical because it may result in a seizure of the export . as state noted , responses to referrals need to be made quickly when items are detained at the port . state further indicated that exporters who believe the commodity has been mischaracterized or not fully understood are encouraged to pursue formal determination through the commodity jurisdiction process . however , the commodity jurisdiction process is time - consuming . therefore , determinations made through the commodity jurisdiction process would not resolve the need to make quick determinations through the referral process . we did not include a detailed discussion on the automated export system because regulations requiring mandatory filing of export declarations through this system had not been finalized at the time of our review . based on discussions with state officials , we added information to the report on state's training and outreach efforts . marion gatling , lillian slodkowski , delores cohen , ian ferguson , bob swierczek , and john van schaik also made significant contributions to this report . export controls: reengineering business processes can improve efficiency of state department license reviews . gao - 02-203 . washington , d.c.: december 31 , 2001 . export controls: clarification of jurisdiction for missile technology items needed .