data analytics . officials from one a / b mac described how they have begun using data analytics to more effectively identify provider - specific patterns of billing errors so that they can conduct targeted outreach and education to providers and try to prevent future billing errors . clinical editing software . cms officials described the software that one mac has deployed to improve the effectiveness of its prepayment edits . the software enables the mac to electronically flag errors in medicare claims that are not likely to meet the criteria for medicare payment when the provider submits the claim for payment , rather than after the mac begins processing the claim . the mac explained that the provider is then offered an opportunity to correct errors before transmitting the claim to the mac for payment . this reduces the resources this mac must devote to the appeals process , the cms officials said . representation at administrative law judge hearings . another mac described an innovation it had piloted in its dme mac jurisdiction , which cms has since required of all a / b and dme macs . the innovation addresses the rate at which the macs' decisions to deny coverage for medicare services or dme were being overturned at administrative law judge hearings , which are convened when the mac and a medicare qualified independent contractor have both determined that a claim should be denied and the beneficiary or provider disagrees with that determination . in the past , the macs did not send representatives to these hearings , and many of the disputed claims were ultimately paid . the macs now send physicians to administrative law judge hearings to represent the mac and explain why it denied payment for claims that are the subject of the hearings . more of the macs' initial determinations are being upheld , which results in savings of medicare dollars , the mac said . cms officials said that the agency includes in its mac performance reviews an assessment of whether the mac has generated ideas or process improvements that add value to the government . these ideas and innovations are documented in the contractor performance assessment reporting system , which may contribute to a favorable past performance evaluation for the mac when its contract is recompeted . while they have made various changes since the implementation of contracting reform , officials we interviewed from both cms and the macs described some challenges created by the structure of the mac contracts that may constrain continued improvements in mac efficiency and effectiveness . one challenge cms officials identified was the 5-year limit on mac contract terms , which they said constrained their ability to respond to issues with macs' performance . these officials stated that they were reluctant to decide not to exercise an option year for a mac based on performance issues . transitioning certain elements within the mac contracts to a fixed - price structure . according to the officials , it was impractical to award a new contract within the 5-year contract terms permitted by the mma because it takes approximately 18 to 24 months to solicit , award , and implement a new mac contract .