enforcement annual report . definition of enforcement actions . enforcement staff told us that before 2013 , the select sec and market data reports changed little from year to year , with the previous year's report used as a template to create the next one . sec adjusted its definition of enforcement actions in the 2013 report , and included notes explaining the change and providing what the number of enforcement actions would have been under the previous definition . presentation of enforcement statistics . enforcement staff said the office of the chief operating officer determined changes in presentation ( such as the order of enforcement action classifications ) in the select sec and market data report . in 2015 , enforcement changed how the report presented summary data for enforcement actions . previously , enforcement counted enforcement actions as civil actions or administrative proceedings , but the fiscal year 2015 report separately identified and counted the proceedings as stand - alone ( initial ) or follow - on ( after initial action ) . enforcement staff said these changes were made possible by better software that allowed for enhanced and expanded presentation of the data . as previously mentioned , the select sec and market data report was discontinued after the fiscal year 2017 report and the enforcement annual report was first published in november 2017 . the annual report included additional data tables of enforcement statistics not previously reported ( some comparing statistics to the previous year ) and narratives about enforcement priorities and cases . enforcement staff told us the annual report was created to increase transparency and provide more information and deeper context than previous reporting had . the sec division of enforcement voluntarily issues an annual report that includes statistics and highlights significant enforcement actions and initiatives of the previous fiscal year . enforcement has documented procedures and has designated staff to input and review enforcement - related data in its case - tracking system . however , the division does not have written procedures for generating its public reporting ( currently , the annual report ) , including for compiling and verifying the report's statistics , or documenting that procedures were implemented as intended . cms also facilitate closing completed cases in the database . enforcement procedures call for enforcement staff to perform multiple data reviews for all information in the enforcement database , according to enforcement staff and the user guide . according to the user guide , local cms review the accuracy of key case - related data recorded in the system at certain stages as a case proceeds ( see fig . the local cms add case information by checking any new documentation , such as court filings . in addition to the review by the local cms , national cms also are to review newly opened cases , as well as cases that have advanced to an investigation , changed from an investigation to an action , or closed . to do this , national cms compare information recorded in the system against any primary documents related to the case , such as court documentation .