what is summary judgment ? summary judgment authority is a procedural device used when there is no dispute as to the material facts of the case , and a party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law and the responsibility of the court . who has summary judgment authority ? other federal adjudicatory bodies , such as the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) and the federal labor relations authority , have summary judgment authority . according to eeoc officials we met with , summary judgment is frequently used at eeoc as a vetting process to determine whether or not a hearing will be held after the record has been developed . they also stated that summary judgment is used as a case management tool and its advantages include eliminating the need for a hearing . focus group participants in favor of summary judgment for mspb stated that it would be advantageous for involved agencies and mspb because it would create greater efficiencies . they said that involved agencies would not have to engage in an exhaustive , extensive process when the facts do not warrant it if mspb had summary judgment authority . one participant stated that having summary judgment would separate valid complaints from meritless complaints that may not have any facts in dispute , such as employees who are shielding themselves from misconduct they actually committed . another participant said that involved agencies would delay making settlement decisions until summary judgment rulings were made instead of currently settling cases agencies deemed meritless to save agency resources . participants also told us that mspb could gain greater efficiencies from summary judgment because it could potentially decrease the number of appeals for which administrative judges would conduct hearings , thus allowing administrative judges to issue decisions on additional appeals , reducing potential backlogs , and resolving cases sooner . as a result , mspb could conserve time and resources in the long term . one participant proposed a 5-year pilot to determine and measure the efficiency of summary judgment on affected parties . on the other hand , focus group participants opposing summary judgment for mspb said that a motion for summary judgment may not resolve whistleblower cases any faster because it would require more discovery , depositions , and documents to establish the disputed facts thereby creating more prehearing litigation work . in addition , they said that while mspb's current caseload may decrease in the short term , mspb may spend more time dealing with appeals of unfavorable summary judgment decisions . they explained that this could lead to prolonged litigation , thereby eliminating any potential efficiency gained by mspb . participants also discussed mspb's ability to dismiss cases under its jurisdictional test , noting that this process is like a summary judgment review . however , one participant distinguished mspb's current jurisdictional test from summary judgment because the jurisdictional test only involves the whistleblower , not the agency , and only reviews whether the whistleblower has exhausted his or her administrative remedies and can establish the jurisdictional requirements for mspb review . three participants pointed out the small number of appeals that are currently adjudicated on the merits as an example of mspb's current efficiency in using its jurisdictional test .