nasa concurred with our recommendation . the agency acknowledged that shuttle workforce management and critical skills retention will be a major challenge as it progresses toward retirement of the space shuttle and as such has acted to respond to our recommendation . for example , since we made our recommendation , nasa developed an agency wide strategic human capital plan and developed workforce analysis tools to assist it in identifying critical skills needs . nasa also developed a human capital plan specifically for sustaining the shuttle workforce through the retirement and , then transitioning the workforce . according to agency officials , currently nasa is mapping the available skills of the space shuttle workforce with the skills it will need for future work so that it can better plan and implement workforce reassignments . nasa's senior leaders recognize the need for an effective workforce strategy in order to sustain the shuttle workforce through the shuttle's retirement , which coincides with the completion of the iss . clear , strong executive leadership will be needed to ensure that the risks associated with the transition of the shuttle workforce are minimized . nasa has several options for filling the gap between the shuttle , which will retire in 2010 and new nasa - developed vehicles that are not expected to come on - line until 2015 . the first relies on new vehicles developed within the u.s. commercial space sector . the second relies on vehicles developed by international partners — both new and legacy systems . there are considerable challenges with all options nasa is examining . nasa is working with the commercial space sector to develop and produce transport vehicles that can take equipment and ultimately crew to and from the space station during the gap between the space shuttle and the crew launch vehicle . rather than buy these vehicles outright , nasa plans to help fund their development and purchase transportation services or perhaps even the vehicles themselves when they are needed . this program is known as commercial orbital transportation services ( cots ) . currently , nasa has seven cots agreements — all are in the initial phases of raising private funds for the development . nasa funding has been provided to two companies , rocketplane kistler ( rpk ) and space exploration technologies ( spacex ) . nasa has signed five more space act agreements which facilitates sharing technological information , but these agreements are unfunded by nasa . there are two phases to the cots program , the first phase entails technical development and demonstration and the second phase may include the competitive procurement of orbital transportation services for iss logistical support . nasa officials noted that both rpk and spacex met their first milestone to demonstrate financial progress by obtaining private funding . however , rpk missed its second milestone in may 31 , 2007 and had to renegotiate its space act agreement milestone with nasa . we will continue to monitor changes to the shuttle manifest as they occur . this was highlighted by the international space station independent safety task force , and nasa has been working to address the concerns laid out in that study .