iii ) . hhs concurred with our recommendation that data should be collected and maintained to track waiver physicians . hhs noted that the department had also discussed , internally , tracking other physicians who are working under h - 1b visas , stating that this would allow a more complete accounting of the actual number of physicians providing care in underserved areas . hhs commented that the department's goal is to assure that the limited resources of the j - 1 visa waiver program and other programs addressing areas and populations with limited access to health care professionals are targeted most effectively and that the availability of complete data on these additional providers would enhance the data used to identify such shortage areas . hhs also commented that the draft report may have overstated , to a degree , the “oversupply” of physicians in some states . hhs acknowledged that we made important adjustments in our analysis for physicians practicing nonprimary care and psychiatry . the department , however , expressed concern that our calculations did not address the fact that some j - 1 visa waiver placements are not in hpsas , referring to our finding that 23 percent of waivers requested in fiscal year 2005 were for physicians to practice outside of hpsas . we believe that applying this percentage to our analysis would be inappropriate for several reasons . first , this percentage pertained to waiver physicians practicing all specialties , including primary care , nonprimary care , and psychiatry , while our analysis focused on physicians practicing primary care . further , the 23 percent figure represents waivers requested in only one fiscal year ( fiscal year 2005 ) , while our analysis covered waivers requested in 3 fiscal years . in addition , fiscal year 2005 was the only year in our analysis in which states could request waivers for physicians to practice in nondesignated areas . in our draft report , we did not use the term “oversupply,” but we acknowledge that our report should clearly specify the limitations in the data used in our analysis . to do so , we clarified the text describing our methodology and results . we also received technical comments from hhs and the department of homeland security's uscis , which we incorporated as appropriate . three agencies — arc , dra , and department of state — said that they did not have comments on the draft report . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , the secretary of homeland security , the secretary of state , the federal co - chair of arc , the federal co - chairman of dra , and appropriate congressional committees . we will also provide copies to others upon request . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 312 ) 220-7600 or aronovitzl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .