we commend fda for these efforts . however , according to our review of fda documents describing the activities planned for this program , the program does not include performance goals and measures for import alerts . fda officials stated that this is because the program is new . additionally , in february 2019 , fda published a broad plan for the safety of imported food that includes a goal , objective , and strategy related to import alerts . under its goal to detect and refuse entry of unsafe foods at the border , fda has an objective to strategically use import alerts and import certifications by using data and information from oversight activities , regulatory cooperation , and other reliable sources to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of import alerts . however , fda's strategy for achieving this objective does not include performance goals or measures that would allow the agency to assess the effectiveness of its seafood import alerts in helping to achieve fda's food safety mission . inspections prior to removal decisions . for the 274 removal decisions we reviewed , fda conducted inspections of importers or foreign processing facilities for 28 ( about 10 percent ) of the removal decisions in the 6 months prior . according to fda's procedures , firms or products placed on an import alert based on a violative facility inspection may generally be removed from the alert following a reinspection of the importer or foreign processing facility . in some instances , a firm may present information or documentation sufficient to demonstrate that appropriate corrections are in place to overcome the appearance of a violation and , with appropriate concurrence , may be removed from the import alert . fda officials added that , regardless of the basis for placement on an import alert , fda could require an on - site inspection prior to removal , depending on the hazard the violation posed . for example , certain violations may result in a finding of “official action indicated” ( oai ) , which indicates that an establishment failed to meet regulatory or administrative requirements and may pose a hazard to public health . fda's field management directive 86 establishes a goal for fda staff to conduct a follow - up inspection within 6 months after an oai finding to verify that the facility has corrected violations . in our review of the 274 removal decisions , we found that for 32 firms that received an oai inspection finding after fda issued the directive in december 2011 , fda did not conduct a follow - up inspection for 31 of these firms before removing them from an import alert . according to fda officials , the agency did not monitor whether its staff decided that inspections would be expected for the 274 removal decisions or whether the facilities that received an oai inspection finding were reinspected . fda officials told us that the agency relied on reviewing data on removal decisions individually to ensure that expected inspections had been conducted . consequently , fda was not aware of the extent to which the facilities associated with the removal decisions were actually inspected . sampling or inspections following removal decisions .