local boards can be just as large . for example , we found one in pennsylvania with 43 members and two in california with 45 members . the size of these boards is especially large in comparison to various private - sector corporate boards . for example , general motors' board of directors has 13 members , while intel's board has 11 . we were told that the size of the boards makes it difficult to recruit the necessary private - sector board members for several reasons . first , because private - sector representatives must make up the majority of board membership , the larger the board , the greater the requirement for private - sector members , which increases the difficulty of recruiting the requisite number of private - sector members . we found several boards that had been unable to achieve the private - sector majority required by wia . for example , vermont's state board had about 42 percent private - sector membership , although the state is working to fill additional private - sector vacancies . pennsylvania and california used private nonprofit institutions to achieve their private - sector majorities . labor's survey of 132 local areas found that local areas were more successful recruiting private - sector representatives who had retired than those who were still working , which may limit the current knowledge of workforce issues brought by the private - sector to the board . second , the large number of board members makes it difficult to set up meetings . for example , officials in one local workforce investment area said they attempted to meet quarterly to accommodate the schedules of the various members . however , because members often are dispersed throughout the state , it may be difficult to handle the logistics for so many participants , or to find locations for the board meetings that are convenient to all members and do not pose transportation obstacles . if members are unable to attend the meetings , boards may not be able to achieve a quorum ( usually a simple majority ) , and therefore may be unable to make decisions . third , the large number of board members makes it difficult to run meetings efficiently . it may be difficult to ensure that the numerous board members all have the same information prior to the meeting , and to keep members apprised of the board's activities . in addition , it is difficult to reach agreement on important issues because having more members results in having more opinions that need to be addressed and reconciled . these difficulties have been especially prevalent this past year when boards have had to perform many administrative tasks , such as developing strategic plans or certifying one - stops , in order to set up the wia system . private - sector representatives and other implementers in the three states we visited said that the boards did not operate in an efficient manner . this inefficiency led to meetings that focused on administration and process rather than on outcomes and broad strategic goals , both of which the private - sector representatives see as an appropriate role for a board of directors .