iii ) . other commerce staff provided technical comments on the draft report , which we incorporated as appropriate . in a may 23 , 2001 , memorandum , the director , office of planning , u.s. customs service stated that he had no substantive comments to make ( see app . iv ) . other u.s. customs staff provided technical comments on the draft report , which we also incorporated as appropriate . the department of defense provided comments , concurring in the report's findings and providing technical comments on the draft report , which we incorporated as appropriate . this report satisfies that requirement . to perform our study , we ( 1 ) monitored u.s. customs service mechanical and chemical tests of fasteners imported in early 2001 and compared the results with similar tests performed by customs in 1998 ; ( 2 ) had the defense supply center philadelphia ( dscp ) send samples of fasteners purchased in small packages before and after december 1999 to customs for testing and compared the results ; ( 3 ) published a notice in the federal register on august 9 , 2000 ( see app . ii ) , and on our web site asking the public to provide any evidence of changes in industry practices ; and ( 4 ) asked officials from federal agencies that use fasteners whether they had any evidence of industry changes . we conducted our review from january 2000 to may 2001 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a more detailed discussion of our objective , scope , and methodology is included as appendix i . billions of fasteners are used in safety - critical applications such as buildings , nuclear power plants , bridges , motor vehicles , airplanes , and other products or equipment each year . for example , an automobile may have as many as 3,000 fasteners . in 1988 , the house committee on energy and commerce's subcommittee on oversight and investigations issued a report on counterfeit and substandard fasteners that , along with hearings held by the house science committee , led to the enactment of fqa on november 16 , 1990 . the subcommittee reported that failures of substandard and often counterfeit fasteners may have been responsible for deaths and injuries , reduced defense readiness , and that they potentially threatened the safety of every american . according to the subcommittee report , the defense industrial supply center , which supplies fasteners to the armed services , found that its inventory contained over 30 million counterfeit fasteners and that army depots contained another 2.6 million . similarly , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) reported that it found substandard fasteners in space shuttle equipment , and six of its fastener vendors were found to have inadequate quality - control systems . the air force likewise discovered substandard flight safety - critical aerospace fasteners in its inventory . fqa covers certain threaded , metallic , heat - treated fasteners of one - quarter inch diameter or greater for use in safety - critical applications .