i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . my testimony today summarizes the findings and recommendation from our report . accordingly , this testimony addresses 1. the extent to which the cbm program has been used to challenge patents and the results of those challenges , 2. the extent to which uspto ensures timeliness of trial decisions , reviews decisions for consistency , and engages with stakeholders to improve its administrative proceedings for the program , and 3. stakeholder views on the effects of the cbm program and whether it should be extended past its scheduled september 2020 sunset date . to conduct this work , we obtained and analyzed data on board proceedings from september 2012 through september 2017 , reviewed the aia and uspto documents , and interviewed uspto officials . however , our analysis of petition data showed that the vast majority of patents challenged under the cbm program were challenged once or twice . stakeholders we interviewed outlined several reasons why petitioners may file more than one petition against a single patent . for example , the board limits the number of pages that a petitioner may use to submit prior art and arguments for invalidity and therefore some petitioners might file more than one petition so they can present all of their art and arguments at once . overall , through september 2017 , the patent trial and appeal board had completed reviews of 329 of the 359 patents challenged under the program , and for about one - third of these patents the board ruled at least some challenged patent claims unpatentable . data on petition outcomes are open to different interpretations depending on how they are presented . for example , under the cbm program , board judges ruled some or all of the patent claims considered at trial unpatentable in 96.7 percent of the petitions for which they issued a final written decision from september 2012 through september 2017 . the cbm program began in september 2012 and is slated to sunset in september 2020 . we also assessed uspto's efforts to review decisions for consistency against federal standards for internal control and uspto's current strategic plan , and we interviewed a nongeneralizable sample of 38 stakeholders knowledgeable about the cbm program , who provided a broad spectrum of opinions on the cbm program . additional information on our scope and methodology is available in our report . the work on which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . finally , board officials told us that the board has begun to increase the number of trial decisions considered for precedential and informative designations as part of its efforts to ensure the consistency of trial decisions . taken together , the board's review processes help ensure that board trial decisions are reviewed in some manner .