research . the executive agreement stated that the fhcc would comply with va policy for research efforts , but provided that when dod researchers or patients are involved in a study , the navy's rules on protection of human subjects would apply in addition to va's . in addition to implementing this provision , fhcc officials told us they decided to integrate the research program at the fhcc . since a majority of the research conducted is va research , it was easily incorporated into the broader fhcc integration efforts . the fhcc has an institutional review board — a body responsible for reviewing and approving research protocols involving human subjects — located at a hospital affiliated with the fhcc that provides research management and operational oversight to the fhcc , the edward hines , jr. va hospital in hines , illinois . what progress have va and dod made in implementing the executive agreement to establish and operate the north chicago fhcc ? what plan , if any , do va and dod have to assess the provision of care and operations at the north chicago fhcc ? to determine what progress va and dod have made in implementing the executive agreement to establish and operate the north chicago fhcc , we examined the 12 integration areas and provisions outlined in the executive agreement , and assessed the fhcc's progress in meeting them . specifically , we reviewed va and dod documentation of implementation plans and progress including timelines for integrating the facility , policies for operation of the fhcc , and plans for integrating the financial systems . we reviewed our earlier work examining the information technology aspects of the fhcc integration . we also interviewed officials at va , dod , and the fhcc about the planning process for , and implementation of , the integration at the north chicago site . in addition , to observe the status of integration efforts , we conducted site visits to the north chicago site in september 2010 , prior to the official establishment of the fhcc , and in january 2011 , after fhcc officials estimated that several key aspects of the integration would be complete by that time . to determine what plan , if any , va and dod have to assess the provision of care and operations at the fhcc , we examined fhcc staff efforts to measure care and operations in the context of 15 integration benchmarks — specific performance measures for determining fhcc success — selected by va and dod and identified as one of the 12 executive agreement integration areas . we did not assess whether the integration benchmarks are the most appropriate measures of a successful integration nor did we evaluate the reliability or validity of the fhcc's performance results . the integration benchmarks are an established element of the executive agreement to which va and dod have formally agreed and fhcc officials have not yet reported a full cycle of performance data . we reviewed relevant documents that describe the fhcc's plans for measuring standards of care provided to patients and for assessing the success of operations for the site .