and libraries . .” based on this direction , and following the recommendations of the federal - state joint board on universal service , fcc established the schools and libraries universal service mechanism that is commonly referred to as the e - rate program . the program is funded through statutorily mandated payments by companies that provide interstate telecommunications services . many of these companies , in turn , pass their contribution costs on to their subscribers through a line item on subscribers' phone bills . fcc capped funding for the e - rate program at $2.25 billion per year , although funding requests by schools and libraries can greatly exceed the cap . for example , schools and libraries requested more than $4.2 billion in e - rate funding for the 2004 funding year . in 1998 , fcc appointed usac as the program's permanent administrator , although fcc retains responsibility for overseeing the program's operations and ensuring compliance with the commission's rules . in response to congressional conference committee direction , fcc has specified that usac “may not make policy , interpret unclear provisions of the statute or rules , or interpret the intent of congress.” usac is responsible for carrying out the program's day - to - day operations , such as maintaining a web site that contains program information and application procedures ; answering inquiries from schools and libraries ; processing and reviewing applications ; making funding commitment decisions and issuing funding commitment letters ; and collecting , managing , investing , and disbursing e - rate funds . fcc permits — and in fact relies on — usac to establish administrative procedures that program participants are required to follow as they work through the application and funding process . the fcc ig has noted that program participants generally consider usac the primary source for guidance on the rules governing the e - rate program . see appendix iii for a more detailed explanation of the structure of usac . under the e - rate program , eligible schools , libraries , and consortia that include eligible schools and libraries may receive discounts for eligible services . eligible schools and libraries may apply annually to receive e - rate support . the program places schools and libraries into various discount categories , based on indicators of need , so that the school or library pays a percentage of the cost for the service and the e - rate program funds the remainder . e - rate discounts range from 20 percent to 90 percent . schools and libraries in areas with higher percentages of students eligible for free or reduced - price lunches through the national school lunch program ( or a federally approved alternative mechanism ) qualify for higher discounts on eligible services . schools and libraries located in rural areas also receive greater discounts in most cases , as shown in table 1 .