the review is discussed below . in april 2000 , ntsb management engaged pwc to perform a comprehensive review of ntsb's internal controls applicable to its current financial management processes . pwc's january 2001 report on the results of its review disclosed a wide range of internal control weaknesses . specifically , pwc identified weaknesses related to the completeness and clarity of financial policies , recording and reviewing transactions , segregation of duties , and reporting on budget execution . in light of the weaknesses identified , pwc concluded that ntsb is “exposed to significant risk of financial loss.” pwc conducted its review by applying the committee of sponsoring organization's framework for evaluating internal controls , internal control – integrated framework . specifically , pwc reviewed ntsb existing policies and procedures , activities and records , interviewed ntsb managers and staff , and reviewed selected transactions . the review , conducted from april through december 2000 , covered ntsb financial activities associated with procurements , disbursements , payroll , asset and receipts management , budget planning and execution , and financial reporting and systems . in making more that 50 recommendations in response to the control weaknesses identified , pwc noted several cross - cutting themes associated with the need to improve ntsb internal controls , including those noted below . greater attention to and awareness of financial policies . pwc concluded that ntsb needed to establish policies governing various financial activities including accounting for and controlling fixed assets and various types of receipts owed to ntsb and to update and clarify existing policies including procurement and use of agency credit cards . pwc also noted that once the financial policies are updated and clarified , ntsb staff need training on their application and enforcement . finally , pwc noted that ntsb management must demonstrate , through review of activities and compliance audits , that the financial policies will be enforced . improved recording of transactions . pwc concluded that ntsb needs to record selected transactions when the financial information needed to record and track the transactions becomes known to ntsb . pwc based this conclusion , in part , on the fact that ntsb had not been recording certain types of transactions ( including amounts owed by others to ntsb and automatic charges , known as opac charges , made by other agencies against ntsb's funds ) until well after the transactions or their underlying economic events have occurred . certain control - related policies and procedures were poorly designed and ntsb staff often did not follow those that were properly designed . also , the control design and compliance problems were compounded by the lack of effective review and approval functions , resulting in impaired organizational accountability for agency resources . ntsb management's failure to monitor and report on the adequacy of its internal controls as required by fmfia and omb circular a - 123 for fiscal years 1999 and 2000 further evidenced the deterioration of ntsb's internal control environment . failure to monitor the adequacy of internal controls precluded ntsb management from having information it needed to assess whether control objectives were being achieved and whether it had proper accountability over agency resources and was in compliance with laws and regulations .