evaluation parameters . in its 1997 report , nichols cautioned that trw's software met performance requirements because the countermeasures included in the 48 tests were relatively simple . our review did not confirm this explanation . a false alarm is a detection of a target that is not there . what was the basis for the department of justice's decision not to join the lawsuit ? how did the national missile defense joint program office assure itself that the phase one engineering team could provide an independent and objective review ? boeing and trw disclosed the key results and limitations of integrated flight test 1a in written reports released between august 13 , 1997 , and april 1 , 1998 . the contractors explained in a report issued 60 days after the june 1997 test that the test achieved its primary objectives , but that some sensor abnormalities were noted . for example , while the report explained that the sensor detected the deployed targets and collected some usable target signals , the report also stated that some sensor components did not operate as desired and the sensor often detected targets where there were none . in december 1997 , the contractors documented other test anomalies . according to briefing charts prepared for a december meeting , the boeing sensor tested in integrated flight test 1a had a low probability of detection ; the sensor's software was not always confident that it had correctly identified some target objects ; the software significantly increased the rank of one target object toward the end of the flight ; and in - flight calibration of the sensor was inconsistent . additionally , on april 1 , 1998 , the contractors submitted an addendum to an earlier report that noted two more problems . in this addendum , the contractors disclosed that their claim that trw's software successfully distinguished a mock warhead from decoys during a post - flight analysis was based on tests of the software using about one - third of the target signals collected during integrated flight test 1a . the contractors also noted that trw reduced the software's reference data so that it would correspond to the collected target signals being analyzed . project office and nichols research officials said that in late august 1997 , the contractors orally communicated to them all problems and limitations that were subsequently described in the december 1997 briefing and the april 1998 addendum . however , neither project officials nor contractors could provide us with documentation of these communications . although the contractors reported the test's key results and limitations , they described the results using some terms that were not defined . for example , one written report characterized the test as a “success” and the sensor's performance as “excellent.” we found that the information in the contractors' reports , in total , enabled officials in the ground based interceptor project management office and nichols research to understand the key results and limitations of the test . however , because such terms are qualitative and subjective rather than quantitative and objective , their use increased the likelihood that test results would be interpreted in different ways and might even be misunderstood .