v ) . the commissioner noted that he was pleased that our report acknowledges irs's accomplishments and steps to protect taxpayer data and rights . the commissioner also noted that irs agreed with our recommendations and had initiated efforts to address them , as discussed below . irs agreed with the recommendation . in discussing our draft report with irs officials , we clarified that the goals and measures should be logically linked to irs's five desired results and that irs should document any indirect links and why more direct linkages were not made . in turn , irs's letter provided information on such linkages , including the indirect linkage for the desired result involving increased public confidence , and provided a revised version of our appendix iv ( which we reprint with the commissioner's letter in app . v ) with columns added to show the linkages between the desired results and the proposed goals and measures as they appeared in our draft report . although we did not have time to fully review irs's information , we are gratified to see that irs has established some program goals and measures and has made progress in developing the linkages . we look forward to irs developing the related measures and data , such as for reducing the penalties and interest paid , better utilizing irs staff , freeing up irs staff to work more complex cases , and significantly reducing case backlogs . how will irs use the lessons learned from the limited implementation phase to assess critical success factors and program performance before full program implementation ? irs agreed with our recommendation . in response to our draft report , irs provided us documentation that it had implemented a system to track pdc program costs going forward from july 2006 . in discussing our draft report with irs officials , they said that irs will face difficulties in estimating some of the of the pdc program costs incurred before the tracking system was established . based on this new information , we revised our recommendation to state that irs should complete establishing verifiable , reliable information on all the costs of the program , to the extent possible . irs's comments state that it will furnish reconstructed historical costs as soon as they are compiled . although we look forward to receiving such cost information , we encourage irs to use the cost information to manage and evaluate the pdc program and inform policymakers . irs provided a combined response on this and the last recommendation dealing with the comparative study ( which is discussed below ) . irs agreed with our recommendation to evaluate the program , but did not provide any additional information on how it plans to do so . we look forward to irs establishing and documenting specific plans for evaluating the program over time and reporting the evaluation results . we did our work from august 2005 to september 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . irs has two major programs to collect tax debts . first , irs staff in the telephone function may attempt collection over the phone or in writing .