we provided interior with a draft of this report for review and comment . there are several ways in which indian oil and gas resources can be leased . for example , oil and gas resources can be nominated for lease by operators , the tribe , or an individual indian mineral owner . bia then reviews nominated oil and gas resources to determine ownership , and in some cases , blm may assist with identifying ownership of the proposed parcels . if the resources are not already leased , bia may advertise and conduct competitive lease sales where operators can bid on nominated leases . bia reviews the bids , identifies the highest bidder , notifies the operator whether its bid was accepted , and issues the lease . an indian lease document comprises a primary term and a secondary term , both of which are negotiated as part of the lease agreement . the primary term is the time frame in which the company has to begin drilling or the lease will expire . the length of this term varies , but it usually ranges from 2 to 10 years for indian leases , according to interior officials . onrr transfers royalty payments to the appropriate indian accounts , and the office of the special trustee for american indians ( ost ) makes the royalty payments to indian mineral owners based on instructions from bia . an approved ca is effective on either the date of first production or the date the ca is approved , whichever is earlier . traditionally , interior encouraged the operator to submit an indian ca before the well was drilled , but it was common for operators to wait until the results of the well were known before submitting the ca application , according to interior officials . in recent years , some offices within interior have taken actions to address the backlog of cas in their regions . for example , we previously reported that in north dakota the blm dickinson field office , bia fort berthold agency office , and onrr created a preliminary ca process in march 2011 to address the backlog of cas in their region . according to interior officials , the preliminary ca process was used by some bia and blm offices as an interim step to ensure the timely collection and distribution of royalties while operators prepared the required documents for a complete ca application . however , in early 2015 interior's office of the solicitor instructed bia and blm to cease using this process . the office of the solicitor determined that preliminary cas were not legally binding because documents used in the process were not formally reviewed , approved , and signed by the secretary of the interior or the secretary's designee . in addition , interior officials said that they signed a contract with lockheed martin in october 2011 that included providing technical assistance and additional staff to help expedite the processing and approval of ca packages at the bia fort berthold agency office . we previously reported that some bia offices did not have adequate staff resources or staff with the skills needed to effectively evaluate energy - related documents , including the large number of cas .