vi ) . in its comments dod stated that it appreciated the collaborative , insightful , and thorough approach that was taken with this important issue . however , dod disagreed with our finding that it had not formally designated a senior official to ensure nonenrolled beneficiaries' access to care , including adequate participation by nonnetwork providers , as required by the ndaa for fiscal year 2004 . does dr. x accept patients under the medicare program ? would dr. x accept additional medicare patients ? in addition to its civilian provider survey that covered 20 states , tma gathers worldwide information on nonenrolled tricare beneficiaries' access to care through its annual health care survey of dod beneficiaries , which covers all tricare beneficiaries and all tricare options . according to survey results from 2003 through 2005 , about 77 percent of nonenrolled tricare beneficiaries who obtained care reported that “getting needed care” was not a problem for them . similarly , over 80 percent of these tricare beneficiaries reported that they could “get care quickly.” for the same time period , tma compared its survey results with the results of a civilian health plan survey , the consumer assessment of healthcare providers and systems ( cahps® ) , which asked participants the same questions on access to care under their plans . from this comparative analysis , tma found that a similar percentage of civilian health plan participants — about 80 percent — responded that “getting needed care” was not a problem and that they could “get care quickly.” tma uses this survey as a benchmark to compare tricare against civilian plans . anecdotal information about access to care is available through tma's centralized beneficiary and provider services office , which collects and monitors information on tricare beneficiaries' complaints and general inquiries , including issues about access to care . tricare beneficiaries may contact this office by telephone , e - mail , written correspondence , or through their congressional representatives . tma officials broadly categorize each contact by issue and use this information to monitor trends in the feedback they receive through these contacts . a tma official stated that if the number of contacts they receive related to an issue rises , the appropriate program officials — such as the tros — are notified and encouraged to investigate the issue . furthermore , tma maintains a record of tricare beneficiary and provider contacts that have been addressed and those that remain open and continue to require attention . although the beneficiary and provider services office does not specifically track access - to - care issues as a separate issue , one of the tma officials responsible for tracking the contacts told us that tricare beneficiary complaints and inquiries relating to access issues have been minimal . overall , concerns and inquiries for the “contractor service complaint” category , which could include access - to - care issues for both enrolled and nonenrolled tricare beneficiaries , represented about 1 percent of about 6,900 total contacts about the mcscs for 2005 . in addition , on a regional level , the tros collect and monitor tricare beneficiary feedback gathered from e - mails and phone calls , as well as correspondence they receive from tricare beneficiary groups .