these findings are not surprising . in our april 2005 testimony before this subcommittee , we stated that a number of agencies would be challenged in the short term to provide the necessary performance data on their senior executives in order to receive full certification or to maintain their certification ( agencies must provide 2 years of performance rating and bonus data showing that meaningful distinctions in senior executive performance were made to qualify ) . other factors might also be at work . for example , a number of agencies have told us that the certification process is burdensome . one agency said that opm's requirements for the certification of a submission are time intensive , laborious , and can disrupt an agency's recruitment and retention efforts . as we also noted at the april 2005 hearing , opm will need to carefully monitor the implementation of agencies' performance management systems , especially those that have provisional certification . this is because , as i have stated earlier , agencies with provisional certification can still receive the flexibilities of the new pay system , even though they do not meet all of opm's certification requirements . in other words , agencies can receive the benefits of the new pay - for - performance system without meeting all of its requirements and safeguards . we believe that , going forward , it will be important for opm to continue to monitor the certification process , determine whether any obstacles are impeding agencies from receiving full certification , and take appropriate measures to address them . these actions will help ensure that agencies continue to make substantive progress toward modernized performance management systems , and that provisional certifications do not become the norm . once agencies have provisional or full certification , opm monitors senior executive performance appraisal systems by measuring the distributions of agencies' performance ratings and pay . this information helps opm determine if agencies are making meaningful distinctions among the performance of their senior executives . such distinctions are important because effective performance management requires the organization's leadership to make meaningful distinctions between acceptable and outstanding performance and appropriately reward those who perform at the highest level . in its report on senior executive pay for performance for fiscal year 2005 , opm stated that the data indicate that federal agencies are taking seriously the requirement to develop rigorous appraisal systems and to make meaningful distinctions in performance ratings and pay . all reporting agencies have moved away from pass / fail appraisal systems and now have at least one performance level above “fully successful.” in 2005 , 43 percent of career ses governmentwide were rated at the highest performance level , compared to 75 percent in 2003 prior to the implementation of the ses pay - for - performance system . further , opm reported for fiscal year 2005 that the percentage of ses rated at the highest performance level declined 16 percent from the prior year . opm also reported that the largest increases in salary went to ses rated at the highest performance level .