to serve those communities . however , we have found that aircraft serving airports that provide eas service were far less full than aircraft serving airports that did not receive such assistance . in 2009 , we found that planes serving airports in 2008 with eas service were only about 37 percent full versus an industry average of about 80 percent . this was due , in part , to eas subsidized service not having the destinations , frequency , or low fares that passengers prefer . further , according to dot officials , the population around some of the very small airports is too low to result in very high passenger loads . since then , the load factor for these flights — the percentage of available seats filled by paying passengers — increased somewhat and was roughly 49 percent versus the industry average of 83 percent in 2013 . this may be due , in part , to more regional airlines serving these eas airports with smaller aircraft , as a result of changes in the eas program that we recommended in 2009 . the number of eas communities being served by airlines with aircraft smaller than 15-seats doubled from 2009 through 2013 . in 2009 , 16 eas communities were served using 9-seaters , but 32 eas communities were served with this aircraft in 2013 . great lakes is one of the few remaining regional airlines that flies 19-seat turboprops , while other small regional airlines such as cape air , seaport , and air choice one — fly smaller 9- seat aircraft not subject to some faa rules for operating scheduled service flights.engine turboprop aircraft. ) small - hub and smaller airports are eligible for scasdp grants provided the airport is not receiving sufficient air service or had unreasonably high airfares . congress has provided funding for scasdp since fiscal year 2002 — ranging from a high of $20 million for fiscal years 2002 through 2005 to a low of $6 million in fiscal years 2010 through 2013 . in fiscal year 2013 , dot awarded 25 grants totaling almost $11.4 million to airports in 22 states ( see table 2 ) . in july 2009 , we concluded that a multimodal approach — one that relies on for example , bus service to larger airports or air taxi service to connect communities — is an alternative to providing scheduled air - service connectivity to small communities . for some communities that receive eas subsidies — for example , those that have limited demand for the service due to proximity to other airports or limited population — other transportation modes might be more cost effective and practical than these subsidies . this approach may be of use to small communities that have not been able to generate sufficient demand to justify the costs for provision of air service , resulting in rising per - passenger subsidies . when potentially cost - effective alternatives , such as bus service to other airports , are not used , the costs of subsidies may be higher than necessary to link these communities to the nation's passenger aviation system .