senate report no . we received examples expressing the view that use of a sabbatical for educational purposes was positive because the education received while on sabbatical was beneficial for career advancement . conversely , there were negative examples reporting that navy chain of command views the break in service as a “lack of commitment,” or “leaving community while others continued to work. congress authorized cipp as a pilot program to help the services offer greater flexibility in career paths for servicemembers with the hope of increasing the retention of personnel with critical skills . all of the military services have implemented cipp , and dod officials have stated that the program should become permanent . beginning in june 2016 , the services will be required to evaluate and report annually on the effectiveness of the pilot . however , they do not have a plan to guide these evaluation efforts and help determine the extent to which the pilot program is an effective means to retain servicemembers . without a plan that includes key features for evaluating cipp's value as a retention tool , dod will be unlikely to determine the extent to which cipp is achieving its intended purpose and thereby inform decision makers as to whether it should become a permanent program . to assist dod in determining whether cipp is meeting its intended purpose of enhancing retention and providing greater flexibility in the career path of servicemembers , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , in collaboration with the service secretaries , develop and implement a plan to evaluate the pilot that includes key features such as well - defined , clear , and measurable objectives and standards for determining pilot - program performance . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in written comments , which are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii , dod concurred with our recommendation . dod noted that they recognize the importance of developing well - defined measures to evaluate the effectiveness and utility of cipp . dod also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated in the report where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , and the secretaries of the military departments . the report also is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the navy implemented cipp in 2009 , followed by the marine corps in 2013 , and the air force and army in 2014 ; as of july 2015 , the services had approved 161 servicemembers to participate in cipp .