in addition , stop documents do not refer to niplecc . the ip coordinator is also serving as the coordinator for stop . both agency officials and industry representatives with whom we spoke consistently praised the ip coordinator , saying that he was effectively addressing their concerns by speaking at seminars , communicating with their members , and heading u.s. delegations overseas . stop has energized u.s. efforts to protect and enforce ip and has initiated some new efforts , however its long - term role is uncertain . one area where stop has increased efforts is outreach to foreign governments . in addition , stop has focused attention on helping small - and medium - sized enterprises to better protect their ip rights . industry representatives generally had positive views on stop , although some thought that stop was a compilation of new and on - going u.s. agency activities that would have occurred anyway . a significant portion of goods received at u.s. ports do not immediately enter u.s. commerce but are instead shipped “in - bond” for official entry at other u.s. ports or are transported through the united states for export . when goods are shipped in - bond , they are subject to national security inspections at the port of arrival , but are exempt from u.s. duties or quotas and formal trade inspections until they reach the final port where they will officially enter u.s. commerce . for many years , gao and others have noted weaknesses in the in - bond system used to monitor shipments between ports . cbp and ice officials recognize that the in - bond system has been used by certain importers to bring counterfeit and pirated goods into the united states by avoiding official entry at the port of arrival and then diverting the goods afterwards . some cbp officials said the in - bond system may contribute to imports of counterfeits by allowing some importers to “port shop” for ports that are less likely to identify ip violations . the niplecc co - chairs are to report to the coordinator . a representative from another automotive industry trade association noted that cbp's ability to make seizures in this area depends on its receiving quality information about counterfeiters from companies . in various stop documents , cbp cites steps it has taken to improve ip enforcement , but many of these are works in progress whose impact and effectiveness are undetermined . cbp identified ip matters as a priority trade issue in fiscal year 2003 and developed an agency - wide strategy for ip enforcement . for example , in january 2004 gao reported that cbp collects significantly less information on in - bond shipment than for regular entries and that this lack of information makes tracking in - bond shipments more difficult . in two of these cases , cbp imposed penalties on the companies totaling about $4.6 million . in the third case , the audit closed in september 2005 , but the decision on whether to impose penalties is still pending in cbp . a cbp official said that some less significant ip - infringing activity was found in several other audits , but cbp chose not to impose penalties in these cases .