the primary care model . prior to centralized scheduling , clerks in each of the medical center's clinics scheduled patient appointments , resulting in a wide variety of scheduling practices . with centralized scheduling , patient appointments for all clinics are now scheduled from one administrative office . according to the center's director of ambulatory care , implementing a centralized scheduling system also allowed the individual clinic clerks more time to focus on other functions , including patient intake at appointment time and patient discharge activities such as recording patient visit information into encounter forms . according to the center's director of ambulatory care , implementing any of these strategies could result in reduced waiting times , but she believed that combining all of the strategies had the most significant effect . although va has set a performance goal for network directors and has contracted with ihi , it has generally relied on its medical centers nationwide to develop and implement strategies to reduce their own waiting times . however , clinic officials we talked to noted that more guidance and direction from va on implementing and using referral guidelines could help them in their efforts to reduce waiting times . in addition , some chiefs of specialty and primary care clinics were unaware of the successes that other medical centers have had in reducing waiting times and told us that they would find such information useful in developing their own strategies . however , va has not provided clinics with referral guidelines , nor has it assessed or disseminated ways to improve patient waiting times that have worked at some clinics . va also lacks a systematic process for determining the causes of long waiting times , for monitoring clinics' progress in reducing waiting times , and for helping those centers and clinics that continue to have long waiting times . clinic officials told us that while ihi's strategies for reducing waiting times have been useful , they could benefit from more guidance and direction from va — including referral guidelines and information on best practices — to help them implement these strategies . in april 1998 , va established a requirement that all medical centers and community - based outpatient clinics adopt a primary care model — a system in which patients use primary care providers to manage their care . in implementing a primary care model , va strongly suggested that its health care facilities establish guidelines for primary care providers to follow in deciding when to refer patients to specialty care . according to the chief of primary care at one medical center we visited , the center's guidelines for referrals to urology and gastroenterology have resulted in improved communication between these specialists and primary care providers , fewer inappropriate referrals , more complete information on patients who have been referred , and ultimately shorter waiting times for patients in these two specialty clinics . however , the chief of primary care also told us that the medical center had not developed referral guidelines for the three other specialty care areas that we reviewed . overall , we found that half of the 54 specialty care clinics we visited have implemented referral guidelines .