gao - 10-213 . washington , d.c.: january 29 , 2010 . veterans' disability benefits: preliminary findings on claims processing trends and improvement efforts . gao - 09-910t . washington , d.c.: july 29 , 2009 . vba began these studies in fiscal year 2008 . vba identified 61 types of impairments for consistency review and conducted at least two inter - rater reliability reviews , which found significant error rates . in its march 2009 report , the oig noted that , while vba had developed an adequate rating consistency review plan , including metrics to monitor rating consistency and a method to identify variances in compensation claim ratings , it had not performed these reviews as scheduled . in fact , vba had initiated only 2 of 22 planned consistency reviews in fiscal year 2008 . the oig reported that vba had not conducted these reviews because star staffing resources were not sufficient to perform all of their assigned responsibilities and noted that vba's quality review office had not staffed all of its authorized positions . in addition , the oig found that inter - rater reliability reviews were not included in vba's quality assurance plan . the oig recommended that vba ( 1 ) develop an annual rating consistency review schedule and complete all planned reviews as scheduled ; ( 2 ) dedicate sufficient staff to conduct consistency reviews in order to complete planned workload and reviews ; and ( 3 ) include inter - rater reliability reviews as a permanent component of its consistency review program . vba reported that it has developed an annual consistency review schedule and is in the process of conducting scheduled fiscal year 2010 reviews . as of january 2010 , vba also added six staff members to perform quality assurance reviews . further , vba incorporated inter - rater reliability reviews into its fiscal year 2009 quality assurance plan . because vba has only recently implemented these initiatives , it is too early to determine their impact on the consistency of claims decisions . over the years , va has been challenged in its efforts to ensure that veterans get the correct decisions on disability claims the first time they apply for them , regardless of where the claims are decided . making accurate , consistent , and timely disability decisions is not easy , but it is important . our veterans deserve timely service and accurate decisions regardless of where their claims for disability benefits are processed . to fulfill its commitment to quality service , it is imperative that va continue to be vigilant in its quality assurance efforts , as this challenge will likely become even more difficult as aging veterans and veterans returning from ongoing conflicts add to va's workload . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact daniel bertoni at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or bertonid@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony .