improvements are needed in the corporation's remedial action processes . specifically , at the time of our review , 25 of the 285 remedial action plans applicable to agency information systems in our audit scope were past their expected closure dates by between about 2 weeks and 10 months , including 4 high - risk items . in addition , the fdic office of inspector general reported in november 2014 that , as of july 2014 , the corporation's remedial action management system contained a large number of high - and moderate - risk security vulnerabilities , many of which had planned corrective actions that were significantly past their scheduled completion dates . the office also reported that fdic has taken steps to improve its remedial action processes by creating a strategy outlining planned actions to address weaknesses in the corporation's plan of action and milestones processes . improvements are needed in the corporation's continuous monitoring program . for example , fdic had ensured that accounts belonging to users who had not accessed certain applications and systems in a predefined period of time were disabled , discontinued the use of shared user ids for several applications and databases supporting financial processing , removed certain users' excessive access to an application supporting fdic's process for estimating potential losses from litigation , and restricted access to the network shared folder where annual financial statements and footnotes were maintained . although improvements were made , fdic did not always implement sufficient authorization controls . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . the objective of this information security review was to determine the effectiveness of the federal deposit insurance corporation's ( fdic ) controls in protecting the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of its financial systems and information . the review was conducted as part of our audit of the fdic financial statements of the deposit insurance fund and the federal savings and loan insurance corporation resolution fund . the scope of our audit included an examination of fdic information security policies and plans ; controls over key financial systems ; and interviews with agency officials in order to ( 1 ) assess the effectiveness of corrective actions taken by fdic to address weaknesses we previously reported and ( 2 ) determine whether any additional weaknesses existed . this work was performed in support of our opinion on internal control over financial reporting as it relates to our audits of the calendar year 2014 and 2013 financial statements of the two funds administered by fdic . gao used an independent public accounting firm , under contract , to evaluate and test certain fdic information systems controls , including the follow - up on the status of fdic's corrective actions during calendar year 2014 to address open recommendations from our prior years' reports . we agreed on the scope of the audit work , monitored the firm's progress , and reviewed the related audit documentation to determine whether the firm's findings were adequately supported . to determine whether controls over key financial systems and information were effective , we considered the results fdic's actions to mitigate previously reported weaknesses that remained open as of december 31 , 2013 , and performed audit work at fdic facilities in arlington , virginia .