table 4 presents the results . the basic specification in table 4 , which does not account for a possible different cost structure in check processing , yields mostly statistically insignificant coefficients . however , the coefficient for the total number of items presented is significant and positive , implying that a 1 percent increase in total presentment will result in a 1.34 percent increase in total cost . however , the coefficient for the check 21 dummy variable ( check21 ) , while negative , is not statistically significant . this result does not provide any support for the hypothesis that the introduction of check 21 led to a decrease in federal reserve costs , although it is not possible to determine the extent to which this may be driven by the concurrent consolidation of federal reserve check services sites . table 4 also shows the results of the estimation incorporating a structural break in the cost function for periods before and after the act as described in equation ( 2 ) . though insignificant , the coefficient of total presentment is positive and less than 1 , and the coefficient of the interacted variable of total presentment and check 21 dummy is negative ( - 0.25 ) . if significant , the sum of two coefficients would imply that the cost structure for the check operation in the post - check 21 period would be different from the pre - check 21 period . however , the relatively short time series data for the post - check 21 period increase the standard errors for all the coefficients of the interacted variables . also , although insignificant , the coefficient of the check 21 dummy is positive , implying that the total cost , on average , is lower in periods before check 21 than after . in addition to the estimation results shown in table 4 , we estimated alternative functional forms used in other similar studies for the relationships in equation ( 2 ) . because these functional forms generally require constructing a substantial number of interacted variables , the subsequent multicollinearity and the limited data available make the results subject to high estimation errors and thus difficult from which to draw clear inferences . we also tested the effects on the estimates of imposing a constraint suggested by economic theory . the standard errors for most of the coefficient estimates decrease , suggesting a decrease in multicollinearity , but the results are otherwise similar to the results without the constraint in table 4 . k=1 to impose this constraint , we made some adjustments to the total costs and input price . do not endore or write below thi line . essentially , check imaging is a process through which a paper check is scanned and a digital image is taken of the front and back of the paper check . the paper check may then at some point be destroyed and the images may then be stored in an archive maintained by the bank for retrieval if needed . when a paper check is imaged depends on the structure of a bank's back office operations .