staff capacity . federal officials at some agencies told us they have experienced heavy workloads as a result of the recovery act , which has impaired their ability to initiate programs . for example , officials from the small business administration said that they were unable to begin their two secondary markets programs until the fall of 2009 because of limited staff resources and the need to sort out other issues related to these programs , including contracting and recovery act recipient reporting requirements . project selection process . this process — including requesting and reviewing applications — was cited as a factor affecting the timing of projects by 5 of the 27 federal agencies — the departments of commerce , defense , education , health and human services , and homeland security — and 2 agencies said it may be a factor . for example , according to commerce officials , before selecting or awarding grants , the department's rules require that each application to the broadband technology opportunities program ( btop ) be reviewed by a panel of at least three reviewers . the agency within commerce that oversees btop received more than 1,800 applications for funding . according to agency officials , ensuring that each application was evaluated by three independent reviewers resulted in a moderate delay in awarding funds . the agency originally anticipated starting to announce btop awards in november 2009 , but it delayed these initial announcements until december 2009 to ensure that each application received a thorough review and evaluation . likewise , officials from homeland security's federal emergency management agency said that it needed to carry out very rigorous technical reviews of its new fire station construction grants program so that the ( 1 ) recommended costs would be appropriate and allowable and ( 2 ) “shovel - ready” aspect of the grant would be verified . technical review of grant applications , therefore , affected the timing of projects funded under this program . recovery act - specific requirements . five of the 27 federal agencies — the departments of health and human services , justice , and transportation , as well as the environmental protection agency and nasa — stated that some recovery act requirements , particularly sections 1511 ( certification ) and 1512 ( reporting ) , affected the timing of projects . in addition , education told us that both sections 1511 and 1512 may cause delays . buy american requirements . moreover , officials from 3 additional federal agencies said buy american provisions may affect their ability to select or start projects . at the state level , 2 states and 1 local entity said that buy american provisions had affected the timing of recovery act projects . in some cases , federal agencies had to develop guidance for compliance with buy american provisions , including issuing guidance on waivers to recipients that were unable to comply . for example , according to environmental protection agency officials , developing buy american guidance was particularly challenging because of the need to establish a waiver process for recovery act projects .