the other two buildings are at hines . one of the two was considered historic . network officials told us they were successful in having the historic designation removed . this building will be demolished in order to construct a surface parking lot for a new spinal cord injury / blind rehabilitation center . during fiscal year 2001 , va spent about $17,000 to operate and maintain these 4 buildings . despite the efforts of network officials , the lack of interest in 9 of va's vacant buildings has been an obstacle to finding alternate uses for these buildings . network officials believe that maintaining ownership of the vacant buildings is the least expensive course of action , given the relatively high demolition costs compared to annual maintenance costs and considerable uncertainties concerning va's potential costs to transfer the properties to gsa . appendix i contains a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . va spent about $21 billion to provide health care services , including acute medicine , surgery , mental health , and long - term care , to about 4.2 million veterans during fiscal year 2001 . of va's 4,700 buildings , over 40 percent have operated for more than 50 years , including almost 200 built before 1900 . over 1,600 buildings have historical significance that requires va to comply with special procedures for maintenance and disposal . va's health care infrastructure was designed and built to reflect a concept of hospital - centered inpatient care , with long stays for diagnosis and treatment . this concept is now outdated as new technology and treatment methods have shifted delivery from inpatient to outpatient services where possible and shortened lengths of stay when hospitalization is required . as a result , va's capital assets often do not align with current health care needs for optimal efficiency and access . to address this situation , cares will assess veterans' potential demand for health care over the next 20 years , identify potential service gaps and develop delivery options for meeting veterans' needs , and guide the realignment of capital assets to support the preferred delivery options . va conducted a pilot test in the great lakes network , which served about 220,000 veterans in fiscal year 2001 with an annual budget of $891 million . this network includes three general market areas: northern illinois ( chicago ) , wisconsin , and the upper peninsula of michigan . in february 2002 , the secretary of veterans affairs selected strategies for realignment of services . these strategies included ( 1 ) consolidation of services at existing locations , ( 2 ) opening of new outpatient clinics , and ( 3 ) closure of one inpatient location . subsequently , va identified 30 vacant buildings that were no longer needed to meet veterans' health care needs . of the 30 buildings , 11 are considered to be historic . under the provisions of the national historic preservation act , federal agencies are required to take into account the effect of any federal undertaking on any historic property . until a decision is made on demolition , agencies that own or control historic properties are required to preserve their historic character and minimize harm to them .