dod had no comments on the draft report . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of veterans affairs and defense and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or sciremj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . to describe the characteristics of temporary residence adaptation ( tra ) grants and grantees and how the grants have been used , we analyzed department of veterans affairs ( va ) data on selected characteristics of tra grants and grantees for the period between june 15 , 2006 ( the date tra was created ) and april 4 , 2010 . in responding to our data request , va headquarters staff gathered information on approved tra grants from the va regional loan centers and compared it to the information in its sahsha system to ensure the grants were in fact approved and processed . to estimate the number of service members and veterans who may be eligible for adaptive housing assistance , we analyzed data from va's sahsha system on the number and selected characteristics of individuals who applied for such assistance between october 1 , 2000 , and october 31 , 2009 . we also analyzed data from va's veterans service network on the number and selected characteristics of service members and veterans who had not used the benefit but who received a rating that qualified them for adaptive housing assistance between october 1 , 2003 , and october 31 , 2009 . va could not provide the number of individuals who received a rating that made them eligible for adaptive housing assistance from fiscal years 2001 through 2003 because va did not consistently track such information until fiscal year 2004 . in addition , because va does not track the living arrangements of individuals eligible for adaptive housing benefits , we could not estimate the number of individuals who may have met the criteria specifically required to receive a tra grant — that is , individuals who lived or planned to live with a relative who owns a home . we assessed the reliability of the data we received from va by reviewing relevant documentation , interviewing knowledgeable officials , and performing electronic testing of the data . we determined that the data were reliable for the purposes of this report . we also reviewed va's case file , which included construction contracts and invoices describing work performed , for each of the 18 individuals who had received a tra grant as of april 4 , 2010 . in addition , we interviewed 11 of the 18 tra grantees , or their caregivers , to obtain information on their use of the grant , the nature of their disabilities , their living circumstances , and any barriers they may have faced in using the grant .