( app . iii , fig . 5 , shows percentages for fiscal year 2002. ) details on each of the systems follow . the army uses dod's computerized program budget accounting system to record and track btrs . the accounting system is accessible at army headquarters and at all of the subordinate organizations . although the system provides the net dollar amount of the btrs for each program and project , the system has several limitations . for example , the system does not show the details of each btr transaction , such as the donors and recipients of each transaction or the purpose . to identify the donors and recipients , the army must resort to paper records produced by the system for each transaction . furthermore , the system does not have the capability to electronically retrieve information about prior individual btrs because the system only shows the cumulative net btr balances . prior individual balances are overwritten after 10 days . once 10 days have passed , if budget officials do not print a record , the opportunity to save that data is lost . if paper records were printed , budget officials can manually assemble and analyze the records about individual btr transactions . we found that nearly 41 percent of the army's btr data contained in the dd 1416 for army programs in fiscal year 2002 did not match the btr data contained in the paper records produced by the army's data collection system , and nearly 46 percent of dd 1416 btr data did not match for fiscal year 2003 . with regard to withholds , the data collection system provides some data on funds withheld from army programs by the office of the secretary of defense , army headquarters , and subordinate organizations , but the system only shows the cumulative amount of the withheld funds , not the information for each btr and withhold . army budget office officials said a report is produced with this information each month . also , a user of the system can , at any time , print a report that shows cumulative withhold amounts up to the date of printing . however , as with the individual btr data , the individual withhold data gets overwritten after 10 days and cannot be retrieved afterward . thus , the army has to rely on paper - based reports to form an audit trail . the navy utilizes multiple systems to manage appropriated funds . separate systems are used at the headquarters level to record and track btrs and withholds . another is used to allocate statutory obligations . multiple subordinate organizations have developed similar systems to record the btrs and withholds that they authorize . the navy required about 10 weeks to gather information about btrs and withholds from subordinate organizations and to consolidate that information with data maintained by headquarters . the navy data collection systems identified all funding level changes , as well as the programs from which funds were taken and added . the systems did not identify the reasons for these changes .