established processes . according to agency officials , having defined long - term processes and accountability mechanisms in place for working with foreign counterparts can facilitate international regulatory cooperation . officials also said that such established processes can increase transparency for stakeholders and better enable input . agencies said that defined processes developed through international agreements , including forums , international procedures , and other international mechanisms , are helpful . agreements , such as the wto sps agreement , require members to consider international standards during their process to develop regulations . the wto sps agreement generally obligates members to base their regulations on sanitary or phytosanitary measures on international standards from codex , oie , or the international plant protection convention unless they have scientific justification or have determined a different level of protection through a risk assessment . in our september 2012 report , we concluded that the establishment of agreements in formal documents can strengthen an agency's commitment to working collaboratively . similarly , officials from dot's phmsa said established processes for the un tdg subcommittee facilitate their cooperative efforts . the oecd also has established processes on chemicals in their rules . the binding nature of oecd rules ensures all countries abide by the requirements to accept data from other oecd members , which helps advance its international regulatory coordination efforts . high - level leadership . agency officials told us in our interviews that high - level leadership within an agency and leadership from outside the agency can facilitate international regulatory cooperation , but a perceived lack of high - level commitment or changing priorities can serve as barriers . one academic expert said that the only way that international regulatory cooperation will work is with high - level attention from the white house , omb , ustr , and the state department . agencies we interviewed said that statutory authority may facilitate or limit their international regulatory cooperation activities . for example , dot phmsa officials said that statutory authority may mandate agency participation in international standards organizations . an industry stakeholder said it would facilitate cooperation if the underlying statutory authorities of agencies clearly permitted them to engage in trade activities . however , when statutes are prescriptive regarding domestic or rulemaking requirements , they can limit agencies' ability to make changes to regulations that align with a foreign trading partner . for example , agency officials said that statutes mandating use of specific technologies can remove the flexibility to coordinate with foreign counterparts . epa officials also said that , in many instances , the clean air act requirements may limit the degree to which domestic regulations can be altered to accommodate or conform to foreign or international standards or approaches . statutes that mandate completion of rulemakings within short time frames can also limit agencies' ability to engage in harmonization . for example , cpsc officials said it was challenging to work with other countries to reach consensus when cpsc had been mandated by the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 to issue a large number of regulations in a short time frame , which limited the amount of time they had to work with foreign counterparts .