doe completed the construction of this facility in 2006 . the facility had a total project cost of $1.4 billion and required the coordination of six doe national laboratories . based on total cost and complexity , doe had a contingency fund of about 20 percent of total costs . according to doe officials , iter is more technologically complex and involves greater risk because of the large number of manufacturers from different countries . finally , the iter organization does not have procedures that identify who is responsible for paying for potential cost overruns that exceed available contingency funds and how costs should be shared . construction could be further delayed if there is no consensus before construction begins on how to share the costs for cost overruns . within doe , nnsa and ofes do not have a coordinated research program for inertial fusion energy . they do not have a research plan that identifies key scientific and technological issues that must be addressed to advance inertial fusion energy and how their research activities would meet those goals . without a coordination research plan and clear responsibility for developing inertial fusion energy , doe may not see progress in developing inertial fusion energy as a promising alternative to magnetic fusion . in addition , alternative magnetic fusion research competes for funding with iter - and tokamak - related research . since the u.s. commitment to iter , funding for alternative innovative magnetic devices has declined over the last 6 fiscal years while funding for tokamak - related research has increased . according to university scientists involved in fusion research , this decrease in funding has led to a decline in research opportunities for innovative devices . figure 2 shows the countries participating in iter . nnsa maintains the united states' inertial fusion facilities . nif , which is scheduled for completion in 2009 , will be the world's largest laser facility and will be used to test inertial fusion . it is designed to achieve the first controlled thermonuclear burn , which will release fusion energy . to achieve the temperature and pressure needed for heating and compressing the fuel to release this fusion energy , nif has 192 laser beams that will converge and strike frozen deuterium and tritium pellets . no other facility has been able to achieve a controlled thermonuclear burn because it did not have enough energy to heat and compress these targets . for example , nif is expected to produce 50 times more energy than the omega laser — the world's most powerful laser facility currently operating . the omega laser , at the university of rochester , is nnsa's main inertial fusion facility until nif is completed . lastly , the z - machine , located at sandia national laboratory , is an alternative approach to reaching conditions of extreme temperature and pressure to validate sophisticated computational models of nuclear weapon performance . rather than using powerful lasers , the z - machine uses an electrical current to create a powerful magnetic field that compresses and implodes the target .