gao - 08-854 . washington , d.c.: june 26 , 2008 . washington , d.c.: january 26 , 2005 . defense acquisitions: knowledge of software suppliers needed to manage risk . gao - 04-678 . washington , d.c.: may 25 , 2004 . joint strike fighter acquisition: observations on the supplier base . gao - 04-554 . washington , d.c.: may 3 , 2004 . dod provided comments on a draft of this report . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in commenting on our first recommendation , dod concurred with the need to leverage existing dod efforts to identify criteria of supplier - base problems and fully apply these criteria to guide the identification and monitoring of supplier - base concerns throughout dod . dod indicated that its ongoing defense acquisition guidebook update presents a fitting and timely opportunity to institutionalize these criteria into departmental acquisition policy . dod partially concurred with our second recommendation , stating that while there is merit in having formal , published criteria for making judgments regarding when program offices should report supplier issues to industrial policy , similar formal reporting criteria or contractual mechanisms are not needed for prime contractors to report supplier - base concerns to the program office . dod expects prime contractors to maintain internal corporate metrics to evaluate the health and performance of their subcontractors and likewise expects program offices to maintain frequent and open communication with their prime contractors on supplier - base issues . our recommendation is for dod to consider how best to facilitate the flow of this information between program offices and their prime contractors , regardless of whether it is through a contractual requirement or other means . this is particularly important given the large role that contractors play in monitoring the supplier base . while we found that almost all of the 20 program officials we surveyed relied on their prime contractors to provide supplier - base information , including identification of supplier - base concerns , there is no guidance to ensure that information is consistently elevated to the appropriate levels . as such , we maintain that a mechanism is needed to facilitate the flow of information from the prime contractor to the program office , and from the program office to higher levels within dod — especially for those concerns whose characteristics meet the criteria for making judgments regarding suppliers and components for dod . we also provided a draft of this report to the department of commerce . the department reviewed the draft and provided no comments . dod's written comments are reprinted in appendix iii . in other instances the gap has not yet been solved . the space tracking surveillance system program relies on one company to supply the base materials used to produce nickel - hydrogen batteries , which are critical to this program . however , this company plans to cease production of these batteries in 2009 or shortly thereafter ; yet an alternate source of supply has not been identified .