reg . conduct quality review and improvement activities . such activities refer to assessing the performance of providers and maos in delivering care . for example , cms could use encounter data to develop new ma quality measures . calculate medicare disproportionate share hospital percentages . cms increases payments to hospitals serving a disproportionate number of low - income patients through the disproportionate share hospital adjustment . the agency currently incorporates the number of hospital days for ma enrollees in its calculation of disproportionate share hospital percentages . cms officials have not specified how the agency could use ma encounter data to modify how it calculates the disproportionate share hospital percentages . monitor medicare coverage . such monitoring may refer to using encounter data to determine whether an ma enrollee has reached the maximum out - of - pocket limit for an enrollee's cost sharing each year . without developing plans for these additional uses of encounter data , cms cannot determine whether it is gathering the proper amount and types of information required for these purposes . additionally , the agency would not be able to establish management priorities , and therefore cannot ensure that it is using the data to their full potential . in a may 2014 proposed rule , cms identified a number of additional uses of encounter data designed to strengthen program management and increase transparency in the ma program . these were the following: conduct program evaluations . cms noted that it may use encounter data to assess the ma program and demonstration designs . the data could also be used for government - sponsored public health initiatives and academic health care research . support program integrity efforts . cms indicated that encounter data could be used to conduct audits , investigations , and other efforts to combat waste , fraud , and abuse undertaken by the office of inspector general or cms . aid program administration . cms stated that it may use encounter data in reviewing the validity of mao bid submissions — projected revenue for providing standard medicare services to an average enrollee in an maos' service area . it may also use the data to verify mao information on medical loss - ratios — the percentage of revenue used for patient care , quality improving activities , and reduced premiums — to determine whether maos have met minimum requirements . as of may 2014 , cms had taken some , but not yet all , appropriate actions — as outlined in its medicaid encounter data validation protocol — to ensure that ma encounter data are complete and accurate before they are used . ( see fig . cms's actions to date have focused on communicating with maos about data submission requirements , certifying maos' capability to transmit the data , and conducting automated checks for completeness and accuracy of the data . however , the agency has not yet conducted statistical analyses , reviewed medical records , and provided maos with summary reports on data quality referenced in its medicaid encounter data validation protocol . although cms intends to perform these additional quality assurance activities , cms officials have not specified a time frame for doing so . cms has established certain requirements for the maos' collection and submission of encounter data .