these are positive steps . we believe the ato should continue the phased approach to acquiring new systems , and involving stakeholders throughout a system's development should help avoid the types of problems that led to cost growth and delays for stars . additionally , we view the decision to cut major systems as an indication that the ato is willing to make difficult decisions to suspend major atc system acquisitions that are not achieving their intended goals — even after a substantial investment of agency resources . faa has made progress in addressing long - standing problems with managing the risks associated with acquiring major atc systems , many of which are software - intensive , but further improvement is possible . for example , faa has established some discipline for acquiring these systems through the acquisition management system that it began implementing after congress exempted the agency from federal acquisition regulations in 1995 . also , faa has begun basing funding decisions for system acquisitions , in part , on their contribution to reducing the agency's operating costs while maintaining safety . currently , fti , a new telecommunications system , is the only acquisition that will reduce faa's operating costs . my statement today will focus on two key questions: first , what is gao's assessment of the ato's efforts to date in addressing some of the key challenges for the atc modernization program ? second , what challenges lie ahead for the ato , and what options could it consider in addressing the needs of the nas over the next decade , as well as the longer - term needs defined by the jpdo ? my statement is based on recently completed and ongoing studies for this committee and for the house committee on government reform . we obtained information from faa officials , an international panel of aviation experts , and relevant stakeholders on the ato's prospects for addressing the systemic management problems on which we and others have reported . ( see the list of related products at the end of this statement ) . later this year , we expect to issue a detailed report that will address these and other related issues . we also obtained information and perspectives from the jpdo and other knowledgeable sources on its mission and plans for achieving that mission . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the ato is taking a number of positive steps to address legacy challenges in system acquisitions and organizational culture that have affected the atc modernization program for the past two decades . our work indicates that four interrelated factors have contributed to the legacy challenges in meeting system acquisitions' cost , schedule , and performance targets: ( 1 ) funding acquisitions at lower levels than called for in agency planning documents , ( 2 ) adding requirements and / or unplanned work , ( 3 ) underestimating the complexity of software development , and ( 4 ) not sufficiently involving stakeholders throughout system development . among the positive steps it is taking , the ato is beginning to include stakeholders in all phases of system development , so that they can provide input in response to technical or financial developments .