gao - 14-314 . washington , d.c.: april 11 , 2014 . missile defense: mixed progress in achieving acquisition goals and improving accountability . gao - 14-351 . washington , d.c.: april 1 , 2014 . aegis bmd is the primary interceptor system for epaa . mda plans upgrades for phase 2 of the epaa that increase the types and number of threats it can engage . however , in april 2014 , we found that one sm - 3 block 1b failed in flight during an interceptor test in september 2013 , which , according to our current work , could increase reliability risk . since then , dod officials told us that mda is seeking to maintain reliability of the interceptor by developing a redesign ; it is unclear when this redesign will be flight - tested . mda told us that it plans to ground - test the redesign . moreover , our reviews of mda's aegis bmd baseline execution reviews from april 2013 , august 2013 , and june 2014 indicated that the certification of a new version of aegis bmd software called aegis bmd 4.1 , which is needed for phase 2 , had been delayed at least 3 months past phase 2 declaration . additionally , based on our analysis of mda's august 2013 and june 2014 baseline execution reviews , mda continues to discover software defects faster than it is able to fix them for another version of aegis bmd , also planned for phase 2 of the epaa . furthermore , although dod officials told us that the aegis ashore program is on track , our review of mda's march 2014 test documentation identified schedule slips that delayed aegis ashore's participation in key interoperability tests , compressing the time to rectify issues should they be discovered prior to the planned phase 2 declaration in 2015 . dod officials who developed the june 2014 regional bmd report told us that they used their best judgment in determining the appropriate level of detail for the report . the officials added that their goal was to address each of the required reporting elements concisely . furthermore , they explained that they regularly provide more detailed analysis on some of these topics to congressional defense committees via periodic briefings , and that they did not want to provide duplicative or unnecessary information . although we recognize the need for professional judgment by dod officials when preparing the report , our review concluded that dod's report did not include details that we believe could have made the report more useful to congress in its oversight of dod's regional bmd programs . however , dod's report was prepared in response to a onetime , nonrecurring mandate , and therefore we are not making any recommendations to amend the report and provide additional detail . dod reviewed a draft of this report , but did not provide formal agency comments . dod did provide technical comments , and we incorporated these changes as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and to the secretary of defense ; the chairman , joint chiefs of staff ; the commander , u.s. strategic command ; and the director , mda .