dla . navy and air force officials we interviewed regarding dla told us that dla does not provide sufficient pricing transparency despite the rate briefings dla conducts for its customers . although the army officials who discussed dla said that the rate briefings provide sufficient information for customers , the navy officials told us that the lack of detailed information on the costs included in dla's rates makes it difficult for the navy to determine how to lower its costs . they also said this lack of information prevents them from determining whether the rates they pay actually reflect the costs of the services they use , as intended . similarly , the air force officials told us that dla's communication regarding its market basket pricing initiative , discussed during the dla briefings , was confusing and did not include all the information they needed to prepare their budget , such as when the change would be implemented and how the initiative would affect the air force's costs . officials noted that , despite initially being told by dla that the air force would experience a reduction in its distribution costs as a result of this initiative , they subsequently learned through a resource management decision that the air force's costs would increase instead . dfas , disa , and dla officials told us they make efforts to communicate with their customers and to improve the transparency of their rates . for example , dfas officials noted that they have one - on - one discussions with each of their customers during the customer rate briefings . disa officials said that they respond to customer questions regarding rates and share information on the costs included in those rates . dla officials said they discuss rates at a variety of customer forums and share documentation of changes to their rate - setting methodologies , such as market basket pricing , with customers . officials from the military departments acknowledged these efforts by the dwwcf agencies to share information . however , as described in the examples above , officials told us that one or more of the agencies have not provided them with the information needed to fully understand their costs , to have assurance that costs are being allocated fairly , or to identify actions they could take to affect their overall bills , in some cases , despite requests for more detailed cost information . in addition , dfas , disa , and dla provided us copies of documents that they present at rate briefings and cost summits to share information about their pricing methodologies with their customers . in our review of those documents , we found that they contained high - level information , such as the rates themselves and the estimated workloads , and did not contain detailed information about the types of costs included in the rates and how those costs are calculated . for example , although dla provides its cost recovery rate for the materiel supply chains in its rate briefing documentation , the documentation does not provide information on the specific costs that go into that rate .