one source of counterfeit drugs is internet pharmacies . while some internet pharmacies are legitimate businesses that offer consumers a safe , convenient , and cost - effective way to obtain their medications , the food and drug administration ( fda ) and the national association of boards of pharmacy ( nabp ) have reported that thousands are fraudulent enterprises . in addition to counterfeit drugs , these “rogue” internet pharmacies often sell prescription drugs that have not been approved for sale in the united states , are substandard and have no therapeutic value , or are harmful to consumers . drugs sold by rogue internet pharmacies have been found to contain too much , too little , or no active pharmaceutical ingredient , or the wrong active ingredient . they have also been found to contain dangerous contaminants , such as toxic yellow highway paint , heavy metals , and rat poison . consumers who have taken prescription drugs purchased from rogue internet pharmacies have experienced health problems , required emergency treatments , and died . despite the risks , buying prescription drugs on the internet is not uncommon . according to a recent survey conducted by fda , nearly one in four adult u.s. internet consumers surveyed reported purchasing prescription drugs online . at the same time , nearly 30 percent said that they lacked confidence about how to safely purchase medicine online . the proliferation and widespread patronage of rogue internet pharmacies has prompted public officials to identify them as a continuing public health threat . many also illegally sell certain medications without a prescription that meets federal and state requirements . indeed , nearly 10 years ago , we made sample purchases from a variety of rogue sites without a prescription and we subsequently received several drugs that were counterfeit or otherwise not comparable to the product we ordered . to sell drugs to their u.s. customers , foreign rogue internet pharmacies use sophisticated methods to evade scrutiny by customs officials and smuggle their drugs into the country . for example , rogue internet pharmacies have misdeclared the contents of packages , in violation of customs laws . rogue internet pharmacies have disguised or hidden their drugs in various types of packaging ; for example , cbp has found drugs in bottles of lotion and in tubes of toothpaste . some of the drugs we obtained when conducting work for our 2004 report were shipped in unconventional packaging , including in a plastic compact disc case and in a sealed aluminum can that was mislabeled as dye and stain remover in addition , rogue internet pharmacies also often violate other wax.federal laws , including those related to fraud and money laundering . rogue internet pharmacies are often complex , global operations , and federal agencies face substantial challenges investigating and prosecuting those involved . according to federal agency officials , piecing together rogue internet pharmacy operations can be difficult because they may be composed of thousands of related websites , and operators take steps to disguise their identities .