dhs concurred with this recommendation . in response to our recommendation , dhs and the rail industry have taken steps to streamline the information distributed to stakeholders . tsa and key industry groups have developed the transit and rail intelligence awareness daily ( triad ) report and associated transportation information library . the overall intent of triad is to streamline the analysis , sharing , and exchange of intelligence and security information that had been disseminated by multiple sources . ( 2 ) what technologies are available to assist rail operators in securing their systems ? ( 3 ) what is the status of transportation security administration's ( tsa ) efforts regarding security training for frontline rail employees ? ( 4 ) how satisfied are rail stakeholders with the quality of security - related information tsa is providing ? this statement is based on related gao reports issued from march 2009 through september 2010 , including selected updates conducted from may 2011 through june 2011 on tsa's efforts to implement our prior recommendations regarding surface transportation security . in conducting these updates , we obtained information from tsa regarding the agency's efforts to develop regulations for security training programs for rail employees and to enhance its overall risk management approach to rail security , among other things . our previous reports incorporated information we obtained and analyzed from officials from various components of dhs , the department of transportation ( dot ) , state and local transportation and law enforcement agencies , and industry associations , as well as a survey of 96 u.s. public transit agencies ( that represented about 91 percent of total 2008 ridership ) . our previously published products contain additional details on the scope and methodology , including data reliability , for those reviews . in addition , this statement includes preliminary observations based on ongoing work , the results of which will be issued in a report later this year , assessing the extent to which freight rail carriers that receive security - related information are satisfied with the products and mechanisms that tsa uses to disseminate this information , among other things . as part of this ongoing work , we surveyed all seven class i freight rail carriers . we also interviewed security officials from three class i freight rail carriers selected on the basis of their location . while the results of our interviews are not generalizable to all class i rail carriers , the responses provide perspectives and examples to expand on survey findings . all of our work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . these standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . for new information that was based on work not previously reported , we obtained tsa views on our findings and incorporated technical comments where appropriate . tsa is the primary federal agency responsible for overseeing the security of the mass transit , passenger rail , and freight rail systems .