iii ) . the u.s. attorney for the district of columbia concurred with our recommendation and stated that the office has devoted appropriate attention to enforcing the act and plans to continue to develop an approach to focus limited resources on lobbyists that continually fail to file as required or otherwise fail to comply with the act . the u.s. attorney noted that his office is taking or planning to take actions that should allow the office to develop a more structured approach as we recommended . specifically , the u.s. attorney indicated that the office plans to enhance its database to improve tracking and has assigned an additional staff member to assist with lobbying compliance matters . the office of the u.s. attorney also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the attorney general , secretary of the u.s. senate , clerk of the u.s. house of representatives , and other interested congressional committees and members . copies of this report will be made available to others upon request . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact george stalcup at ( 202 ) 512-9490 or stalcupg@gao.gov if you or your staffs have any questions about this report . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . consistent with the requirements of the honest leadership and open government act ( hloga ) , our objectives were to determine the extent to which lobbyists can demonstrate compliance by providing support for information on registrations and reports filed in response to requirements of the amended lobbying disclosure act ( the act ) ; identify the challenges lobbyists cite in complying with the act and suggestions for improving compliance ; and describe the process of referring noncompliance cases to the department of justice ( doj ) and the resources and authorities available to doj in its role in enforcing compliance with the act . to respond to the requirements of hloga , we used information in disclosure databases maintained by the secretary of the senate and the clerk of the house of representatives . to assess whether these disclosure data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report , we reviewed relevant documentation and spoke to officials responsible for maintaining the data . although registrations and reports are filed through a single web portal , each chamber subsequently receives copies of the data and follows different data cleaning , processing , and editing procedures before storing the data in either individual files ( in the house ) or databases ( in the senate ) . currently , there is no means of reconciling discrepancies between the two databases that result from chamber differences in data processing ; however , we do not have reason to believe that the content of the two systems would vary substantially .