apr . 30 , 2001 apr . 15 , 2002 apr . 23 , 2002 3 the service's peer review policy does not apply to this decision because its most recent comment period opened before the policy became effective . documentation unavailable . based on discussions with service officials , experts , and others knowledgeable about the endangered species act , we found that several scientific disagreements over service listing decisions have surfaced in recent years — mostly concerning whether the amount of information available at the time a decision is made suffices as a basis for a decision . regarding critical habitat decisions , we found there has been scientific controversy surrounding whether the areas chosen as critical habitat is sufficiently defined or the overall information used to support the designation is adequate . although we found that scientific disagreements surrounding listing decisions are not widespread , some of the controversy in recent years can be categorized as “science - related.” experts and others working with the endangered species act that we spoke with identified 11 species where there was significant scientific controversy surrounding the decisions to list the species . our discussions with these individuals and a review of related federal register notices revealed that the most common scientific disagreements hinge on whether enough information was available to determine ( 1 ) whether the plants or animals under consideration qualified as a “species” as defined by the act , ( 2 ) the status of the species , or ( 3 ) the degree of threat that the species faces . critics of some listing decisions argued that the service lacked information to determine whether the entity in question met the definition of a “species.” the act defines a species as including “any subspecies of fish or wildlife or plants , and any distinct population segment of any species of vertebrate fish or wildlife which interbreeds when mature.” there is general agreement within the scientific community as to what constitutes a species and this has not been a major source of controversy in most listing decisions . disagreements typically arise over whether entities that are genetically , morphologically , or behaviorally distinct , but not distinct enough to merit the rank of species ; qualify for protection as a distinct population segment ( dps ) . under service policy , to be identified as a dps , a population segment must be both discrete and significant . in order to be discrete , the population must be markedly separate from other populations as a consequence of physical , physiological , ecological , or behavioral factors . if a population segment is considered discrete , its biological and ecological significance will then be considered . this consideration would include such factors as evidence that the loss of the population would result in a significant gap in the range of a species . for example , disagreement surrounded the decision to list the population of the sonoma county california tiger salamander , a large terrestrial salamander that is native to california .