delta . in the delta , federal and nonfederal entities coordinate comprehensive restoration efforts through the delta plan interagency implementation committee . this committee was created in 2013 by the delta stewardship council , the state agency responsible for overseeing the delta plan — the state's plan for promoting a more reliable water supply and a healthy ecosystem . the committee is made up of representatives from 7 federal and 11 state entities and helps implement the delta plan . members of the committee may also carry out various activities for restoration projects in the delta , such as scientific monitoring , on - the - ground project implementation , project planning , and regulating and permitting ( eg , for placing materials such as concrete structures or rocks into the water to support levees ) . the committee meets twice a year and participates in conferences to gather scientific consensus or to share recent research . some committee members are also members of the san francisco estuary partnership and coordinate separately through initiatives that may have predated the committee and that are specific to entities , projects , or restoration topics . upper watershed . in the upper watershed , while federal and nonfederal entities do not have a coordinating body for comprehensive restoration efforts , they coordinate restoration efforts through plans specific to entities , projects , or restoration topics . for example , 20 federal , state , and nongovernmental entities coordinate through the central valley joint venture — a partnership with the mission to conserve migratory bird habitat — and its implementation plan . likewise , dozens of federal , state , and local government entities coordinate to implement the central valley flood protection plan , a plan adopted by california's central valley flood protection board for managing flood risk . in addition , noaa , the u.s . fish and wildlife service , and the california department of fish and wildlife coordinate on implementing a conservation strategy in parts of the central valley . a federal memorandum of understanding and an interim federal action plan outline how federal entities are to coordinate the federal government's restoration activities and support state efforts across the entire watershed . the california bay - delta memorandum of understanding among federal agencies , signed in september 2009 , established a federal bay - delta leadership committee to coordinate federal efforts related to restoration and water management across the entire watershed while the state structure was transitioning from the california bay - delta authority to the delta stewardship council , and the state therefore was no longer participating in the originally structured calfed federal - state partnership . according to the memorandum , this federal committee was to be led by interior and ceq and to meet regularly . the signatories of the memorandum also agreed to develop a federal work plan to outline near - term federal actions and begin to identify and prioritize key longer - term federal actions for restoration efforts and water management across the watershed . the entities issued an interim federal action plan in december 2009 .