iii. ) generally , three carrier strike groups are deployed at any given time . the three deployed carriers include the uss kitty hawk , which is home ported in japan and is counted as being continuously deployed . this carrier provides most of the u.s. naval presence in the western pacific ocean region and some in the indian ocean / arabian sea region . carriers originating from the eastern and western united states have traditionally provided presence in the mediterranean sea and indian ocean / arabian sea regions , respectively . there are also 10 carrier airwings , one of which accompanies each deployed carrier . while the composition of each airwing can be tailored to the carrier's specific mission , each airwing typically includes a helicopter squadron as well as squadrons of aircraft for attack ( composed of aircraft such as the f / a - 18 ) , electronic warfare ( composed of aircraft such as the ea - 6b ) , and reconnaissance ( composed of aircraft such as the e - 2c ) missions . the navy cites a variety of roles in which carrier strike groups may be employed , for example they ( 1 ) are deployed worldwide in support of u.s. interests and commitments ; ( 2 ) respond to global crises from peacetime to full - scale war ; ( 3 ) can operate as the cornerstone of joint / allied maritime expeditionary forces in times of crisis ; and ( 4 ) can operate and support aircraft attacks on enemies , protect friendly forces , and engage in sustained independent operations of war . expeditionary strike groups are typically centered on amphibious ships with a marine corps marine expeditionary unit , aircraft , and landing craft . each expeditionary strike group notionally includes one amphibious assault ship , one amphibious transport dock ship , and one dock landing ship . these amphibious ships together can embark a marine expeditionary unit consisting of about 2,200 marines , their aircraft , their landing craft , their combat equipment , and about 15 days worth of supplies . like a carrier strike group , the expeditionary strike group may also include several surface combatants such as a cruiser , destroyer , and frigate ; an attack submarine ; and one or more p - 3 long - range , land - based , maritime patrol aircraft . expeditionary strike groups are designed to be independently deployable , strike - capable naval formations , but they can also operate in conjunction with carrier strike groups to form larger naval task forces . generally , two or three expeditionary strike groups are forward - deployed at any given time . frp represents a change in the way the navy manages its forces . the plan changes the manner in which the navy maintains , trains , mans , and deploys its ships to allow a greater number of ships to surge on short notice while at the same time meeting forward - presence requirements . four phases within the frp cycle serve as the framework to more rapidly prepare and sustain the readiness of ships , aircraft , and personnel .