this program has not yet begun . fmcsa officials plan to award a contract by the end of 2005 to develop , implement , and evaluate the non - entrant program . the contractor is to test the effectiveness of the outreach materials while they are being developed to determine if they will reach the intended audience and effectively changed knowledge and attitudes . development of the materials will include surveying the targeted audience and conducting outreach through truck leasing and sales firms . fmcsa's program plan indicated that the contractor will be expected to assess changes in knowledge , attitudes , and behaviors of its target audience . in june 2005 , fmcsa launched its redesigned household goods web page , designed around the “protect your memories…” theme , which incorporates new content , including a checklist for moving and information on protecting against moving fraud . in november 2005 , fmcsa officials informed us that they were in discussions with the u.s . fmcsa officials stated that they plan to evaluate this initiative in several ways once they have finalized its evaluation arrangements . according to fmcsa officials , during program design , fmcsa tested its marketing materials with target audiences , including truck drivers , and found that the marketing material was appropriately targeted . also , fmcsa is installing software to track the number of web - site hits on certain of its web pages that contain important educational elements of the safety belt campaign . this system will enable fmcsa to determine how many times its information has been viewed , but it will not enable fmcsa officials to know whether that information was effectively conveyed to its target audience or changed their attitudes about wearing safety belts . nonetheless , fmcsa officials believe that this software will enable program managers to monitor and determine which web - site pages are viewed , and therefore are more effective , based on the number of hits and the length of time at each site . furthermore , fmcsa is considering focus groups and surveys with carriers on how safety belt marketing material affected their awareness of the importance of using safety belts . in addition , fmcsa has an agreement with nhtsa for two efforts that could measure progress toward the expected outcome of this initiative — a 10-percent increase in use of safety belts from 2006 through 2009 . the first effort is a study , expected to be completed in december 2005 , which updates a 2003 commercial motor vehicle study that reported that 48 percent of commercial drivers wear safety belts . ( see fig . 1 for an example of a brochure describing the safety - belt partnership. ) working through the partnership allows fmcsa to leverage its resources and tap into organizations that have their own communication links to the trucking industry . fmcsa staff distribute materials through trucking industry shows and events , and state law enforcement personnel distribute materials during safety enforcement campaigns . fmcsa has prepared over 200,000 brochures and 50,000 bumper stickers for the 2005 “be ready , be buckled” campaign . fmcsa also provides safety belt information through its web site . to help them select and hire motor coach services .