pub . 107-300 , 116 stat . ipia was amended by the improper payments elimination and recovery act of 2010 , pub . 111-204 , 124 stat . 2224 ( july 22 , 2010 ) . the changes made by this law to ipia estimation and reporting were first implemented for fiscal year 2011 reporting . foster care program since 2005 . in its fiscal year 2010 agency financial report , hhs reported estimated improper payments for foster care of about $73 million , which contributed to the total governmentwide improper payment estimate of over $125 billion for that year . given continuing concerns about financial vulnerabilities in the foster care program , you asked us to conduct a review of the program's improper payment estimate and reduction strategies . specifically , our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the extent to which acf's estimation methodology generated a reasonably accurate and complete estimate of foster care improper payments and ( 2 ) determine the extent to which acf's corrective actions reduced improper payments . to address these objectives , we reviewed applicable improper payment legislation , title iv - e of the social security act , as amended , and hhs regulations on title iv - e eligibility reviews , related office of management and budget ( omb ) guidance and acf's internal guidance , results from title iv - e eligibility reviews , past gao and oig reports , and internal control standards . we also reviewed improper payment information reported in the improper payments section of hhs's fiscal year 2010 agency financial report . to further address the first objective , we performed independent assessments of acf's methodology , including statistical sampling analysis using omb's statistical guidance , gao guidance , and federal internal control standards as criteria to determine the accuracy and completeness of acf's reported fiscal year 2010 improper payment estimate for the foster care program.conducted interviews with acf officials and its contractor to clarify our understanding of the methodology . we also obtained information about acf's pilot to develop a methodology for estimating improper payments related to administrative costs for the title iv - e foster care program . the scope of our review did not include an assessment of individual states' processes or payment systems . as part of this assessment , we to further address the second objective , we reviewed agency policies and procedures and states' program improvement plans ( pip ) used to address the root causes of improper payments identified from the title iv - e eligibility reviews , which acf conducts to ensure that states are claiming federal reimbursement only for eligible children ; evaluated the compliance thresholds acf uses to require states to implement corrective actions ; and conducted interviews with officials from acf's central office . we also obtained information about other acf monitoring activities over states , such as its tracking and monitoring of states' efforts to address the findings identified in the single audits .