( app . i provides a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) we also have work underway to review other components of the sbinet program . specifically , we are conducting work for the house committee on homeland security to assess the development and deployment of sbinet's command , control , and communications systems , and surveillance and detection systems and expect to issue a report next year . in addition , we are reviewing dhs's use of performance - based services acquisition , an acquisition method structured around the results to be achieved instead of the manner by which the service should be performed . we expect to issue a report on this effort in january 2008 . the sbinet program is responsible for identifying and deploying an appropriate mix of technology ( eg , sensors , cameras , radars , communications systems , and mounted laptop computers for agent vehicles ) , tactical infrastructure ( eg , fencing , vehicle barriers , roads , ) , rapid response capability ( eg , ability to quickly relocate operational assets and personnel ) and personnel ( eg , program staff and border patrol agents ) that will enable cbp agents and officers to gain effective control of u.s. borders . sbinet technology is also intended to include the development and deployment of a common operating picture ( cop ) that provides uniform data through a command center environment to border patrol agents in the field and all dhs agencies and to be interoperable with stakeholders external to dhs , such as local law enforcement . in addition , we interviewed dhs and cbp headquarters and field officials , including representatives of the sbinet pmo , and border patrol . we also interviewed officials from the u.s. army corps of engineers and the department of the interior . we visited the tucson and yuma , arizona border patrol sectors — two sites where tactical infrastructure projects were underway at the time of our review . we did not review the justification for infrastructure project cost estimates or independently verify the source or validity of the cost information . to determine the extent to which cbp has determined the impact of sbinet technology and infrastructure on its workforce needs and operating procedures , we reviewed documentation of the agency's decision to hire an additional 6,000 agents and the progress hiring these agents . we also interviewed headquarters and field officials to track if and how cbp ( 1 ) is hiring and training its target number of personnel , ( 2 ) it is planning to train new agents on sbinet technology , and ( 3 ) it will incorporate the new system into its operational procedures , and any implementation challenges it reports facing in conducting this effort . to determine how the sbinet pmo defined its human capital goals and progress it has made in achieving these goals , we reviewed the office's documentation on its hiring efforts related to sbinet , related timelines , and compared this information with agency goals . we determined that the workforce data were sufficiently reliable for purposes of this report .