inaccurately determined contract costs . we could not reliably determine the costs associated with core contract personnel , in part because our analysis identified numerous discrepancies between the amount of obligations reported by the civilian ic elements in the inventory and these elements' supporting documentation for the records we reviewed . for example , we found that the civilian ic elements either under - or over - reported the amount of contract obligations by more than 10 percent for approximately one - fifth of the 287 records we reviewed . further , the ic elements could not provide complete documentation to validate the amount of reported obligations for another 17 percent of the records we reviewed . civilian ic elements cited a number of factors that may account for the discrepancies , including the need to manually enter obligations for certain contracts or manually delete duplicate contracts . officials from one civilian ic element noted that a new contract management system was used for reporting obligations in the fiscal year 2011 inventory , which offered greater detail and improved functionality for identifying obligations on their contracts ; however , we still identified discrepancies in 18 percent of this element's reported obligations in fiscal year 2011 for the records in our sample . in our january 2014 report , we recommended that ic chco clearly specify limitations , significant methodological changes , and their associated effects when reporting on the ic's use of core contract personnel . we also recommended that ic chco develop a plan to enhance internal controls for compiling the core contract personnel inventory . ic chco agreed with these recommendations and described steps it was taking to address them . specifically , ic chco stated it will highlight all adjustments to the data over time and the implications of those adjustments in future briefings to congress and omb . in addition , ic chco stated it has added requirements for the ic elements to include the methodologies used to identify and determine the number of core contract personnel and their steps for ensuring the accuracy and completeness of the data . lack of documentation for calculating ftes . most of the civilian ic elements did not maintain readily available documentation of the information used to calculate the number of ftes reported for a significant number of the records we reviewed . as a result , these elements could not easily replicate the process for calculating or validate the reliability of the information reported for these records . federal internal control standards call for appropriate documentation to help ensure the reliability of the information reported . for 37 percent of the 287 records we reviewed , however , we could not determine the reliability of the information reported . the civilian ic elements have used core contract personnel to perform a range of functions , including human capital , information technology , program management , administration , collection and operations , and security services , among others . however , the aforementioned limitations we identified in the obligation and fte data precluded us from using the information on contractor functions to determine the number of personnel and their costs associated with each function category .