implementation was phased in over 1 year . a state official said retailers may apply for a variance from the state standard provided they can demonstrate that the temperature of the fuel they deliver to consumers in their location differs from 80 degrees f. according to a state official , temperature compensation is a matter of fairness and equity . belgium mandated temperature compensation for retail sales of fuel beginning in january 2008 . belgium adopted temperature compensation for retail sales , in part , because some retailers were artificially heating fuel , and the government sought greater consistency in the energy content of the fuel sold to consumers , according to a weights and measures official . after january 2008 , any newly installed pumps must be equipped for temperature compensation and , by january 2015 , all pumps must be equipped to dispense temperature - compensated fuel . a belgian official told us that the 7-year transition period will allow retailers to make adjustments over time , in the normal course of their operations , thereby reducing the overall cost to implement temperature compensation . while retailers will decide when to install temperature compensation equipment , they are prohibited from turning it off . that is , once the equipment is in place and dispensing temperature - compensated fuel , all hoses attached to the equipment must continue to dispense temperature - compensated fuel . to date , the belgian government has not developed guidance for consumers or retailers , in part because the transition to temperature compensation has just begun , according to the official . canada has adopted a permissive policy on automatic temperature compensation for the retail sale of liquid petroleum products , such as gasoline , diesel , and home heating oil . specifically , canada established technical and other standards in the early 1990s that allowed retailers to sell temperature - compensated fuel , but it did not require them to do so . according to a canadian official , canada developed the standards largely for three reasons: advances in measurement technology had made temperature compensation equipment more readily available , automatic temperature compensation is thought to be a more equitable and accurate method of measuring fuel , and temperature compensation addresses retailers' concerns about inventory losses potentially due to temperature - related changes in volume . today , over 90 percent of canadian fuel retailers sell temperature - compensated fuel . canada imposed policy controls on the use of temperature - compensated equipment to prevent practices that might harm consumers or businesses , and any change to pumps requires an inspection by government officials . for example , pumps with automatic temperature compensation devices must be operable and dispense temperature - compensated fuel at all times throughout the year . in addition , pumps equipped with the devices must have a sticker that says “volume corrected to 15 degrees c” adjacent to the pump's visual and printed net quantity display . retailers may elect to convert only selected pumps or product lines , provided that all pumps for the same grade or blend of fuel are converted and the compensation equipment is activated at the same time .