grantees are required to provide these services and to document that they did so . however , in our 2016 report , we found that documents — such as legal presentation acknowledgment forms , records of group counseling sessions , or clinical progress notes — were often missing from the 27 randomly selected case files we reviewed . in addition , we identified several cases in which forms that were present in the files were not signed or dated . we found that although orr used its web - based data system to track some information about the services children received , and grantees reported on the services they provided in their annual reports , the documents contained in case files were the primary source of information about the services provided to individual children . we concluded that without including all of the documents in case files , it was difficult for orr to verify that required services were actually provided in accordance with orr policy and cooperative agreements . in our 2016 report , we noted that orr's most comprehensive monitoring of grantees occurred during on - site visits , but that onsite visits to facilities were inconsistent . prior to fiscal year 2014 , project officers were supposed to conduct on - site monitoring of facilities at least once a year . however , we found in our review of agency data that many facilities had not received a monitoring visit for several years . for example , orr had not visited 15 facilities for as many as 7 years . in 2014 , orr revised its on - site monitoring program to ensure better coverage of grantees and implemented a biennial on - site monitoring schedule . nevertheless , orr did not meet its goal to visit all of its facilities by the end of fiscal year 2015 , citing lack of resources . in our 2016 report , we concluded that without consistently monitoring its grantees , orr cannot know whether they were complying with their agreements and that children were receiving needed services . we recommended that the secretary of hhs direct orr to review its monitoring program to ensure that onsite visits are conducted in a timely manner , case files are systematically reviewed as part of or separate from onsite visits , and that grantees properly document the services they provide to children . hhs concurred with this recommendation and stated that it had created a new monitoring initiative workgroup to examine opportunities for further improvement . since our 2016 report , orr has reported achieving more timely and complete monitoring . in may 2017 , orr issued a summary of its fiscal year 2016 monitoring showing that monitoring of all of its 88 grantees was completed over the 2-year period of fiscal years 2015 and 2016 . as a result of this monitoring , the agency reported issuing 786 corrective actions , almost all of which were closed within 90 days . the most common corrective actions were related to incomplete case file documentation and inconsistent implementation of some of orr policies and procedures , according to orr .