we disagree with this interpretation . probability sampling is statistically based and does not depend solely on empirical criteria regarding the details of possible contamination . the situation in 2001 was unique , and the agencies were not fully prepared to deal with environmental contamination . in the future , if the agencies decide to use a targeted rather than a probability sampling strategy , they must recognize that they could lose a number of days if their targeted sampling produces negative test results . in this case , additional samples would have to be collected and analyzed , resulting in the loss of critical time for public health interventions . this was so at the wallingford postal facility in the fall of 2001 , when about 3 weeks elapsed between the time the first sampling took place and the results of the fourth testing , which revealed positive results . furthermore , about 5 months elapsed between the time of the first sampling event and the time anthrax was found in the wallingford facility's high - bay area . therefore , strategies that include probability sampling need to be developed in order to provide statistical confidence in negative results . further , even if information on all the performance characteristics of methods is not yet available , a probability sampling strategy could be developed from assumptions about the efficiency of some of the methods . and even if precise data are not available , a conservative , approximate number could be used for developing a sampling strategy . this would give agencies and the public greater confidence in negative test results than was associated with the sampling strategy used in 2001 . cdc , epa , and usps , the federal agencies involved in sampling the postal facilities in 2001 to detect anthrax , undertook several activities . these included development of a sampling strategy followed by collecting samples , using a variety of methods , and transporting , extracting , and analyzing the samples . neither these activities nor the overall process was validated for anthrax testing . consequently , the agencies were challenged by limited information for reliably choosing one method over another and by lack of information on the detection limit to use when evaluating negative results . federal agencies used different methods for collecting samples . while usps generally used dry swabs to collect samples ( the least effective method ) , cdc and epa used multiple methods — dry swabs , premoistened swabs , wet wipes , and a high - efficiency particulate air ( hepa ) vacuum — in various combinations or alone . however , none of the agencies' collection methods were evaluated for anthrax detection in environmental samples . in the absence of empirical research , agencies had no information available for reliably choosing one method over another and no information on the limits of detection to use when evaluating negative results . the majority of the samples collected from the postal facilities tested negative . in all , federal agencies collected about 10,000 samples during initial testing .