tsa . tsa assumed primary responsibility for implementing and overseeing the security of the nation's civil aviation system following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 . as previously stated , tsa primarily fulfills its mission through a regulatory structure largely focused on implementing and enforcing measures that ensure the security of the aircraft and traveling public — such as by controlling access to the security - restricted areas of the airport through the screening of passengers , accessible property , checked baggage , air cargo and mail , or ensuring that controlled access points for use by credentialed aviation workers are in place . however , tsa is also responsible for ensuring that airport operators and other aviation stakeholders remain compliant with their tsa - approved airport security programs and other applicable requirements , which it accomplishes by conducting inspections of , for example , an airport operator's perimeter , access control , and other security measures . as circumstances warrant , tsa also issues information circulars to notify regulated entities of security concerns and security directives to augment or supplement requirements implemented through security programs . security directives and guidance issued by tsa related to airport public areas have covered such topics as law enforcement requirements to patrol public areas , law enforcement response times and improved communications systems , among others . key tsa roles at airports include: federal security directors ( fsd ) . the ranking tsa authority at airports , the fsd , provides leadership and coordination of tsas day - to - day security activities , including ensuring airport operator's compliance with their airport security program . assistant federal security directors for inspections ( afsd - i ) . each afsd - i manages a compliance hub staffed by transportation security inspectors who ensure regulatory compliance , respond to incidents , and reduce vulnerabilities in collaboration with regulated and non - regulated entities . the area of responsibility of the compliance hub may cover one or more fsd areas . visible intermodal prevention and response ( vipr ) teams . on march 22 , 2016 , suicide bombers using explosives in suitcases killed 16 people and injured more than 200 inside the main terminal area of the brussels zaventem international airport in belgium . the attack was followed by the june 28 , 2016 istanbul ataturk international airport attack in turkey , where suicide attackers used guns and bombs to kill 46 and injured more than 230 people inside public areas of the airport , including the security checkpoint and parking areas . on january 6 , 2017 , a passenger obtained a handgun from his checked baggage upon landing at the airport and shot and killed five people and injured six others in the baggage claim area at fll . travelers rushed out of the terminal and also ran into security - restricted areas while law enforcement officers responded to the scene . the shooting event ended in less than 80 seconds when the shooter surrendered to law enforcement officers . approximately 90 minutes after the shooting , speculation of additional gunshots in the airport caused panic and led to an uncontrolled self - evacuation of passengers , and others throughout the airport .