but we can do better than we do now . the primary consequences of risk are often the need for additional time and money . yet , when significant risks are taken , they are often taken under the guise that they are manageable and that risk mitigation plans are in place . the question is why aren't we doing it ? ” to that point , reforms have been aimed mainly at the “what” versus the “why.” they have championed sound management practices , such as realistic estimating , thorough testing , and accurate reporting . reforms have also added program decision points , reviews , and reporting requirements to help ensure these practices are used . we need to consider that these reforms mainly address the mechanisms of weapon acquisitions . seen this way , the practices prescribed in policy are only partial remedies . the acquisition of weapons is much more complex than this and involves very basic and strongly reinforced incentives to pursue weapons that are not always feasible and affordable . accordingly , rival practices , not normally viewed as good management techniques , comprise an effective stratagem for fielding a weapon because they reduce the risk that the program will be interrupted or called into question . i will now discuss several factors that illustrate the pressures that create incentives to deviate from sound acquisition management practices . a key cause of poor acquisition outcomes is the mismatch between the validated capability requirements for a new weapon system and the appropriate systems engineering knowledge , funding , and time that is planned to develop that new system . dod's three key decision making processes for acquiring weapon systems — requirements determination , resource allocation , and the acquisition management system — are fragmented , making it difficult for the department to achieve a balanced mix of weapon systems that are achievable and affordable and provide the best military value to the warfighter when the warfighter needs them . in addition , these processes are led by different organizations , making it difficult to hold any one person or organization accountable for saying “no” to an unrealistic requirement or for tempering optimistic cost and schedule estimates . while the department has worked hard to overcome this fragmented decision making paradigm and policies have been written to force more integrated decisions and more accountability , we continue to see programs that have experienced cost and schedule growth . this is because weapon system programs often begin with validated requirements that have not been informed by solid systems engineering practices , often do not represent true “needs” as much as “desires,” have optimistic cost and schedule estimates , and , all too often , are unachievable . program managers are handed a business case that can be fatally flawed , and usually have no recourse other than to execute it as best they can and therefore cannot be held accountable . the process of planning and executing the program is ( 1 ) shaped by many different participants and ( 2 ) far more complex than the seemingly straightforward purchase of equipment to defeat an enemy threat .