cyber threats can be unintentional or intentional . unintentional or nonadversarial threat sources include failures in equipment , environmental controls , or software due to aging , resource depletion , or other circumstances that exceed expected operating parameters . they also include natural disasters and failures of critical infrastructure on which the organization depends but are outside of the control of the organization . intentional or adversarial threats sources include threats originating from foreign nation states , criminals , hackers , and disgruntled employees . concerns about these threats are well - founded because of the dramatic increase in reports of security incidents , the ease of obtaining and using hacking tools , and advances in the sophistication and effectiveness of cyberattack technology , among other reasons . without proper safeguards , systems are vulnerable to individuals and groups with malicious intent who can intrude and use their access to obtain or manipulate sensitive information , commit fraud , disrupt operations , or launch attacks against other computer systems and networks . we and federal inspectors general have reported on persistent information security deficiencies that place federal agencies at risk of disruption , fraud , or inappropriate disclosure of sensitive information . accordingly , since 1997 , we have designated federal information security as a government - wide high - risk area . this was expanded to include the protection of critical cyber infrastructure in 2003 and protecting the privacy of personally identifiable information in 2015 the federal information security modernization act ( fisma ) of 2014 is intended to provide a comprehensive framework for ensuring the effectiveness of information security controls over information resources that support federal operations and assets . fisma requires each agency to develop , document , and implement an agency - wide security program . the program is to provide security for the information and systems that support the operations and assets of the agency , including information and information systems provided or managed by another agency , contractor , or other source . additionally , fisma assigns responsibility to the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) to provide standards and guidelines to agencies on information security . accordingly , nist has issued related standards and guidelines , including recommended security controls for federal information systems and organizations , nist special publication ( nist sp ) 800-53 , and contingency planning guide for federal information systems , nist sp 800-34 . to support its financial operations and store the sensitive information it collects , sec relies extensively on computerized systems interconnected by local - and wide - area networks . for example , to process and track financial transactions , such as filing fees paid by corporations or disgorgements and penalties paid from enforcement activities , and for financial reporting , sec relies on numerous enterprise applications , including: delphi - prism is the financial accounting and reporting system operated by the federal aviation administration's enterprise service center ( esc ) . sec uses various modules of this system for financial accounting , analyses , and reporting . delphi - prism also produces the sec financial statements .