repayments . repayments allow financial institutions , with the approval of their regulators , to redeem their preferred shares in full . institutions have the contractual right to redeem their shares at any time . as of february 29 , 2016 , 261 institutions had exited cpp through repayments . institutions must demonstrate that they are financially strong enough to repay the cpp investments to receive regulatory approval to proceed with a repayment exit . restructurings . restructurings allow troubled financial institutions to negotiate new terms or discounted redemptions for their investments . raising new capital from outside investors ( or a merger ) is a prerequisite for a restructuring . treasury conducted the first auction of cpp investments in march 2012 , and has continued to use this strategy to sell its investments . as of february 29 , 2016 , treasury had conducted a total of 28 auctions of stock from 190 cpp institutions . through these transactions , treasury received about $3 billion in proceeds , which was about 80 percent of the investment's face amount . as we previously reported , treasury has sold investments individually to date , but noted that combining smaller investments — into pooled auctions — remained an option . whether treasury sells stock individually or in pools , the outcome of this option will depend largely on investor demand for these securities and the quality of the underlying financial institutions . the method by which institutions have exited the program has varied over time . with this option , treasury receives cash or other securities that generally can be sold more easily than preferred stock , but the restructured investments are sometimes sold at a discount to par value . according to treasury officials , treasury facilitated restructurings as an exit from cpp in those cases in which new capital investment and redemption of the cpp investment by the institutions otherwise was not possible . treasury officials said that they approved the restructurings only if the terms represented a fair and equitable financial outcome for taxpayers . treasury completed 39 such restructurings through february 29 , 2016 . auctions . as shown in figure 4 , from 2009 through 2011 , the majority of institutions exiting cpp did so through repayment or refinancing their shares through cdci and sblf . from 2012 to 2014 , auctions were the predominant exit strategy . during that same period , restructurings also increased . for example , in 2012 , 4 percent of exits ( 7 of 159 ) were restructurings . in 2014 , 15 percent ( 8 of 52 ) used restructuring as an exit strategy . in 2015 , restructurings remained a common strategy , representing 35 percent ( 6 of 17 ) of exits , while auctions dropped from 44 percent ( 23 of 52 ) in 2014 to 29 percent ( 5 of 17 ) in 2015 . treasury officials told us they expected restructurings to be the primary exit strategy in the future , but as noted earlier , auctions remain a possible exit strategy . treasury expects to rely on restructurings and auctions because the overall financial condition of the remaining institutions makes full repayment unlikely .