these practices include the following . engaging in broad - based recruiting . representatives from three firms stated that they are increasingly hiring and interested in recruiting students from a variety of academic disciplines , such as liberal arts or science and technology . for example , representatives from one firm explained that they are interested in candidates with critical thinking skills , and that technical skills can be taught to new employees . additionally , representatives from several firms noted the importance of recruiting at a broad group of schools , not just a small number of elite universities . establishing relationships with student and professional organizations . most financial firm representatives told us that an effective strategy for recruiting diverse students is to establish relationships with student organizations representing diverse groups . representatives from one firm explained that working with student groups helps expose diverse students to careers in financial services . additionally , to help recruit women and minorities who may already have graduated from college or graduate school , representatives of most financial firms and two trade groups described establishing relationships with professional organizations that represent women and minorities . intentionally recruiting diverse candidates . representatives from two financial services firms and two organizations that advocate for the financial services industry noted that firms should intentionally seek out diverse candidates . for example , representatives from one firm discussed the importance of including diversity in a firm's recruiting strategy and establishing relationships with schools and organizations that can increase women's and minorities' exposure to financial services . offering programs to increase awareness of financial services . several financial firm representatives told us that they establish relationships with high school students to expose diverse students to the financial services field . for example , representatives from one firm described a program that pairs high school students with a mentor from the firm . two organizations that advocate for the financial services industry also noted that it is helpful for financial services firms to establish relationships with high schools to educate young students about the field . a 2016 consulting firm report on women in financial services organizations in 32 countries found that a majority of asset managers who were interviewed thought it was important for financial services firms to educate students about careers available in financial services . the report noted that more on - campus education and public relations work could help attract women to the field . reports on workforce diversity , representatives from financial services firms , and other stakeholders discussed several challenges to retaining women and racial / ethnic minorities , several of which we have previously reported . representatives of three financial services firms and two organizations that advocate for the financial services industry told us that it is challenging to retain women and minorities at organizations that lack women and minorities in management positions . additionally , two former employees of large financial services firms , both racial / ethnic minorities , told us that there are fewer mentors or role models for women and racial / ethnic minorities in firms that have fewer women and minorities in leadership positions .