according to the u.s . advisory commission on public diplomacy , “the need to fill a post quickly often prevents public diplomacy officers from receiving their full training.” in addition , public diplomacy officers at post are burdened with administrative tasks and thus have less time to conduct public diplomacy outreach activities than previously . one senior state official said that administrative duties , such as budget , personnel , and internal reporting , compete with officers' public diplomacy responsibilities . another official in egypt told us that there was rarely enough time to strategize , plan , or evaluate her programs . these statements echo comments we heard during overseas fieldwork and in a survey for our 2003 report . surveyed officers told us that , while they manage to attend functions within their host country capitals , it was particularly difficult to find time to travel outside the capitals to interact with other communities . this challenge is compounded at posts with short tours of duty , which include many in the muslim world . according to data provided by state , the average tour length at posts in the muslim world is about 22 percent shorter than tour lengths elsewhere . noting the prevalence of one - year tours in the muslim world , a senior official at state told us that public affairs officers who have shorter tours tend to produce less effective work than officers with longer tours . it is not clear when this strategy will be developed . in 2005 , the under secretary established a strategic framework for u.s. public diplomacy efforts , which includes three priority goals: ( 1 ) support the president's freedom agenda with a positive image of hope ; ( 2 ) isolate and marginalize extremists ; and ( 3 ) promote understanding regarding shared values and common interests between americans and peoples of different countries , cultures , and faiths . the under secretary noted that she intends to achieve these goals using five tactics — engagement , exchanges , education , empowerment , and evaluation — and by using various public diplomacy programs and other means . this framework partially responds to our 2003 recommendation that the department develop and disseminate a strategy to integrate all state's public diplomacy efforts and direct them toward achieving common objectives . however , the department has not yet developed written guidance that provides details on how the under secretary's new strategic framework should be implemented in the field . in 2005 , we noted that state's efforts to engage the private sector in pursuit of common public diplomacy objectives had met with mixed success and recommended that the secretary develop a strategy to guide these efforts . state is currently establishing an office of private sector outreach and is partnering with individuals and the private sector on various projects . the under secretary plans to institutionalize this function within the department surrounding key public diplomacy objectives , but it is unclear when this office will be established and whether it will develop a comprehensive strategy to engage the private sector . gao and others have suggested that state adopt a strategic approach to public diplomacy by modeling and adapting private sector communication practices to suit its purposes ( see fig .