( see app . i for details regarding our scope and methodology and app . ii for a copy of the may 6 , 2004 , not - approvable letter for the initial application. ) we conducted our work from september 2004 through november 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . within fda , cder oversees the switch of drugs from prescription to otc . generally , prescription drugs are drugs that are safe for use only under the supervision of a health care practitioner . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 or crossem@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii . to examine how the decision was made to not approve the switch of plan b from prescription to over - the - counter ( otc ) , we reviewed documents , such as the plan b otc switch action package related to the may 6 , 2004 , decision from the food and drug administration ( fda ) . we examined documents produced by fda , including official meeting minutes and the reviews of the plan b otc switch application from the offices of drug evaluation iii and v and the office of new drugs , related to the review of the plan b otc switch application . fda officials told us that documentation was not available concerning some communications within fda . it was not possible to determine whether such communications may have concerned the plan b otc switch application . however , we acquired sufficient information from other fda documents and our interviews with fda officials to fully address our objectives . we interviewed fda officials involved in the plan b otc switch application review , including officials from the office of drug evaluation iii , office of drug evaluation v , office of new drugs , and office of drug safety . we also interviewed the acting director of the center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) , the acting deputy commissioner for operations , and the director of the office of women's health . we interviewed members of fda's advisory committees that met jointly to discuss the plan b otc switch application — the nonprescription drugs advisory committee ( ndac ) and the advisory committee for reproductive health drugs ( acrhd ) — and reviewed the transcripts of the meeting . in addition , we interviewed officials from barr pharmaceuticals , inc. , the company currently sponsoring the plan b application for the prescription - to - otc switch , and women's capital corporation ( wcc ) , the original sponsor of the plan b otc switch application . to examine how the plan b decision compares to the decisions for other proposed prescription - to - otc switches made from 1994 through 2004 , we examined the recommendations of the joint advisory committee and if they were followed for plan b and the proposed otc switch drugs that were decided from 1994 through 2004 .