iii ) . we also included open - ended questions to give respondents an opportunity to tell us about challenges and potential federal actions that we did not ask about . these concerns are not new . in fact , a 1993 report on climate change adaptation by the congressional office of technology assessment posed the following question within its overall discussion of the issue: “why adopt a policy today to adapt to a climate change effect that may not occur , for which there is significant uncertainty about impacts , and for which benefits of the anticipatory measure may not be seen for decades ? ” several officials shared similar reactions in written responses to our questionnaire . for example , one local official asked , “how do we justify added expenses in a period of limited resources when the benefits are not clear ? ” while the costs of policies to mitigate and adapt to climate change may be considerable , it is difficult to estimate the costs of inaction — costs which could be much greater , according to a recent nrc report . this report cites the long time horizon associated with climate change , coupled with deep uncertainties associated with forecasts and projections , among other issues , as aspects of climate change that are challenging for decision making . several officials who responded to our questionnaire noted similar concerns . for example , one federal official stated that decision makers needed to confront “the reality that the future will not echo the past and that we will forever be managing under future uncertainty.” of particular importance in adaptation are planning decisions involving physical infrastructure projects , which require large capital investments and which , by virtue of their anticipated lifespan , will have to be resilient to changes in climate for many decades . the long lead time and long life of large infrastructure investments require such decisions to be made well before climate change effects are discernable . for example , the united kingdom environment agency's thames 2100 plan , which was released for consultation in april 2009 , maps out necessary maintenance and operations needs for the thames barrier until 2070 , at which point major changes will be required . since constructing flood gates is a long - term process ( the current barrier was finished 30 years after officials first identified a need for it ) , officials said they need the information now , even if the threat will not materialize until later . translating climate data into site - specific information: the process of providing useful information to officials making decisions about adaptation can be summarized in several steps . first , data from global - scale models must be “downscaled” to provide climate information at a geographic scale relevant to decision makers . about 74 percent ( 133 of 179 ) of the officials who responded to our questionnaire rated “availability of climate information at relevant scale ( i.e. , downscaled regional and local information ) ” as very or extremely challenging .