iscd has addressed both of these recommendations . in response to the first recommendation , iscd implemented an updated top - screen survey in october 2016 and now collects data from facilities and conducts more accurate modeling to determine the actual area of impact ( formerly called the distance of concern ) , rather than relying on the facilities' calculation . in response to the second recommendation , iscd officials reported in november 2016 that they reassessed all facility top - screens that reported threshold quantities of chemicals posing a toxic release threat , and identified 158 facilities with the potential to cause the greatest harm . in april 2018 , iscd officials reported that all of these facilities have since been reassessed using updated top - screen information and , where appropriate , assigned a risk tier . in addition , in october 2016 , iscd implemented a quality assurance review process whereby iscd officials manually check and verify the accuracy of facility self - reported top - screen information used in identifying potential high - risk facilities . the objective of iscd's review process is to evaluate the information provided by a chemical facility in order to recommend approval or rejection of a submitted top - screen for accuracy prior to issuing a letter notifying the facility of its risk tier designation . according to iscd , all top - screens undergo a quality assurance review with two exceptions: ( 1 ) a facility that registers through csat for the first time and submits a top - screen identifying zero chemicals of interest on site and which does not identify an exclusion ; or ( 2 ) a facility that possessed a chemical of interest in the past but subsequently submits a follow - up top - screen for redetermination identifying they no longer possess the chemical of interest and after iscd validates the removal of the chemical of interest . when a top - screen submission is rejected , iscd sends a letter notifying the facility of the rejection and requesting that a revised top - screen be submitted . in addition , according to iscd , they contact facilities prior to a top - screen rejection to ensure the facility understands the required updates and to discuss the potential reporting error . as of february 2018 , a total of 1,956 top - screen submissions ( across 1,799 unique facilities ) were rejected as part of this quality assurance review process since implementing the updated top - screen survey in october 2016 , according to iscd data . according to iscd , the majority of these top - screens were rejected due to common reporting errors , such as misreporting the flammability hazard rating for a chemical of interest subject to a release security issue or not reporting transportation packaging when a chemical of interest is identified as being subject to a theft or diversion security issue .