iii. ) psychosocial therapies are mental health treatments that generally involve sessions with a mental health professional that are designed to reduce patients' emotional or behavioral symptoms . such therapies may be used instead of , or in combination with , psychotropic medications to psychosocial therapies that treat children with mental health conditions.have been shown to be effective in treating mental health conditions may be referred to as evidence - based therapies ( ebt ) . while there is no standard definition of what constitutes “evidence - based,” some federal agencies and provider organizations evaluate and compile information on available therapies . for example , samhsa maintains the national registry of evidence - based programs and practices , a list of treatments that have been assessed by independent evaluators and rated on the strength of the evidence showing their effectiveness . provider organizations may also make recommendations to providers on which treatments to use . for example , aacap publishes practice parameters that contain recommendations for treating specific disorders , with each recommendation labeled to indicate the strength of the evidence underlying it . although psychosocial therapies may be effective for many children , the institute of medicine and others have reported that a shortage of mental health providers in general is a major factor affecting access to services , especially for children . furthermore , finding a mental health professional who has been trained to provide a specific ebt can be a challenge because training in ebts is not uniformly required in medical and professional schools . children enter foster care when they have been removed from their parents or guardians and placed under the responsibility of a state child welfare agency , often because of maltreatment at home . removal from the home can occur for multiple reasons , including parental violence , substance abuse , severe depression , or incarceration . according to acf , 46 percent of children investigated by child welfare services came to a state's attention primarily because of a report of neglect , and 27 percent had experienced physical abuse as the most serious form of recorded maltreatment . other children are referred when their own behaviors or conditions are beyond the control of their families or they pose a threat to themselves or the community . children in foster care can experience traumatic stress due to maltreatment experienced at home as well as the trauma of being removed from their homes . trauma significantly increases the risk of mental health problems , difficulties with social relationships and behavior , physical illness , and poor school performance . furthermore , child mental health experts have stated that the traumatic stress symptoms foster children may experience are often the same as symptoms that can indicate other mental health conditions , which may lead to misdiagnosis and inappropriate treatments . when children are taken into foster care , the state's child welfare agency becomes responsible for determining where the child should live and providing the child with needed supports . the agency may place the foster child in the home of a relative , with unrelated foster parents , or in a group home or residential treatment center , depending on the child's needs .