these objects . these objects . these objects . what is considered a financial management system ? who will be responsible for developing a governmentwide concept of operations and what process will be used to ensure that the resulting document reflects the governmentwide solution rather than individual agency stove - piped efforts ? how will the concept of operations be linked to the federal enterprise architecture ? how can the federal government obtain reliable information on the costs of its financial management systems investments ? a concept of operations defines how an organization's day - to - day operations are ( or will be ) carried out to meet mission needs . the concept of operations includes high - level descriptions of information systems , their interrelationships , and information flows . as noted above , the priority projects to be undertaken in the near term will relate to the transparency and standardization initiatives of the fmlob . other projects that were previously under fsio's purview – acquisition , budget formulation , and property system requirements – have been transitioned to the chief acquisition council , the budget officers advisory council , and the federal real property council , respectively , for their consideration and completion . also , effective january 2006 , the fsio office will be transferred from the general service administration's ( gsa ) office of the chief financial officer to the office of government - wide policy , office of technology strategy ( ots ) . there are several significant benefits of this move: lower administrative cost through shared resources ( rent , supplies , equipment , etc. ) permanent ses in place to provide leadership to fsio staff access to immediate resources and expertise on it , administrative management , contract management , testing , etc . fits well with current mission and stakeholder focused model of ots 5 6 . what specific actions are expected of federal agencies ? as described above , a central goal of the fmlob is that financial system investments will be at lower risk and lower cost as agencies leverage the economies offered by shared service solutions ( i.e. , coes ) . to this end , omb has instituted a policy that agencies seeking to modernize their financial system must either be designated a public coe or must migrate to a coe ( public , private , or a combination of both ) . although exceptions to this policy will be made in limited situations when an agency demonstrates compelling evidence of a best value and lower risk alternative , it is omb's intent to avoid investments in “in - house” solutions wherever possible so that the shared service framework can fully achieve potential and anticipated returns . to the extent we require any specific action on your part to carry out the priority initiatives and milestones outlined above , we will communicate such requests through subsequent memos from omb or the fsic . performance measures performance measures performance measures performance measures performance measures performance measures project description: develop a project description: develop a project description: develop a project description: develop a project description: develop a project description: develop a series of measures ( i.e. , cost , series of measures ( i.e. , cost , series of measures ( i.e.