gao - 18-453 . washington , d.c.: july 19 , 2018 . ( recommendation 1 ) . the director of omb should develop and provide guidance on the types of projects and activities that agencies involved in the protection and restoration of the columbia river basin should include in their reports , as well as the processes they should follow in compiling the related budget and spending information . ( recommendation 2 ) . the director of omb should direct each federal agency involved in the protection and restoration of the columbia river basin to collect the information omb needs for the interagency crosscut budget and to submit this information to omb for inclusion in the interagency crosscut as part of the president's budget request for fiscal year 2020 . ( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to epa , omb , and the departments of agriculture , commerce , defense , energy , and the interior . we also provided a draft of the report to the idaho department of environmental quality , montana department of environmental quality , oregon department of environmental quality , and washington state department of ecology . epa provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix iv , and stated that it agreed with the conclusions and recommendation in our report . the department of agriculture also provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix v. the departments of defense and the interior and the washington state department of ecology responded by email that they did not have comments on the draft report . the departments of commerce and energy and the idaho department of environmental quality provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . omb , the montana department of environmental quality , and the oregon department of environmental quality did not provide any comments . in its written comments , epa stated that it agrees with our recommendation to develop a program management plan that includes schedule of the action it will take and the resources and funding needed to establish and implement the columbia river basin restoration program and associated working group as required under clean water act section 123 . epa stated that it will work with its partners within the existing governance structures to begin discussions on the development of a program management plan . as an initial step , the agency will reconvene the columbia river toxics reduction working group to initiate discussion for how to approach implementation of section 123 . further , epa stated it stands ready to work with omb on an interagency cross cut budget after omb provides guidance on the types of projects and activities necessary to develop the budget . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of agriculture , commerce , defense , energy , and the interior ; the administrator of epa ; the director of omb ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or gomezj@gao.gov .