we recognize that doing so may be difficult . fhwa's current activities — such as its survey regarding the supportive services program — are positive steps towards making such an assessment . while it is appropriate for fhwa headquarters to rely extensively on its division offices to oversee state on - the - job training programs , such a decentralized management approach does not relieve fhwa headquarters from the responsibility of providing leadership and a national perspective for its programs . even though the on - the - job training and supportive services programs are relatively small compared to fhwa's other programs , we would still expect fhwa to conduct oversight to ensure program goals are met and at a scale appropriate for the size of the programs . a necessary first step is for the agency to establish clear criteria — existing program criteria are not clear — for states on what they are to accomplish and for its division offices on how they are to oversee state activities . these criteria could continue to allow for flexibility in state programs , as fhwa deems appropriate . in doing so , fhwa needs to provide guidance on state reporting that will lay the groundwork for national assessments of results . likewise , evaluation of supportive services results could inform funding decisions . such actions will result in fhwa being able to better ensure that program goals are being met and would allow them to improve program accountability . to establish accountability for meeting the programs' goal of increasing the participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in the highway construction workforce , we recommend that the secretary of transportation direct the fhwa administrator to take the following three actions:  strengthen criteria — through regulations , guidelines , or other mechanisms — so that states have a clear understanding of how the on - the - job training program should be implemented and the results state programs are intended to accomplish .  create and implement an oversight mechanism that ( 1 ) holds states accountable for meeting federal training criteria and ( 2 ) clearly stipulates how fhwa will assess state program effectiveness , including what type of program achievement data states are to submit and how such data will be used . this oversight mechanism should include assessing the effectiveness of its division offices in overseeing state activities .  for the supportive services program , develop an approach to ( 1 ) evaluate the extent to which grantees have met their proposed annual goals and ( 2 ) integrate the results of this evaluation into fhwa's funding decisions for supportive services programs . ( see app . the department of transportation generally agreed with the recommendations and provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to congressional committees with responsibilities for surface transportation issues , the director of the office of management and budget , the secretary of transportation , and the administrator of the federal highway administration .