by ben canada . washington , d.c.: updated august 28 , 2003 . congressional research service . public safety wireless network . information material — ‘how to' guide for funding state and local public safety wireless networks . fairfax , virginia: 2003 . public safety wireless network . federal interoperability assistance support — funding strategy best practices report . fairfax , virginia: 2002 . public safety wireless network . the report card on funding mechanisms for public safety radio communications . fairfax , virginia: 2001 . public safety wireless network . fire and emergency management services ( ems ) communications interoperability . fairfax , virginia: 1999 . public safety wireless network . land mobile radio replacement cost study . fairfax , virginia: 1998 . public safety wireless network . report on funding strategies for public safety radio communications . as prepared by booz⋅allen & hamilton . fairfax , virginia: 1998 . public safety wireless network . report on funding mechanisms for public safety radio communications . prepared by booz ⋅allen & hamilton . fairfax , virginia: 1997 . public safety wireless network . final report of the public safety wireless advisory committee . fairfax , virginia: 1996 . public safety wireless network . public safety coordination and preparedness guide . fairfax , virginia . public safety wireless network . the role of the federal government in public safety wireless interoperability . fairfax , virginia . public safety wireless network . the role of the local public safety community government in public safety wireless interoperability . fairfax , virginia . public safety wireless network . the role of the states in public safety wireless interoperability . fairfax , virginia . u.s. department of justice . wireless communications and interoperability among state and local law enforcement agencies . washington , d.c.: 1998 . in october 2002 the house committee on government reform issued a report entitled how can the federal government better assist state and local governments in preparing for a biological , chemical , or nuclear attack ? the committee's first finding was that incompatible communication systems impede intergovernmental coordination efforts . the committee recommended that the federal government take a leadership role in resolving the communications interoperability problem . in december 2003 , the safecom and the agile program within doj issued a joint report in which they established a series of initiatives and goals extending over the next 20 years . the report concludes that a continuous and participatory effort is required to improve public safety communications and interoperability . omb created the safecom program as a short - term ( 18-24 months ) e - gov initiative . it had no designated long - term mission . however , omb has identified safecom as the primary program responsible for coordinating federal efforts to improve interoperability . how to institutionalize that role is still an evolving process . in addition , the roles and responsibilities of the various federal agencies — the fcc , doj , and others — involved in communications interoperability have not been fully defined and safecom's authority to oversee and coordinate federal and state efforts is limited .