pub . 111-148 , 124 stat . 119 ( mar . 23 , 2010 ) , as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 , pub . 111-152 , 124 stat . 1029 ( mar . 30 , 2010 ) , which we refer to collectively as ppaca . irs refers to ppaca by the acronym for the affordable care act , aca . generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . irs formulates its budget at three levels: ( 1 ) appropriation account , ( 2 ) budget activity , and ( 3 ) program activity . irs requests funding by appropriation accounts , which align broadly with its strategic goals , which are to ( 1 ) deliver high quality and timely service to reduce taxpayer burden and encourage voluntary compliance ; and ( 2 ) effectively enforce the law to ensure compliance with tax responsibilities and combat fraud . irs's cj presents funding and fte information at the appropriation account and budget activity levels . in addition , it provides descriptions of program activities within each budget activity . irs has four appropriation accounts ( fiscal year 2015 appropriation listed in parentheses ) : enforcement ( $4.86 billion ) : funds activities such as determining and collecting owed taxes , providing legal and litigation support , and conducting criminal investigations . operations support ( $3.64 billion ) : funds activities including rent and facilities expenses , irs - wide administration activities , and it maintenance and security . taxpayer services ( $2.16 billion ) : funds taxpayer service activities and programs , including pre - filing assistance and education , filing and account services , and taxpayer advocacy services . business systems modernization ( $290 million ) : funds the planning and capital asset acquisition of it to modernize irs business systems . budget activities divide appropriation accounts into additional functions . for example , the enforcement appropriation is broken into three budget activities: investigations , exam and collections , and regulatory . each budget activity , in turn , has multiple program activities . for example , exam and collections has 20 program activities , such as tax reporting compliance – field exam ; earned income tax credit management and administration ; and whistleblower office . in addition to program activities , the lower levels of the budget formulation and budget execution structures include business units and other areas of interest , which are not discrete categories . for example , wage and investment is one division within irs and can be referred to as a business unit , while identity theft would be considered an area of interest that crosses divisions within irs . irs's appropriation accounts align with its organizational structure at the highest level . for example , irs has an operations support appropriation account and an operations support commissioner - level organization .