iaea member state ? u.s. - designated state sponsor of terrorism ? npt state party ? comprehensive safeguards agreement in force ? additional protocol in force ? iaea member state ? assistance under some regional tc projects . the tc program also plays a role in facilitating article iv of the treaty on the tc program also plays a role in facilitating article iv of the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons ( npt ) , which affirms that all the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons ( npt ) , which affirms that all states party to the treaty have a right to participate in the exchange of states party to the treaty have a right to participate in the exchange of equipment , materials , and scientific and technological information for equipment , materials , and scientific and technological information for peaceful uses of nuclear energy . the npt also requires nonnuclear peaceful uses of nuclear energy . the npt also requires nonnuclear weapon state parties to the npt ( defined as those countries that had not weapon state parties to the npt ( defined as those countries that had not manufactured and detonated a nuclear device before january 1 , 1967 ) to manufactured and detonated a nuclear device before january 1 , 1967 ) to accept iaea safeguards on all nuclear material used in peaceful activities so that the agency can verify that their nuclear programs are not being used for weapons purposes . most countries have concluded “comprehensive safeguards agreements” with iaea , under which governments declare their nuclear materials and activities to iaea . the agency then verifies and monitors these declarations . iaea has sought to further strengthen its verification efforts through a complementary “additional protocol” to a country's comprehensive safeguards agreement . under such protocols , states must provide iaea with broader information and wider access rights on all aspects of their activities related to the nuclear fuel cycle . in 2007 , the tc program disbursed over $93 million in nuclear technical assistance to 122 countries and territories . tc projects have supported efforts to eradicate tsetse flies and other insect pests in certain regions , control communicable diseases in developing countries , and develop higher - yielding agricultural crops . as of june 2008 , 1,290 tc projects were under way , with each project lasting , on average , 3 to 4 years . a tc project typically has several components , including equipment procurement , provision of expert services , training , and fellowships . each year , about 1,600 individuals around the world are granted fellowships by the tc program , allowing them to pursue specialized nuclear studies at universities , institutes , and other facilities outside their home countries . all tc projects are considered by the technical assistance and cooperation committee of iaea's board of governors — the 35-member policy - making body for iaea programs — before they are approved by the board of governors . this approval covers the entire life cycle of the project . the tc department and other departments within iaea's secretariat begin working with the member states to develop project concepts and proposals approximately 1 year before the project is approved .