gao - 09-517r . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2009 . washington , d.c.: january 11 , 2007 . medicaid outpatient prescription drugs: estimated 2007 federal upper limits for reimbursement compared with retail pharmacy acquisition costs . gao - 07-239r . washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2006 . federal employees health benefits program: premium growth has recently slowed , and varies among participating plans . gao - 07-141 . washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2006 . blanket purchase agreements and other national contracts . b purchase agreements and other national contracts with drug manufacturers allow va and dod — either separately or jointly — to negotiate prices below fss prices . the lower prices may depend on the volume of specific drugs being purchased by particular facilities , such as va or military hospitals , or on being ass od's respective national formularies . d igned preferred status on va's and in a few cases , individual va and dod medical centers have obtained lower prices through local agreements with suppliers than they could through the national contracts , fss prices , or federal ceiling prices . in addition , va's and dod's use of formularies , pharmacies , and prime vendors can further affect drug prices and help control drug spending . both va and dod use their own national , standard formulary to obtain more competitive prices from manufacturers that have their drugs listed on the formulary . va and dod formularies also encourage the substitution of lower cost drugs determined to be as or more effective than hig drugs . va and dod use prime vendors , which are preferred drug distributors , to purchase drugs from manufacturers and deliver the drugs to va or dod facilities . va and dod receive discounts from their prime vendors that also reduce the prices that they pay for drugs . for dod , the discounts vary among prime vendors and the areas they serve . as of june 2004 , va's prime vendor discount was 5 percent , while dod's discounts averaged about 2.9 percent within the united states . additionally , si to fehbp and medicare part d , dod uses utilization management methods to limit drug spending including prior authorization , dispensin limitations , and higher cost sharing for nonformulary drugs and drugs dispensed at retail pharmacies . unlike va and dod , medicaid programs do not negotiate drug prices with il manufacturers to control prescription drug spending , but reimburse reta pharmacies for drugs dispensed to beneficiaries at set prices . cms sets aggregate payment limits — known as the federal upper limit ( ful ) — for certain outpatient multiple - source prescription drugs . cms also provides guidelines regarding drug payment . states are to pay pharmacies the lower of the state's estimate of the drug's acquisition cost to the pharmacy , pl a dispensing fee , or the pharmacy's usual and customary charge to the general public ; for certain d costs may apply if lower . rugs the ful or the state maximum allowable in addition to these retail pharmacy reimbursements , medicaid programs also control prescription drug spending through the medicaid drug rebate program .