pt . 214. existing documentation on the controls in the system and the policies for ensuring data reliability ; ( 2 ) interviewing agency officials about the data's sources , the system's controls , and any quality assurance steps performed after data are entered into the system ; and ( 3 ) testing the data for missing data , outliers , or obvious errors . we identified several limitations to the data resulting from ice's process by which schools' dsos are responsible for data entry and updates . sevis is used by schools to apply for and receive sevp certification , as well as for dsos to keep records of individual students who enter the united states on f and m visas . although sevp officials may make edits to a student's sevis record in some cases , all data or information entries on students are the responsibility of dsos . therefore , data elements that are not required may be missing or invalidly entered . for example , entries for schools' physical locations may not be valid u.s. postal addresses . furthermore , some sevis records may be duplicated because of students changing from one type of opt to another . however , we were able to address this issue with duplicates by removing the record that was less accurate and up to date . while we identified such limitations , we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for providing descriptive information on the population of sevp - certified schools that have recommended opt and of foreign students engaged in opt . we also found the data to be sufficiently reliable for analyzing student records for compliance with certain regulatory and policy requirements . we focused our analysis on several sevis fields related to management and oversight of foreign students engaged in opt: ( 1 ) employer name and location , ( 2 ) remarks and comments on employment , and ( 3 ) dates of program of study and authorized opt employment . we also analyzed student records for which an employer name was included and belonged in industries such as food service and retail , industries in which ctceu officials were concerned about the potential of students working in unrelated jobs . we analyzed a sample of 158 student records in which the employer name field indicated the student worked in select food service or retail industries . this is a select sample and is not representative of all records indicating a student is working in the food service or retail industries . we identified this sample by searching the sevis data of foreign students authorized to engage in opt as of august 2013 for employers names with key words such as “restaurant,” “café,” “coffee,” “pizza,” and “burger,” as well as for select retailers . this search returned 207 student records , which we reviewed and subsequently made the determination to exclude 49 records based on the employer name including one of these search terms but belonging to a business outside of the food service or retail industries . for example , we excluded an employer that is a printing company with the word “café” in its name .