program . in addition , individuals eligible for groceries through the commodity supplemental food program or services through the elderly nutrition program may also be eligible for groceries through the emergency food assistance program and for targeted benefits that are redeemed in authorized stores through the largest program , snap . in fact , a recent aoa report conducted by mathematica found that seven percent of congregate meal recipients and 16 percent of home - delivered meal recipients were also receiving snap benefits . the availability of multiple programs with similar benefits helps ensure that those in need have access to nutritious food , but can also increase administrative costs , which account for approximately a tenth to more than a quarter of total costs among the largest of these programs . in addition , our previous work has shown that overlap among programs can lead to inefficient use of federal funds , duplication of effort , and confusion among those seeking services . we have found in previous work that despite the potential benefits of varied points of entry , program rules related to determining eligibility often require the collection of similar information by multiple entities . for example , an older adult might apply for congregate meals through the elderly nutrition program at their local area agency on aging , electronic benefits through snap at the health and human services office , and vouchers for fresh fruit and vegetables through the senior farmers' market nutrition program at a local food bank . most of the 18 programs have specific and often complex administrative procedures that federal , state , and local organizations follow to help manage each program's resources . according to our previous work and state and local officials , rules that govern these and other nutrition assistance programs often require applicants who seek assistance from multiple programs to submit separate applications for each program and provide similar information verifying , for example , household income . all other usda progr lited above re dminitered y the food nd ntrition service . commnity food project competitive grnt progrm prticiption informtion i from csrees updte: septemer 17 , 2009 , office of the adminitrtor , csrees , usda . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we believe that the evidence we obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions . on march 1 , 2011 , we issued a report outlining opportunities to reduce duplication across a wide range of federal programs raising attention to these issues . that report was prepared in response to a new statutory requirement that gao identify and report annually on federal programs , agencies , offices , and initiatives — either within departments or governmentwide — that have duplicative goals and activities . in that work , we also considered fragmentation and overlap among government programs or activities as these can be harbingers of unnecessary duplication .