the federal judiciary and the u.s . marshals service ( usms ) also obligated about $577.1 million from the court security appropriation . gao - 03-609t . to view the full testimony , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? for more information , contact bernard l. ungar at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or ungarb@gao.gov . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: we welcome the opportunity today to discuss factors affecting the costs of constructing , leasing , and operating general services administration ( gsa ) owned and leased buildings . reports of rising costs in these areas are of particular concern in today's environment , as the increased federal budget deficit has led to intensified competition for federal resources . at the same time , one of the main cost factors facing gsa is security . physical security for federal office buildings has been a governmentwide concern since the 1995 bombing of the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city , oklahoma . this concern has become more compelling in the wake of the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and the anthrax incidents that closely followed it . to assist gsa in determining how to best prioritize security enhancements while also addressing other federal building needs , we believe it is helpful to consider factors affecting the costs of meeting these needs . gsa has responsibility for more than 8,000 owned and leased buildings nationwide , together encompassing about 338 million square feet of space . gsa's owned and leased space , which includes office buildings , courthouses , border stations , and other types of facilities , makes up about 6 percent of all federally owned space worldwide and 39 percent of all federally leased space worldwide . between fiscal year 1995 and fiscal year 2002 , gsa's average rental rate for leased space increased 4.1 percent in constant dollars , to $20 per square foot , and gsa's building operations obligations increased by 31.3 percent in constant dollars , to about $1.9 billion . in fiscal year 2002 , gsa had total estimated project costs of about $2.6 billion for new construction , about $690 million for major renovations , and more than $435 million for design of repair and alterations . it has obligated about $3.1 billion for the rental of space , which is a 24 percent increase in constant dollars since fiscal year 1995 . today , in this context of rising costs and limited funds , we would like to discuss ( 1 ) factors that have affected gsa's construction , leasing , and operating costs and ( 2 ) our designation of federal real property as a high - risk area . my statement today is based largely on our past work on constructing , operating , leasing , and securing federally owned or leased buildings . in certain instances , we obtained updated information and opinions from gsa officials . we also reviewed a gsa contractor's march 2002 report on courthouse construction costs . several factors have affected gsa's construction , leasing , and operating costs for federal buildings .