dhs concurred with the recommendations . fema implemented our first recommendation by developing an incident management assistance team training and readiness manual and providing a training schedule for fiscal year 2017 . in response to the second recommendation , fema officials stated in july 2018 that they plan to develop policies that will provide guidance on a new workforce structure , incentives for incident management assistance team personnel , and pay - for - performance and all other human resource actions . we are continuing to monitor fema's efforts to address this recommendation . public assistance program staffing . in november and december 2017 , we reported on staffing challenges in fema's public assistance program . in november 2017 , we reported on fema's efforts to address past workforce management challenges through its redesigned public assistance delivery model . as part of the redesign effort , fema created consolidated resource centers to standardize and centralize public assistance staff responsible for managing grant applications , and new specialized positions to ensure more consistent guidance to applicants . however , we found that fema had not assessed the workforce needed to fully implement the redesigned model , such as the number of staff needed to fill certain new positions , or to achieve staffing goals . further , in december 2017 , we reported on fema's management of its public assistance appeals process , including that fema increased staffing levels for the appeals process from 2015 to 2017 . however , we found that fema continued to face a number of workforce challenges , such as staff vacancies , turnover , and delays in training , which contributed to processing delays . based on our findings from our november and december 2017 reports , we recommended , among other things , that fema ( 1 ) complete workforce staffing assessments that identify the appropriate number of staff needed to implement the redesigned public assistance delivery model , and ( 2 ) document steps for hiring , training , and retaining key appeals staff , and address staff transitions resulting from deployments to disasters . dhs concurred with our recommendations to address workforce management challenges in the public assistance program and have reported taking some actions in response . for example , to address the first recommendation , fema officials have developed preliminary models and estimates of staffing needs across various programs , including public assistance . however , as of october 2019 , the agency has not yet taken actions to implement this recommendation . to address the second recommendation , fema has collected information on the amount of time regional appeals analysts spend on appeals , and the inventory and timeliness of different types of appeals . fema officials stated in september 2018 that they plan to assess this information to prepare a detailed regional workforce plan . in may 2019 , fema sent us additional information and documentation involving its analysis of appeal inventory and timeliness . as of october 2019 , we are evaluating the information provided by fema to determine if they have addressed this recommendation . contracting workforce shortages . in april 2019 , we reported on the federal government's contracting efforts for preparedness , response , and recovery efforts related to the 2017 hurricanes and california wildfires .