annuities . in responding to our survey , all states reported requiring documentation of annuities and thus should have sufficient information to determine whether an annuity should be considered a transfer of assets for less than fmv under the dra . ccrcs . on the basis of our survey results , most states — 46 of 51 — reported requiring applicants to provide documentation of ccrc or life care community entrance fees , such as a copy of the contract or agreement . thus , these states should have sufficient information to determine if , under the dra , an applicant's entrance fees should be countable resources for determining medicaid eligibility . however , it is unclear how the remaining 5 states would be able to determine if an applicant has paid such fees , and whether they should be counted toward the applicant's medicaid long - term care eligibility determination . promissory notes . fifty states reported on our survey that they require applicants to provide documentation of promissory notes or loans ; such documentation should allow the state to determine if a note meets the requirements specified in the dra , such as providing for payments to be made in equal installments throughout the course of the loan , or if a note should be treated as a transfer of assets for less than fmv . additionally , our review of 49 states' long - term care application forms found that 45 required the disclosure of any interest the applicant or spouse has in an annuity and 27 contained statements regarding the state becoming a remainder beneficiary of such annuities . ( see app . viii. ) as the demand for long - term care services increases and federal and state resources continue to be strained , it is important to ensure that only eligible individuals receive medicaid coverage for long - term care . since each state is responsible for day - to - day implementation of its medicaid program , variation in policies and practices for determining financial eligibility is expected . however , some of the variation we found may raise questions regarding how states determine medicaid eligibility for long - term care and enforce certain provisions of the dra . states must balance the costs of eligibility determination efforts with the need to ensure that those efforts provide sufficient information to implement federal requirements . while third - party verification of applicants' financial information likely provides states with the best assurance of having a complete picture of an applicant's financial status , it can be a complex and costly process that requires a significant amount of information and review . given the complexities involved , it may be reasonable for states to adhere to a risk - based approach and focus their eligibility determination efforts on applicants who appear to be more likely to have assets or to have transferred assets that would make them ineligible . the electronic avs that is required by law may help states identify some unreported or transferred assets . however , it is too early to assess its overall effectiveness , which will ultimately depend on the breadth of the financial institutions participating and the depth of the information obtained .