( see fig . over time , medicare's spending target system has been revised and renamed . the sgr system , medicare's current system for updating physician fees , was established in the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba ) and was first used to adjust fees in 1999 . following the implementation of the fee schedule and spending targets in 1992 through 1999 , average annual growth in volume and intensity of service use per beneficiary fell to 1.1 percent . more recently , volume and intensity growth has trended upward , rising at an average annual rate of more than 5 percent from 2000 through 2005 . although this average annual rate of growth remains below that experienced before spending targets were introduced , the recent increases in volume and intensity growth are a reminder that inflationary pressures continue to challenge efforts to moderate growth in physician expenditures . consequently , volume and intensity growth that exceeds 2.2 percent causes medicare sgr - covered spending to exceed the sgr system's target , while slower volume and intensity growth leads to spending that falls below the sgr target . if cumulative spending on sgr - covered services is in line with the sgr system's target , the physician fee schedule update for the next calendar year is set equal to the estimated increase in the average cost of providing physician services as measured by the medicare economic index ( mei ) . the sgr system establishes spending targets to moderate spending increases caused by excess growth in volume and intensity . services covered by the sgr system's spending targets include physician services and other items and services , such as clinical laboratory services , specified by the secretary of hhs , that are commonly performed or furnished by physicians or in a physician's office . the sgr system's spending targets do not cap expenditures for sgr - covered services . instead , spending in excess of the target triggers a reduced fee update or a fee cut . in this way , the sgr system applies financial brakes to spending for sgr - covered services and thus serves as an automatic budgetary control device . in addition , reduced fee updates signal physicians collectively and congress that spending because of volume and intensity has increased more than allowed . to apply the sgr system , every year the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) follows a statutory formula to estimate the allowed rate of increase for spending on sgr - covered services and uses that rate to construct the spending target for the following calendar year . the sustainable growth rate is the product of the estimated percentage change in ( 1 ) input prices for physician services and other sgr - covered services ; ( 2 ) the average number of medicare beneficiaries in the traditional fee - for - service program ; ( 3 ) national economic output , as measured by real ( inflation - adjusted ) gdp per capita ; and ( 4 ) expected expenditures for physician services and other sgr - covered services resulting from changes in laws or regulations . sgr spending targets are cumulative .