applications ( e.g . the briefing slides are in appendix i . we performed our work at irs offices in washington , d.c. , from august through mid - september 2000 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix ii for details on our scope and methodology . irs provided us with written comments on a draft of this report . their comments are discussed in the “agency comments” section of this report and reprinted in appendix iii . since may 1999 , irs has submitted two spending plans and two interim , stopgap plans . on june 15 , 1999 , we reported on irs' first spending plan , stating that the $35 million requested satisfied the legislative conditions for the use of itia funds and was consistent with our open recommendations . we also said that it was an appropriate first step but that the key to success would be effective implementation of the plan . we recommended that future plans specify progress against prior plan commitments and that the next plan clarify the roles and responsibilities of irs , its prime systems integration services contractor ( prime ) for modernization , and other modernization support contractors . because irs was unable to submit its second plan on time , it submitted in december 1999 a stopgap request for $33 million and additional time as an interim measure . we reviewed the request and raised concerns about projects that were scheduled to begin detailed design and software development before , among other things , the enterprise architecture was completed and the elc was defined and implemented . later that december , the appropriations subcommittees approved irs' $33 million funding measure but , in discussions and correspondence , directed irs to ( 1 ) expedite completion of the architecture and implementation of the elc and ( 2 ) explain in future expenditure plans how it plans to manage the risk of performing detailed design or development work if the architecture is not completed or the elc is not implemented . subsequently , irs reassessed its modernization program plans and decided to restructure the program by scaling back its systems development efforts until it addressed our concerns and put in place the requisite modernization management capability . on march 7 , 2000 , irs submitted to the appropriations subcommittees its second spending plan , which reflected these restructuring decisions and sought to obligate about $176 million from itia . on march 31 , 2000 , we briefed the subcommittee and subsequently reported that ( 1 ) the plan satisfied the legislative conditions and was generally consistent with recommendations contained in our earlier reports and ( 2 ) irs met few of the commitments in its first spending plan , even though it later received an additional $33 million and nearly 5 months additional time to do so . we analyzed the process that irs and the contractor undertook to revise and validate cost and schedule estimates in the march 2000 spending plan and verified for two projects - cade and customer communications - whether irs adhered to its process . we selected these projects because they had the highest funding requirements .