competing interests . with respect to operational control , we found that the dual reporting chain to both headquarters and regional mission support , set forth in the service level agreement , heightens the potential for an environment of competing interests for the regional contracting officers . specifically , in some regions , supervisors have assigned duties outside of a contracting officer's responsibilities . in other cases , contracting officers have experienced pressure from program officials to make decisions that may not be appropriate . in both situations , being physically located in a regional office where their regional supervisor is not a contracting professional gives contracting officers less standing to resist requests ; for example: based on our discussions with regional supervisors and contracting officers , we found that regional supervisors in three regions had asked contracting officers to take on additional duties outside of their contracting responsibilities . in one case , an internal review at fema showed that a regional contracting officer did not deploy to a disaster because he was carrying out non - contracting tasks as requested by a regional supervisor not typically responsible for overseeing contracting officers . as a result of the internal review , fema reassigned the contracting officer to a regional mission support supervisor to follow the management structure used in other regions . contracting officers in four regions reported resistance from regional program staff in following contracting processes , such as meeting competition requirements . one mission support supervisor explained that when there are questions about contracting processes , she does not necessarily understand what the contracting officer is required to do in order to adhere to contracting regulations . in one case contracting officers reported that program staff wanted them to eschew contracting requirements and award a noncompetitive contract . the program officials complained to the regional supervisor , who in turn pressured the contracting officers to make the award . in a july 2010 report , we found that the potential exists for program offices , which play a significant role in the contracting process , to exert pressure on contracting officers or that may not result in the best use of taxpayer dollars . further , a 2008 office of federal procurement policy memorandum states that agencies should consider where an acquisition function is placed because it may be viewed as an administrative support rather than as a business partner , so that contracting requirements are circumvented . under the current agreement , the risks associated with the divided structure of fema's regional contracting offices , and actions that may be taken to mitigate these risks , are not specifically addressed . limited insight into contracting officers' work . dividing supervisory responsibilities between headquarters and regional staff has resulted in cases where neither had full insight into contracting officers' work , in both the operational control and training areas of responsibility . in some cases , problems were not detected by management and led to gaps in oversight ; for example: a regional supervisor reported discovering poor contract administration after the departure of a contracting officer .