unproven technology . our reviews of other acquisitions have shown that reliance on unproven technology is a frequent contributor to escalated costs , schedule and delays , and compromised performance standards . while the coast guard has successfully identified technologies that are sufficiently mature , commercially available , and proven in similar applications for use in the first 7 years of the project , it has no structured process to assess and monitor the potential risk of technologies proposed for use in later years . specifically , the coast guard has lacked uniform and systematic criteria , which is currently available , to judge the level of a technology's readiness , maturity , and risk . however , in response to our 2001 recommendation , the coast guard is incorporating a technology readiness assessment in the project's risk management process . technology readiness level assessments are to be performed for technologies identified in the design and proposal preparation and procurement stages of the project . for these and other reasons , our most recent series of performance and accountability reports continues to list the deepwater project as a project meriting close management attention . we will continue to assess the department's actions in these areas . the coast guard's move to dhs may complicate these challenges further . for example , central to the acquisition strategy for the deepwater project is a clear definition of goals , needs , and performance capabilities , so that a contractor can design a system and a series of acquisitions that can be carried out over 2 to 3 decades , while meeting the coast guard's needs throughout this time . these system goals and needs were all developed prior to september 11th . whether the coast guard's evolving homeland security mission will affect these requirements remains to be seen . properly aligning this program within the overall capital needs of dhs is critical to ensuring the success of the deepwater project . also , the homeland security act of 2002 requires the secretary of dhs to submit a report to the congress on the feasibility of accelerating the rate of procurement of the deepwater project . if the project is accelerated , even greater care would need to be exercised in managing a project that already carries numerous risks . in conclusion , these challenges are daunting but not insurmountable . the coast guard continues to do an admirable job of adapting to its new homeland security role through the hard work and dedication of its people , and it has the management capability to address the implementation issues discussed here as well . however , reorganizations frequently encounter startup problems and unanticipated consequences , and even in the best of circumstances , implementation is a lengthy process that requires a keen focus , the application of sound management principles , and continuous reexamination of challenges and issues associated with achieving desired outcomes . as the coast guard addresses these and other challenges in the future , we will continue to monitor its efforts as part of our ongoing work on homeland security issues , and we will be prepared to report to you on this work as you deem appropriate . madame chair , this concludes my testimony today .