newspapers . we used bowker's news media directory to identify the daily , weekly , ethnic , religious , and special interest publications whose area of dominant influence included the core urban area . we counted daily and weekly newspapers separately and combined the ethnic , religious , and special interest publications into the “other” category . we also surveyed web sites of the major daily newspapers in the core urban area of each of our case study markets to determine if there were any additional publications not contained in bowker's news media directory . we also used the directory from the new american media organization to identify additional ethnic publications available in new york , los angeles , chicago , miami , charlotte , nashville , and chattanooga . this source did not list publications for the other case study markets . fieldwork in the nashville and tucson markets turned up additional publications that were missing in our data source . our data sources likely undercount small local weeklies and other types of independent journals . multichannel video programming distributors . we obtained the list of cable operators in each state from fcc's database of registered cable operators ( http: / / www.fcc.gov / mb / engineering / liststate.html ) . we used the warren television and cable factbook to verify that a cable company listed in the fcc database provided service in the core urban area . if the market contained more than one urban area , we used the largest city ( eg , miami ) . in addition to cable companies , we included both direct broadcast satellite companies ( directv and echostar ) . the minimum mvpd count a market could have with this methodology is three . any number greater than three reflects the presence of a cable overbuilder or a telecommunications company that is offering subscription television services in the core urban area of the dma . in addition to case studies , we reviewed the relevant literature and conducted interviews to assess the current ownership of media outlets . we identified studies through a general literature review . we interviewed agency officials at fcc and the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) about media ownership policies . we also identified 102 stakeholders in academia , think tanks , nonprofits , and media companies and interviewed them to obtain their views on fcc's ownership policies and issues affecting media ownership . we used the same structured interview for all interviewees and analyzed the content of the interview responses . to ensure consistent analysis of the interview responses , we had two reviewers independently apply the content analysis tool to each interview write - up and standardized the coding to ensure reliability . we cross - tabulated the interview content to determine patterns in responses and the extent to which interview subjects supported particular positions . to identify the economic , legal and regulatory , and technological factors affecting media ownership , we reviewed the relevant literature , studies , and regulations and conducted interviews .