department of the interior . bureau of indian affairs . bureau of land management . fish and wildlife service . national park service . u.s. geological survey . environmental protection agency . national science foundation . office of federal environmental executive , executive office of the president . office of science and technology policy , executive office of the president . we also contacted officials from the departments of commerce and transportation , who told us their departments have no activities related to woody biomass utilization . to collect information on federal agency woody biomass utilization activities , we used our structured interview guide to ask officials to identify individuals or organizations responsible for biomass utilization activities within their agencies and to identify other federal agencies involved in such activities . we also asked them to provide information about the activities their agencies had under way as well as policies , strategic plans , and goals related to woody biomass . we also reviewed agency policies , strategic plans , and other documents ; federal and nonfederal studies regarding technological , economic , and other issues related to woody biomass utilization ; and pertinent laws and other documents . to corroborate the information we gathered through interviews , we compared interviewees' responses with other information we reviewed . because the documentary evidence we reviewed generally agreed with the information provided by key agency officials involved in woody biomass efforts , we believe the data are sufficiently reliable to be used in providing descriptive information on federal agency woody biomass utilization activities . to obtain information on obstacles that federal agencies face in their efforts to increase the use of woody biomass , we asked agency officials to identify and provide their opinions on the major obstacles to increasing the use of woody biomass , describe agency efforts that target the obstacles they identified , and discuss additional steps they believe are necessary to address these obstacles . because we asked only for opinions about obstacles to woody biomass utilization and additional steps needed to overcome them , we made no attempt to corroborate these responses . to corroborate responses regarding agency efforts to target the obstacles identified , we compared interviewees' responses with the documentary evidence we gathered regarding the agencies' woody biomass utilization activities . we then compared the information provided by agency officials with this documentation . because the documentary evidence we reviewed generally agreed with the information provided by key agency officials involved in woody biomass efforts , we believe the data are sufficiently reliable to be used in providing descriptive information on agency woody biomass coordination efforts . because the documentary evidence we reviewed generally supported the information provided by interviewees , we believe the data are sufficiently reliable to be used in providing information about the extent to which the agencies are addressing these obstacles . we performed our work from june 2004 through march 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to those named above , james espinoza , steve gaty , richard johnson , and judy pagano made key contributions to this report .