see table 3 . factors associated with the characteristics of each facility likely contributed to the variation in the costs . for example , the generally lower costs incurred by nih for chimpanzee care at chimp haven compared to the other three facilities were likely attributable to the requirement that chimp haven match 1 dollar for every 3 dollars in federal funding for operating expenses — a 25 percent matching requirement that chimp haven met throughout the time period we analyzed . because of these matching requirements , while the actual average cost of care per - chimpanzee per - day on average at chimp haven during the time period we analyzed was about $55 , the share of those costs incurred by nih was about $41 per - chimpanzee per - day . in contrast to chimp haven , nih fully funded the reported costs or grant awards for chimpanzee care at the other three facilities . in addition , costs may have been lower at the two large primate research facilities , keeling and snprc , compared to alamogordo because they were likely able to realize economies of scale associated with the sharing of staff and resources with their larger primate programs — officials from both facilities reported that they shared staff and resources in this way . alamogordo , which only houses chimpanzees , does not have the ability to share resources in this way . however , alamogordo had notably reduced costs between federal fiscal years 2014 and 2015 . alamogordo officials reported that they were able to do this by taking a number of cost - cutting measures . for example , they reduced staff and associated overhead , made changes to payroll , accounting , and information technology functions , and switched from brand name to generic drugs whenever possible . through these efforts , costs per - chimpanzee per - day were reduced by more than $6.00 . at snprc costs incurred by nih varied widely for the nih - owned compared to the nih - supported chimpanzees . of the 100 chimpanzees at snprc as of the end of the first quarter of federal fiscal year 2016 , nih owned only 19 , and funding for the care of these chimpanzees was provided through a cooperative agreement , which could only be used to fund the care of its nih - owned chimpanzees . the other 81 chimpanzees were owned by snprc , not nih , but nih provided some financial support for those chimpanzees through a different grant — a grant which provided funding for snprc's larger primate program and out of which a portion was used to support some of the care of chimpanzees . based on an analysis of these two different funding sources , we found that the per - chimpanzee per - day costs incurred by nih were significantly higher for the nih - owned chimpanzees at this facility compared to those that were supported by nih . according to keeling and snprc officials , they can reduce costs associated with their chimpanzee programs as the facilities' chimpanzee populations decline because they can reallocate staff , facilities , and other overhead to other parts of their larger primate programs .