this is consistent with recent experience in mexico . as shown in figure 6 , these four posts handled 77 percent of the mission's total passport and crba workload in fiscal year 2007 . they also handled 73 percent of the mission's total workload in the first 6 months of fiscal year 2008 . the whti workload estimates discussed in this report , which were provided to us on july 2 , are revisions to earlier projections discussed in our june 25 , 2008 , testimony . state's earlier projections had underestimated passport and crba workload by 31 percent for the mission in fiscal year 2007 . although its earlier estimates were too low for fiscal year 2007 , state's revised whti forecasts are actually lower than its previous estimates of passport and crba workload for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 . to accomplish our objectives , we analyzed state data on current and forecasted passport and nonimmigrant visa ( niv ) workload for all 10 consulates in mexico and assessed the magnitude of expected future workload increases . some card holders have had their cards lost or stolen and have already had them replaced at a consulate . as part of our review , we also assessed state's forecasting methodologies based on available information . along with this , we analyzed the reliability of state passport and niv workload data and found them sufficiently reliable for our purposes . in our review , we determined that state had employed a reasonable methodological approach in developing its niv forecasts for the mission and among the individual consulates . this serves as the starting point for the underlying demand line shown in figure 2 . then , state calculated an annual increase in underlying demand to account for estimated growth over time . using underlying demand as a baseline , state then developed a range of forecasts that reflect differing assumptions about the percentage of border crossing card holders who will renew their cards when they expire . in addition , we assessed how state used its workload forecasts to assist in developing these estimates . we compared these estimates to other documented assessments of resource needs , including those contained in rightsizing reports for mission mexico and consular packages for fiscal year 2007 . to gather further information on mission mexico's staffing and facility needs , and to learn about state's plans to prepare for the mission's upcoming workload increases and the implementation status of these plans , we performed fieldwork at five consulates in mexico — mexico city , guadalajara , monterrey , ciudad juarez , and tijuana . we chose these consulates because they were among the posts with the highest current and forecasted passport and visa workloads in mexico and also because they provided a mix of border posts and posts within the interior of the country . at each post , we observed visa and passport processing , and met with consulate management and representatives from the non - immigrant visa and american citizenship services units .