we have added this information to the report . ( see app . i for a more detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) at the time of the publication of this report , the house of representatives and the senate had passed similar versions of a bill to establish a new department of homeland security . under these bills , visa policy - making authority would be transferred to the new department , while the administration of visas would be retained by the department of state . some of the issues addressed in this report may become the responsibility of this new department . according to the program's legislative history , the visa waiver pilot program was created , in part , to improve u.s. foreign relations and to promote effective use of state department‘s resources . such data may include comparisons between the denial rates of persons presenting passports purported to have been lawfully issued by a particular visa waiver country and the denial rates of individuals traveling from the same country with nonimmigrant visas . ins has completed the assessments of five countries: argentina , belgium , italy , portugal , and slovenia . the assessment of uruguay is still pending . ins selected the countries for assessment on the basis of specific security concerns . for example , ins selected argentina because of the economic crisis and political instability in the country ; the attorney general subsequently removed argentina from the program because of those problems . ins selected belgium because of repeated thefts of blank belgian passports . ins accelerated the scheduling of the evaluations after the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 . however , although ins completed the field visits to the countries in december 2001 , it did not send the finalized reports with recommendations to justice until september 2002 . the next step in the evaluation process is for the attorney general , in consultation with the secretary of state , to decide whether each country should remain in the program or its participation should be terminated . the attorney general , in consultation with the secretary of state , may also immediately terminate a country's participation in the visa waiver program in the event of an emergency that threatens u.s. law enforcement or security interests . the law defines emergencies as the overthrow of a democratically elected government ; war ( including undeclared war , civil war , or other military activity ) in a severe breakdown in law and order affecting a significant portion of the program country's territory ; a severe economic collapse in the program country ; or any other extraordinary event in the program country that threatens the law enforcement or security interests of the united states . on february 20 , 2002 , the attorney general used this emergency provision to remove argentina from the visa waiver program because of the country's economic crisis , which had raised concerns that the number of argentines illegally immigrating to the united states would increase . ins had reported an increase in the number of argentine nationals attempting to remain illegally in the united states after their 90-day period of admission had expired .