we agree with this comment . however , the point of our finding is that the segment architectures themselves do not include performance goals and related time frames , as required by omb guidance . as a result , we have not modified our report to reflect this comment . ii for descriptions of each segment. ) ” and “have potential funding constraints been considered ? ” to maintain the portfolio , hud's guidance states that , as a result of ongoing control reviews , recommendations can be made to the tibec to maintain or adjust the it portfolio , including the cancellation of a project . for conducting postimplementation reviews , hud has developed detailed guidance . for example , these reviews are to be conducted within 6 to 18 months after the implementation of a project to validate actual investment results and extract lessons learned for itim process improvement . these reviews are to be conducted by designated teams that are selected annually by itim staff using identified criteria and represent a cross section of representatives from various disciplines , such as ea and it operations . the guide also provides a step - by - step process for conducting the reviews , as well as detailed evaluation criteria to be applied to help formulate findings . the results of this review process are to be provided to the reviewed project's sponsors , managers , and other stakeholders , and a summary of the results is to be provided to the tibwg . for evaluating the portfolio , hud does not have policies and procedures for reviewing , evaluating , and improving the performance of its portfolio . specifically , while the tibec charter establishes that it is responsible for conducting regular reviews to assess and improve the performance of hud's investment portfolio , policies and procedures that address this responsibility have not been established . ( see table 3 for a summary of our analysis relative to hud's policies and procedures for each stage 3 critical process. ) moreover , the department is not executing five of the six additional key practices associated with evaluating its portfolio . specifically , the department does not evaluate performance of its overall investment portfolio on a continuing basis and has not established criteria for assessing overall portfolio performance . ( see table 4 for a summary of our analysis of the practices related to the evaluating the portfolio critical process , with the exception of the establishment of policies and procedures , which is addressed in table 3. ) the ocio's director of itim attributed these portfolio management weaknesses to limitations in resources . the director of itim also stated that the department recognizes the need to improve it portfolio investment management , adding that a plan will be developed within the next 12 months to address the key practice weaknesses that we identified . without having defined and implemented practices for evaluating the performance of its it investment portfolios , hud will be limited in its ability to control the risks and achieve the benefits associated with the mix of legacy system and modernization investments that it selects . effective human capital management requires a strategic and proactive approach to meeting current and future human capital needs .