capacity . in june 2012 , dhs identified the resources needed to implement most ( 154 of 173 ) of its corrective actions , but needs to continue to identify resources for the remaining corrective actions ; determine that sufficient resources and staff are committed to initiatives ; work to mitigate shortfalls and prioritize initiatives , as needed ; and communicate to senior leadership critical resource gaps . dhs also identified ways in which it is leveraging resources to implement corrective actions , which is particularly important in light of constrained budgets . for example , in october 2012 , dhs reported that it is pooling resources and working across functional lines to create cross functional , matrixed teams and executive steering committees to ensure timely implementation of the strategy . however , it is too soon to determine whether this approach is a sustainable way for dhs to address the resource challenges and capacity gaps that have affected its implementation efforts at the department and component levels . demonstrated , sustained progress . dhs has made important progress in implementing corrective actions across its management functions , but it has not yet demonstrated sustainable , measurable progress in addressing key challenges that continue to remain within these functions and in the integration of those functions . dhs has implemented a number of actions demonstrating the department's progress in improving its management functions . for example , dhs established the office of program accountability and risk management in october 2011 to be responsible for the department's overall acquisition governance process . dhs also established a formal it program management development track and staffed centers of excellence with subject matter experts to that as of march 2012 , approximately two - thirds of the department's major it investments we reviewed ( 47 of 68 ) were meeting current cost and schedule commitments ( i.e. , goals ) . additionally , in the financial management area , dhs has reduced the number of material weaknesses in internal controls and obtained a qualified audit opinion on its fiscal year 2012 financial statements . dhs has also implemented common policies , procedures , and systems , such as those related to human capital , across its management functions . however , dhs still has considerable work ahead in many areas . for example , in september 2012 , we reported that most of dhs's major acquisition programs continue to cost more than expected , take longer to deploy than planned , or deliver less capability than promised . we identified 42 programs that experienced cost growth or schedule slips , or both , with 16 of the programs' costs increasing from a total of $19.7 billion in 2008 to $52.2 billion in 2011 — an aggregate increase of 166 percent . further , while dhs has defined and begun to implement a vision for a tiered governance structure to improve information technology ( it ) management , we reported in july 2012 that the governance structure covers less than 20 percent ( about 16 of 80 ) of dhs's major it investments and 3 of its 13 portfolios .