through these initiatives . the fssi mission is to encourage agencies to aggregate requirements , streamline processes , and coordinate purchases of like products and services in order to leverage spending to the maximum extent possible . additionally , the navy reported spending $145 million and achieving savings of $30 million through its strategic sourcing efforts in fiscal year 2011 ; the reported savings was almost 21 percent of the spending that went through strategic sourcing vehicles . agencies also continued to face challenges in obtaining and analyzing reliable and detailed data on spending , securing leadership support for strategic sourcing , and applying this approach to acquiring services . in 2012 , we reviewed the use of strategic sourcing across agencies with the largest procurement budgets in fiscal year 2011 and found that they were reluctant to apply strategic sourcing techniques to services , especially more complex ones . additionally , these agencies did not sufficiently support strategic sourcing efforts with staff and other resources . these challenges make it difficult for agencies to identify opportunities for strategic sourcing or measure the success of ongoing initiatives . in our strategic sourcing report , we found that agencies and federal strategic sourcing programs generally continued to rely on the government's current system for tracking contracting information data , and noted numerous deficiencies with this data for the purposes of conducting strategic sourcing research.obtain knowledge of procurement spending is a foundational component of an effective strategic approach . the analysis reveals how much is spent each year , what was bought , from whom it was bought , and who was purchasing it . the analysis also identifies where numerous suppliers are providing similar goods and services — often at varying prices — and where purchasing costs can be reduced and performance improved by better leveraging buying power and streamlining the number of suppliers to meet needs . for example , in a report on the use of strategic sourcing for office supplies , we reported that the general services administration ( gsa ) estimated federal agencies spent about $1.6 billion during fiscal year 2009 purchasing office supplies from more than 239,000 vendors . gsa used available data on spending to support development of the office supplies second generation fssi , which focuses office supply conducting spend analysis to spending to 15 strategically sourced contracts . agencies and the federal strategic sourcing program generally continued to rely on the government's current system for tracking contracting information data , fpds - ng , and noted numerous deficiencies with this data for the purposes of conducting strategic sourcing research . although we noted that some agencies had been able to identify some strategic sourcing opportunities despite flaws in the available data , the difficulty of obtaining reliable and detailed data on spending hindered their ability to assess which strategic sourcing opportunities offered the most potential benefits . this report presents those results . specifically , we ( 1 ) identified leading company practices for acquiring services , and ( 2 ) examined potential opportunities for federal agencies to incorporate these practices .