accomplishments . in addition , according to our internal control standards and leading practices on performance management , agencies should establish performance measures for their activities and continually compare actual performance data against these goals . to measure the effectiveness of its research grants , ies counts the number of ies - supported interventions that have been determined to be effective in improving student outcomes in particular areas . however , ies officials told us that its current performance measures , which were developed after the agency was established in 2002 , no longer capture the scope of ies's current research and priorities . furthermore , in some cases , senior ies officials told us they are not relevant to managing the agency's operations . for example , one measure relies on the results of a survey of potential users of the what works clearinghouse , but ies officials told us they will not conduct this survey because they do not believe it would yield enough useful information to be worth the investment . moreover , a new performance measure was reported in education's fiscal year 2014 budget request for ies that better reflects the results of its recent research . however this measure still does not include certain existing areas of ies research , such as research on the organization and management of schools and education systems . in addition , ies does not publicly report on the performance of the rels , which constitute one of the agency's largest investments . as we have reported , without performance measures , agencies may be at risk for failing to achieve their goals . ies officials told us they have begun work on revising their performance measures . officials told us that they plan to include revised performance measures in education's fiscal year 2015 budget request for ies , and that it has begun discussions with omb to establish these new measures . as of august 2013 , ies officials told us they intend for the new performance measures they are developing to include all programs , including the rels and its new grant programs for researcher - practitioner partnerships . research and technical assistance groups have taken various steps to provide relevant research to the education field . more specifically , to identify topics of relevance , rels , r & d centers , and comprehensive centers have engaged policymakers and practitioners in planning research and technical assistance activities . for example , beginning in 2012 , rels were required to conduct their work through new or existing partnerships of practitioners , policymakers , and others — called research alliances — which would work together to use data and research to address specific concerns in education , such as improving low - performing schools or college readiness . all three groups use a range of methods to disseminate their research evidence and products , including publications , conferences , and in some cases , technical assistance resources specifically for teachers , such as professional development courses . despite these efforts , stakeholders — including practitioners and policymakers — have raised concerns about the relevance and dissemination of some of the research and products these groups have produced .