iii . usaid has taken steps to improve documentation for award - type decisions by updating its guidance and templates but has not assessed whether these updates have resulted in timely and complete documentation of award - type decisions . usaid officials stated that assessments are conducted at the sub - bureau or mission level , rather than by specific sectors , such as for drg programs . as a result , usaid officials do not have plans to assess whether the newly updated processes and procedures have resulted in more timely documentation of drg award - type decisions . it is important that usaid document the award - type decision before it publishes a solicitation for the award because award - type decisions impact other award elements , such as the requirements for competition and oversight and whether profit is permissible under the award . until usaid assesses its updated processes and procedures , it cannot know if the steps it has taken have resulted in complete and timely documentation of award - type decisions as required by usaid guidance . for the awards in our sample , contracts generally differed from grants and cooperative agreements in terms of competition , scope of work , cost sharing and profit , and oversight requirements , among other characteristics . we identified differences in three award elements — competition , cost sharing and profit , and oversight requirements — that were generally consistent with the unique requirements provided for in procurement regulations and agency guidance . we also identified differences between the award types with regard to scope of work , and found certain activities were conducted under all three award types . usaid awarded most , but not all , of the contracts in our sample using full and open competition , according to usaid data . different federal and usaid requirements are in place regarding the use of competition procedures to award contracts than apply to grants and cooperative agreements . in accordance with the far , executive agencies such as usaid are required to promote and provide for full and open competition in awarding contracts , with only limited exemptions . usaid did not require full competition for any of the grants in our sample and required it for only about one - third of the cooperative agreements , according to usaid data . for the 41 awards in our sample , table 7 shows how many of each award type used full competition , limited competition , or no competition , based on usaid data . below are examples of the rationale usaid provided for limiting competition for selected contracts , grants , and cooperative agreements: usaid limited competition for one of the contracts in our sample because of potential impairment to a foreign aid program , and another contract was limited to local competitors . this exemption to full and open competition is based on a unique statutory authority available to usaid and other agencies operating foreign assistance programs , which has been implemented in the usaid supplement to the far .