his comments are reprinted in appendix i of this report . it also designated fdic as the administrator of these funds . as part of this function , fdic has an examination and supervision program to monitor the safety of deposits held in member institutions . fdic insures deposits in excess of $10 trillion for about 8,900 institutions . together , the three funds — the bank insurance fund , the savings association insurance fund , and the fslic resolution fund — have about $52 billion in assets . fdic had a budget of about $1.1 billion for calendar year 2004 to support its activities in managing the three funds . information system controls are a critical consideration for any organization that depends on computerized systems and networks to carry out its mission or business . without proper safeguards , there is risk that individuals and groups with malicious intent may intrude into inadequately protected systems and use this access to obtain sensitive information , commit fraud , disrupt operations , or launch attacks against other computer systems and networks . we have reported information security as a governmentwide high - risk area since february 1997 . our previous reports , and those of agency inspectors general , describe persistent information security weaknesses that place a variety of federal operations , including those at fdic , at risk of disruption , fraud , and inappropriate disclosure . congress and the executive branch have taken action to address the risks associated with persistent information security weaknesses . in december 2002 , the federal information security management act ( fisma ) of 2002 , which is intended to strengthen information security , was enacted as title iii of the e - government act of 2002 . in addition , the administration undertook important actions to improve security , such as integrating information security into the president's management agenda scorecard . moreover , the office of management and budget and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) have issued information security guidance to agencies . the objectives of our review were to assess ( 1 ) the progress fdic had made in correcting or mitigating weaknesses reported in connection with our financial statement audits for calendar years 2002 and 2003 and ( 2 ) the effectiveness of the corporation's information system controls . our evaluation was based on ( 1 ) our federal information system controls audit manual ( fiscam ) , which contains guidance for reviewing information system controls that affect the integrity , confidentiality , and availability of computerized data and ( 2 ) our may 1998 report on security management best practices at leading organizations , which identifies key elements of an effective information security program . our review was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . congress created fdic in 1933 to restore and maintain public confidence in the nation's banking system .