( recommendation 14 ) . we provided a draft of this report to commerce , dhs , eop , irs , omb , and ustr for review and comment . we received written comments from commerce , dhs , and irs , summarized below and reproduced in appendixes ii , iii , and iv . ita did not provide documents showing these processes . internal control standards states that agency component management should design and implement control activities , such as shutdown processes , through policy . agencies can effectively do so , in part , by documenting processes and roles and responsibilities for staff implementing those processes . during the fiscal year 2019 government shutdown , agencies recalled employees who were previously furloughed to return to work as the shutdown continued and circumstances changed . commerce stated that ita has documented its shutdown planning processes and recall processes for furloughed employees during a shutdown ( recommendation 5 ) . according to commerce , ita has also established and documented internal controls to limit virtual workspace access to excepted or exempt employees during a government shutdown ( recommendation 13 ) . in addition , commerce stated that it will develop an action plan to address the recommendation to better align its contingency plan with omb guidance ( recommendation 1 ) . dhs agreed with all four recommendations directed to it and cbp , and stated that it has begun to take steps to better address omb guidance on contingency plans ( recommendation 2 ) . in addition , dhs stated that cbp plans to analyze existing systems to determine which is best suited to track and document employee work during a government shutdown and will ensure that the chosen system is available should a future shutdown occur ( recommendation 7 ) . for the recommendation on developing controls for physical workspaces ( recommendation 8 ) , dhs stated that because cbp does not have systems capable of efficiently restoring physical access for furloughed employees , it would have to reinstate employee access individually and the cost would be substantial . dhs stated that cbp plans to update procedures to ensure more comprehensive workspace access guidance for furloughed employees . with regard to the recommendation on developing controls for virtual workspace access ( recommendation 11 ) , dhs stated that cbp believes that furloughed employees must be able to passively monitor the status of the government shutdown and access important agency communications using dhs - issued electronic devices . additionally , disabling and reactivating thousands of employee user accounts during a shutdown posed a significant burden . dhs said that cbp plans to update shutdown procedures to clarify allowed use of dhs - issued electronic devices by furloughed employees . we agree that cbp should update procedures on workspace access as suggested , and continue to believe that physical and virtual access controls are important during shutdowns in order to prevent misuse of government resources . we encourage cbp to improve their systems to be able to efficiently implement such controls . irs partially agreed with one recommendation addressed to it and disagreed with two others .