recapitalization metric . in 2001 , dod began using the facilities recapitalization metric , which determines the rate of restoration and modernization relative to the average expected service life of the inventory . it is also developing a recapitalization funding model . improved budgeting methods . in 2002 , dod changed the way that facilities funding is reported and tracked , replacing real property maintenance with sustainment , and restoration and modernization , having already created a separate structure for demolition and disposal in fiscal year 1999 . by tracking each element separately , it is now possible to link programs and budgets directly to program objectives and to better track performance relative to the objectives . dod gave the navy and the marine corps permission to delay this change until fiscal year 2003 . dod also developed and implemented the facilities demolition and disposal program , in which more than 62 million square feet of excess and obsolete facilities were demolished during fiscal years 1998 to 2001 . according to dod officials , one reason for the success of this program is that the services' budgets were not reduced in advance by the estimated maintenance costs of the facilities to be demolished . instead , as an incentive to dispose of what the services did not need , their budgets were left intact and the forecasted savings were reprogrammed by the services to other needs within their programs . cost factors handbook . in 1999 , dod issued its first defense facilities cost factors handbook , which categorizes defense facilities into approximately 400 categories and uses commercial benchmark costs to determine the annual cost per square foot ( or similar unit of measure ) to sustain each facility type . the purpose of the handbook was to standardize the method by which the services would determine the sustainment costs of their facilities and to establish a minimum sustainment funding level for facilities . facilities sustainment model . in 1999 , dod developed the facilities sustainment model , which estimates the annual sustainment cost requirement , adjusted for area costs , for each service and defense agency , based on the number , type , location , and size of its total inventory of facilities . by closing some installations and consolidating overlapping activities within and across the services , dod also intends to further reduce its inventory of facilities through an upcoming round of base realignments and closures starting in 2005 , as authorized by congress in 2001 . dod officials have testified that 20 to 25 percent of dod's infrastructure is not needed to meet current mission requirements . the process of realigning and closing bases , however , will take some years to accomplish and , while it is expected to produce significant long - term savings , typically it has required considerable up - front expenses . to prevent major commands from moving funds to other priorities , the army centralized and streamlined its facility management in october 2002 . the new installation management agency , which reports directly to the army assistant chief of staff for installation management , oversees all facilities maintenance funds for army installations and supervises seven regional management centers worldwide that are responsible for 10 to 30 installations each .