in particular , it has done the following . we also summarize the findings of the other studies . the clinger - cohen act of 1996 , omb guidance , dod policy , and practices of leading organizations provide an effective framework for managing information technology investments , not just when a program is initiated , but continuously throughout the life of the program . together , they provide for ( 1 ) economically justifying proposed projects on the basis of reliable analyses of expected life - cycle costs , benefits , and risks ; and ( 2 ) using these analyses throughout a project's life - cycle as the basis for investment selection , control , and evaluation decisionmaking , and doing so for large projects ( to the maximum extent practical ) by dividing them into a series of smaller , incremental subprojects or releases and individually justifying investment in each separate increment on the basis of costs , benefits , and risks . the department had not met these investment management tenets for sps . first , the latest economic analysis for the program — dated january 2000 — was not based on reliable estimates because most of the cost estimates in the 2000 economic analysis were estimates carried forward from the april 1997 analysis ( adjusted for inflation ) . only the cost estimates being funded and managed by the sps program office , which were 13 percent of the total estimated life - cycle cost in the analysis , were updated in 2000 to reflect more current contract estimates and actual expenditures / obligations for fiscal years 1995 through 1999 . moreover , the military services , which share funding responsibility with the sps program office for implementing the program , questioned the reliability of these cost estimates . however , this uncertainty was not reflected in the economic analysis using any type of sensitivity analysis . a sensitivity analysis would have disclosed for decisionmakers the investment risk being assumed by relying on the estimates presented in the economic analysis . moreover , the latest economic analysis ( january 2000 ) was outdated because it did not reflect the program's current status and known problems and risks . for instance , this analysis was based on a program scope and associated costs and benefits that anticipated four software releases . however , as mentioned previously , the program now consists of five releases , and subreleases within releases , in order to accommodate changes in sps requirements . estimates of the full costs , benefits , and risks relating to this additional release and its subreleases were not part of the 2000 economic analysis . also , this analysis did not fully recognize actual and expected delays in meeting sps's full operational capability milestone , which had been slipped by 3½ years and dod officials say that further delays are currently expected . such delays not only increase the system acquisition costs but also postpone , and thus reduce , accrual of system benefits . further , several dod components are now questioning whether they will even deploy the software , which would further reduce sps's cost effectiveness calculations in the 2000 economic analysis .