ii ) . in many instances , these actions were relatively minor in that they involved only several acres , but in other cases the actions involved creating enclaves with large acreages and millions of square feet of facilities under reserve component management to conduct training for not only the reserve component but also the active component as well . figure 1 shows the locations of dod's 10 major ( i.e. , sites exceeding 500 acres ) reserve component enclaves established under the previous brac rounds . as shown in figure 1 , the army has 7 enclave locations ; all of these enclaves , with the exception of fort devens ( a 1991 round action ) , were created during the 1995 round . the air force has the remaining 3 enclaves: air reserve — grissom air reserve base ( a 1991 round action ) ; homestead air reserve base ( a 1993 round action ) ; and march air reserve base ( a 1993 round action ) . neither the navy nor the marines created any major enclaves . many of dod's specific enclave infrastructure needs were not identified until after the commission for a brac round held its deliberations and had rendered its recommendations . although the army's enclave planning process — particularly for the 1995 brac round — began before the issuance of commission recommendations , specificity of needed infrastructure was not defined until after the recommendations were finalized . the subsequent size of several of these enclaves was much greater than seemingly reflected in commission recommendations that called for minimum essential facilities and land for reserve use . on the other hand , the air force's planning process was reportedly further along and enclave needs were better defined at the time the commission made its recommendations . in addition , dod's enclave - planning processes generally did not include a cross - service analysis of the needs of military activities or activities in the vicinity of a realigning or closing base with a proposed enclave . as a result , the commission often held deliberations without the benefit of some critical information , such as the extent of the enclave infrastructure needed to support training and potential opportunities to achieve benefits by collocating nearby reserve components on enclave property . while the army's enclave planning process for the 1995 round began previous to completion of the brac commission's deliberations , specific enclave infrastructure needs were not identified until after commission recommendations had been issued on july 1 , 1995 . army officials told us that it was recognized early in the process that the army wanted to retain the majority of existing training land at some of its bases slated for closure or realignment that also served as reserve component maneuver training locations , but time constraints precluded the army from fully identifying specific enclave needs before the commission completed decision - making .