hermo . health risk assessment of mobile communications . a finnish research programme . finland: 2007 . institution of engineering and technology . how has fcc set the rf energy exposure limit for mobile phones and how does fcc ensure compliance with the limit ? what actions have federal agencies and the mobile phone industry taken to inform the public about issues related to mobile phone health effects ? mann , c.r . muirhead , r.d . saunders , z.j . sienkiewicz , j.w . stather , and p.r . wainwright . “advice on limiting exposure to electromagnetic fields ( 0- 300 ghz ) .” documents of the nrpb , vol . national radiological protection board , 2004 . mobile telecommunications and health research programme . “report 2007.” united kingdom: october 2007 . to determine what is known about the human health effects of rf energy exposure from mobile phone use , we reviewed selected studies , including studies and reports that review and assess the scientific research as well as key individual studies . we identified these studies through literature searches in online databases , such as embase and medline , and interviews with officials from federal agencies , academic institutions , consumer groups , and industry associations . we also interviewed subject matter experts in a range of fields , such as public health and engineering . to determine the current research activities of federal agencies related to mobile phone use and health , we interviewed officials from fcc ; the department of health and human services' fda , centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , and national institutes of health ( nih ) ; department of defense ; department of labor's occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) ; and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . to determine the research activities of other organizations , we interviewed representatives of the international agency for research on cancer ( iarc ) , academic institutions , consumer groups , mobile phone industry associations , mobile phone manufacturers , and mobile phone providers . to determine how fcc set the rf energy exposure limit and ensures compliance with it , we reviewed fcc regulations and guidance . we also reviewed reports from international organizations that recommend rf energy exposure limits . we conducted interviews with officials from fcc and telecommunication certification bodies ( tcbs ) to understand their role in certifying mobile phones . we also interviewed representatives of the mobile phone industry and consumer organizations , and experts in rf energy exposure limits to obtain their perspectives on the testing and certification of mobile phones . to determine the actions federal agencies and the mobile phone industry have taken to inform the public about issues related to mobile phone health effects , we reviewed information on the public websites of cdc , epa , fcc , fda , nih , and osha . we also reviewed the user manuals for selected top - selling mobile phones of 2011 to identify the information manufacturers provided to consumers . ( see app . i for more information on our scope and methodology and app . ii for a list of studies we reviewed. )