( see app . i for details of our scope and methodology. ) the organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons consists of three entities: the conference of the states parties , the executive council , and the technical secretariat . the conference of the states parties currently comprises 147 representatives , one from each member state , and oversees the implementation of the convention . the executive council , consisting of 41 representatives from regionally distributed member states , meets in sessions throughout the year to supervise the secretariat's activities . the secretariat , headed by the director - general , manages the organization's daily operations , including implementing the inspection measures of the convention and preparing the organization's annual budgets and reports . about 60 percent of the secretariat's authorized staff level of 507 employees engages in the inspection - related activities mandated under articles iv , v , and vi of the convention . specifically , to verify compliance with article iv , the secretariat inspects declared chemical weapons stocks and destruction facilities . to verify compliance with article v , it inspects and monitors the destruction and conversion of chemical weapons production facilities . under article vi of the convention , the secretariat inspects commercial production facilities . as of july 2002 , the organization had conducted 1,210 inspections at the 5,066 declared chemical weapons sites and facilities that fall under the convention's purview . the secretariat supports member states in their efforts to implement the convention . it also encourages international cooperation and assistance among the member states as mandated by articles x and xi of the convention . under these provisions , the secretariat is authorized to coordinate the provision of assistance to member states that are the victims of chemical attacks . the secretariat also encourages economic and technological developments in the field of chemistry by encouraging trade and exchange of information among the member states . the organization's budget for calendar year 2002 is about $54 million . funding for opcw operations comes primarily from the 147 member states' annual contributions , which are based on the united nations scale of assessments . the other large source of funding is reimbursement payments for inspections conducted under articles iv and v of the convention . as required by the convention , members states with chemical weapons related – facilities must reimburse the organization for its inspection costs related to the destruction of chemical weapons ( article iv ) and the destruction of chemical weapons production facilities ( article v ) . the state department reports annually to congress on u.s. contributions to international organizations , including the opcw . in early 2002 , the united states and other member states to the convention raised concerns that the organization was not fulfilling its mandate because of a number of management weaknesses . according to the united states , such weaknesses included mismanagement by the organization's then director - general , as well as his advocacy of inappropriate roles for the organization — such as attempting to interfere with united nations weapons inspections in iraq . to address these management concerns , the conference of the states parties voted to remove the former director - general in april 2002 .