( see fig . these requirements generally include registering for work , reporting to an employer if referred by a state agency , accepting an offer of a suitable job , not voluntarily quitting a job or reducing work hours below 30 hours a week , or participating in a snap e&t program or a workfare program — in which recipients perform work on behalf of the state — if assigned by the state agency . specifically , we reviewed the plans to determine which services states planned to offer through partnerships with other programs in that year and the extent to which states documented their use of available workforce development system resources . to supplement our review of the plans , we also analyzed fiscal year 2018 summary data from fns on the number of state snap agencies that partnered with community - based organizations , workforce agencies , and community colleges , as well as the number with state snap agency - operated snap e&t programs . we also analyzed fiscal year 2010 and 2017 summary data from fns on mandatory and voluntary programs to determine how the number of state snap agencies with each program type changed over time . to assess the reliability of the fns summary data , we interviewed fns and state officials and reviewed relevant documentation . we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to help inform both of our objectives and gather additional information about state snap e&t programs , we selected five states: delaware , oregon , kansas , texas , and virginia . we selected these states based on several criteria to ensure our sample included state snap e&t programs with different service delivery approaches and other program characteristics , as well as geographic diversity . specifically , we considered state snap e&t participation and expenditures , including utilization of federal 50 percent reimbursement funds . in addition , we considered whether the state operated a mandatory or voluntary snap e&t program , a county - or state - administered program , and opted to be an abawd pledge state . we also considered whether the state submitted its snap e&t plan as part of a workforce innovation and opportunity act combined state plan . using semi - structured questions , we interviewed officials from the state agencies responsible for administering snap in the five selected states . we gathered information on snap e&t administration at the state level , including information on partnerships ; program participation and expenditures ; data collection efforts , including those related to assessing program outcomes ; and any challenges to administering the program , as well as efforts to address such challenges . we conducted site visits to our selected states in which services are provided through partnerships with local providers — delaware , oregon , texas , and virginia — and interviewed selected local program staff with knowledge of snap e&t program operations , participant characteristics , and coordination with the state snap agency who provide snap e&t services in both urban and rural areas . we conducted these visits in february and march 2018 .