ilities h y . recent changes to staff and working relationships within the soc could pose future challenges to dod's and va's efforts to develop joint policy . since december 2008 , the soc has experienced turnover in leadership and changes in policy development responsibilities . the soc is undergoing leadership changes caused by the turnover in presidential administrations as well as turnover in some of its key staff . for example , the dod and va deputy secretaries who previously co - chaired the soc departed in january 2009 . as a short - term measure , the secretaries of va and dod have co - chaired a soc meeting . dod also introduced other staffing changes to replace personnel who had been temporarily detailed to the soc and needed to return to their primary duties . dod had relied on temporarily - assigned staff to meet soc staffing needs because the soc was originally envisioned as a short - term effort . in a december 2008 memo , dod outlined the realignment of its soc staff . this included the transition of responsibilities from detailed , temporary soc staff and executives to permanent staff in existing dod offices that managed similar issues . for example , the functions of loa 7 ( legislation and public affairs ) will now be overseen by the assistant secretary of defense for legislative affairs , the assistant secretary of defense for public affairs , and the dod general counsel . dod also established two new organizational structures — the office of transition policy and care coordination and an executive secretariat office . the office of transition policy and care coordination oversees transition support for all servicemembers and serves as the permanent entity for issues being addressed by loa 1 ( disability evaluation system ) , loa 3 ( case management ) , and loa 8 ( personnel , pay , and financial support ) . the executive secretariat office is responsible for performance planning , performance management , and soc support functions . according to dod officials , the new offices were created to establish permanent organizations that address a specific set of issues and to enhance accountability for policy development and implementation as these offices report directly to the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness . currently , many of the positions in these new offices , including the director positions , are staffed by officials in an acting capacity or are unfilled . dod's changes to the soc are important because of the potential effects these changes could have on the development of policy for recovering servicemembers . however , officials in both dod and va have mixed reactions about the consequences of these changes . some dod officials consider the organizational changes to the soc to be positive developments that will enhance the soc's effectiveness . they point out that the soc's temporary staffing situation needed to be addressed , and also that the two new offices were created to support the soc and provide focus on the implementation of key policy initiatives developed by the soc — primarily the disability evaluation system pilot and the new case management programs .