v . the objectives of this report were to analyze , for medicaid and schip in selected states , differences in ( 1 ) enrollment requirements , particularly application and eligibility determination practices , and ( 2 ) health plan and physician participation and payments to plans and physicians . with regard to both objectives , we were also asked to consider whether differences between medicaid and schip might have implications for children's access to care . to do this , we conducted telephone interviews of medicaid and schip state , county , and private sector officials responsible for medicaid and schip administration in 10 states . we visited four states , and we analyzed data from states' programs as well as federal medicaid and schip program reports and documents . because states' medicaid programs varied considerably , data collected from states did not always represent the same time frames . we asked states to provide their latest available data , which ranged from 1999 to the summer of 2001 . in addition , we reviewed published studies and reports on application and eligibility determination practices , plan and physician participation , and provider payment issues in medicaid and schip . we also relied on information from our previous work . to analyze the extent of programmatic differences for the two reporting objectives , we selected 10 states that had schip programs with separate child health programs . these states were alabama , california , colorado , florida , kansas , michigan , new york , north carolina , pennsylvania , and utah . with one exception , these were the same states included in our previous medicaid and schip comparison report . in selecting these states , we considered attributes of schip separate child health programs , such as administrative structure and the method of providing services ( fee - for - service ( ffs ) or managed care ) compared to medicaid programs in each state . we also selected states whose schip programs had been in operation since january 1999 and represented a range of geographic locations . we made site visits to four of these states ( california , colorado , michigan , and new york ) to probe certain issues more deeply and obtain the multiple perspectives needed . we selected these four states primarily because of their geographic distribution , the varying sizes of their medicaid and schip enrollments , and their different program administration structures . for example , the medicaid program in california operates at the county level , while schip operates statewide ; in contrast , michigan operates both medicaid and schip out of the same state agency . during the four site visits , we interviewed representatives of programs — including state , county , and private sector officials — as well as a wide range of groups , including state medicaid and schip directors and their staffs ; managed care plan officials ; local organizations responsible for assisting families with applications ; contractors and other staff responsible for determining eligibility and for enrolling children in medicaid and schip ; physician organizations , such as local chapter officials of the american academy of pediatrics ; and child health advocacy organizations .