more information . business identity theft refund fraud ( business idt ) occurs when thieves create , use , or try to use a business' identifying information to claim a tax refund . in january 2020 , gao found that the medical surgical prime vendor program duplicates parts of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) federal supply schedule program . va spends billions of dollars annually on procurement of medical supplies to support care for veterans at its 170 medical centers but has not assessed whether its efforts are duplicative . va procures medical supplies through both its own medical surgical prime vendor program and through the federal supply schedule program — a government - wide program , parts of which the general services administration has long delegated to va . however , va has not assessed whether duplication across these programs is necessary or if efficiencies could be gained . gao cannot estimate the savings that might be associated with this action because such savings will be dependent on whether , when , and how va takes action . new action: gao recommended that the secretary of veterans affairs should take steps to assess duplication between va's medical - surgical prime vendor and federal supply schedule programs to determine if this duplication is necessary or if efficiencies can be gained . agency comments and gao's evaluation: va agreed with this recommendation . gao provided a draft of this report section to va for review and comment . va provided technical comments which gao incorporated as appropriate . gao - 19-511 . washington , d.c.: july 17 , 2019 . gao provided dod with a draft of this report section for comment . dod provided technical comments , which gao incorporated as appropriate . washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2018 . gao provided a draft of this section to the dod for review and comment . dod did not provide comments on this report section . depot maintenance: dod should adopt a metric that provides quality information on funded unfinished work . gao - 19-452 . washington , d.c.: july 26 , 2019 . gao provided a draft of this report section to ginnie mae for review and comment . ginnie mae did not have any comments on the draft but noted that it is working diligently on the recommendations . ginnie mae: risk management and staffing - related challenges need to be addressed . gao - 19-191 . washington , d.c.: april 3 , 2019 . gao provided a draft of this report section to irs for review and comment . irs's technical comments were incorporated above . tax debt collection contracts: irs analysis could help improve program results and better protect taxpayers . gao - 19-193 . washington , d.c.: march 29 , 2019 . gao provided a draft of this report section to irs for review and comment . in its response , irs stated that it is working with treasury on guidance to address third - party reporting on certain taxable transactions involving virtual currency . gao will review this guidance when it is available . virtual currencies: additional information reporting and clarified guidance could improve tax compliance . gao - 20-188 . washington , d.c: february 12 , 2020 .