benchmarking . to benchmark , depot officials visit another depot to compare performance and find improvement ideas , particularly best practices and lessons learned related to weapon systems and depot management . our analysis of site visit and survey data shows 10 of the 17 depots reported benchmarking trips . for example , in 2018 the marine corps albany production plant sent a team of managers and technicians from their electronics and fabrications branches on a benchmarking trip to learn best practices from the team at tobyhanna army depot . they visited six areas , where they observed processes and ideas that they could take back to their plant . in its trip report , the marine corps albany production plant team highlighted a number of processes that increased efficiency in the electronics shop at tobyhanna army depot , such as steps to eliminate unnecessary travel in sheet metal processes and updated electronics workstations . according to our prior work , benchmarking is useful for reducing internal resistance to change — a barrier to sharing best practices and lessons learned cited by the depots — because knowing what others actually are accomplishing changes perceptions of what can be done and what should be attempted . one depot told us that it intentionally brings maintainers and depot officials together on benchmarking trips so that the maintainers can benefit firsthand from seeing the best practices and lessons learned . dod has communication challenges , such as the lack of awareness of venues , that may hinder the ability of the 17 depots to share best practices and lessons learned . while many sharing venues exist , such as working groups , the depots' knowledge of them has gaps . according to our survey , 12 of the 17 depots reported being unaware of the existence of some venues where best practices and lessons learned can be shared . additionally , 7 of the 17 depots reported not knowing who to contact to participate in some venues for sharing best practices and lessons learned . moreover , in our interviews officials explained that staff turnover is also a challenge . specifically , officials from one depot said that when the depot representative to a venue leaves , the institutional knowledge of the venue and its point of contact can be lost . they recounted having to resort to cold - calling other depots for information . depots also reported that their staff did not attend best practices and lessons learned venues because they believed that those venues were for higher command levels . for example , one depot expressed confusion about the industrial base commanders' meeting and reported that while the depot officials were aware of the meeting , they believed that it was for officials at a higher level , such as their materiel command . department of defense instruction 4151.18 states that dod materiel maintenance programs should adopt business practices and quality management processes to continuously improve maintenance operations and maintenance production , achieve cost savings and avoidance , and realize process cycle time reduction . further , gao's standards for internal control in the federal government states that management should communicate quality information down and across reporting lines to enable personnel to perform key roles in achieving objectives .