cnmi . in its written comments , the cnmi government said the draft report fairly characterized current conditions in the cnmi and stated that the findings were similar to those in our last report . it noted that cnmi businesses were struggling to survive as they faced multiple factors , including the contracting economy , uncertainties surrounding the application of u.s. immigration law , rising energy costs , and the global recession . it raised several questions and concerns regarding the report methodology . first , the cnmi government questioned that for some key past and future actions , such as reducing regular work hours and freezing hiring , no cnmi employers attributed the actions to the minimum wage increases . without it , the economy falls apart.” reduced benefits and work hours “there has been cost - cutting . they got rid of benefits . there's no annual leave or vacations.” “if we have another 50 cent increase , hours are reduced — no more eight hours a day , it'll be six hours a day . so if the rate goes up , it doesn't matter . “if there's no job for me , because i'm from western samoa , where can i find work and money for my family ? ” “those that lost their jobs after closed are staying at home , doing nothing , went back home , or they're on social services. cnmi employment fell by about 13 percent from 2008 to 2009 and by about 35 percent from 2006 to 2009 , largely reflecting the closure of the cnmi's last remaining garment factories . in addition , we estimate that less than 1,000 temporary federal jobs funded beginning in june 2009 will end when federal funding is no longer available . inflation - adjusted average earnings of cnmi workers who maintained employment rose by 3 percent from 2008 to 2009 and remained largely unchanged , with a slight drop of .5 percent , from 2006 to 2009 , according to cnmi government data . in addition , over both periods , the minimum wage increased by significantly more than inflation . in discussion groups , private sector employers said minimum wage increases imposed additional costs during a time in which multiple factors made it difficult to operate . according to cnmi government payroll data , about 17 percent of government workers are paid at or below $7.25 and would be affected by the minimum wage increases by 2016 . in the tourism industry , close to three - quarters of hourly - wage workers in june 2010 were at the current minimum wage , and future scheduled increases through 2016 would affect 95 percent of those workers . tourism questionnaire employers reported that they took cost - cutting actions from june 2009 to june 2010 , including reducing hours and freezing hiring ; employers also reported plans to take the same types of actions by early 2012 , as well as laying off workers . few employers — weighted by numbers of employees — attributed their past cost - cutting actions largely to the minimum wage increases , and one - half or less did so for each of the planned actions .