business act . however , none of the legal arguments that the agencies raised caused us to revise our conclusions or recommendations . for example , the department of the interior stated that the assistant to whom the osdbu director reported was the agency head for acquisition matters , in accordance with the far . we responded that interior's designation of the assistant secretary as its “agency head” for procurement powers did not mean that the person thereby became its agency head for purposes of section 15 ( k ) ( 3 ) . several agencies also commented on the effectiveness of their small business programs and reporting structure . during our interviews for this report , officials generally did not state that their agencies were complying with the requirement . rather , they commented on how their current reporting structures were working . for example , officials at five agencies stated small business matters were not suffering as a result of the structure . additionally , in follow - up interviews , four osdbu directors noted that limited budgetary resources hindered their efforts to reach out to small businesses . we also asked the osdbu directors to indicate the extent to which they cooperated and consulted with sba in carrying out their responsibilities . twenty - one directors reported that they cooperated and consulted with sba to a great or very great extent . in their written comments , more than half of the directors noted they participated in sba - sponsored activities and initiatives . for instance , 13 reported attending or sending staff to monthly sba small business procurement advisory council meetings . the number of osdbu directors surveyed who did not view a section 15 ( k ) function as their current responsibility varied , depending on the specific function . the number ranged from 1 who did not view maintaining supervisory authority over osdbu personnel as a function to 11 who did not view assisting small businesses to obtain payments from prime contractors as a responsibility . in their written comments and follow - up interviews , the directors who did not view a section 15 ( k ) function as their responsibility generally stated that contracting , acquisition , or program staff performed it . it was not clear from our survey results the extent to which osdbu directors are involved in those functions carried out by other agency staff . appendix iii provides details on the agency personnel other than osdbu staff who carry out certain section 15 ( k ) functions . in 2010 , a smaller number of osdbu directors than in 2003 viewed additional procurement activities such as developing solicitations , evaluating proposals , developing factors for evaluating solicitations , and monitoring small businesses as roles of the osdbu ( see fig . for example , 3 directors reported that developing proposed solicitations was a role of the osdbu in 2010 , compared with 9 directors in 2003 . the majority of the 22 directors who reported they did not carry out this function commented that their agencies' contracting offices performed this role . of these 22 directors , 6 reported that the osdbu played a collaborative role , such as reviewing solicitation language .