and libraries . .” based on this direction , and following the recommendations of the federal - state joint board on universal service , fcc established the schools and libraries universal service support mechanism , commonly referred to as the e - rate program . fcc designated usac to carry out the day - to - day activities of the program , which is funded from statutorily mandated payments to the universal service fund . fcc oversees usac and the program through rule - making proceedings , enforcement actions , audits of participants , and reviews of funding decision appeals from participants . fcc also reviews usac's procedures , including its process for reviewing applications for funding ; meets frequently with usac staff ; and provides guidance letters to usac . a memorandum of understanding between fcc and usac , first executed in june 2007 and updated in september 2008 , as well as fcc orders and rules , set forth the roles and responsibilities of the two parties in the management , oversight , and administration of the program . what are fcc's performance goals and measures for the e - rate program , and how do they compare to key characteristics of successful goals and measures ? to answer these questions , we analyzed data from usac on applications , funding commitments , and disbursements for the first 10 years of the e - rate program . we obtained from the department of education's national center for education statistics the most recent complete listings of public schools , private schools , and libraries , and compared these listings to the entities that applied for e - rate funding during a comparable time period . we used this comparison as a basis to determine the rates at which eligible entities participated in the e - rate program and characteristics of participants and nonparticipants . we determined that the data obtained from usac and the department of education were sufficiently reliable for the purposes specified . we interviewed six nonparticipants chosen on the basis of their entity type — public school , private school , or library — and whether they were located in a rural or urban area to obtain anecdotal information on reasons eligible entities do not apply for support . we conducted a web - based survey of 697 beneficiaries selected by drawing a stratified , random sample from about 31,000 applications for funding year 2006 to obtain their views on program requirements and how to improve the program , among other things . this report does not contain all of the results from the survey ; the survey and a more complete tabulation of the results , as well as detailed statistics on the results of our participation analysis , can be viewed at gao - 09-254sp . we reviewed fcc documentation on the agency's performance goals and measures for the e - rate program and compared this information with literature on results - oriented management and effective practices for setting performance goals and measures .