food . three airlines in our review provide for meals for passengers inconvenienced by flight disruptions in their contracts of carriage . for example , jetblue's contract of carriage provides for meal vouchers or pizza for flight delays of 6 or more hours . in addition , airlines may deliver meals or offer other amenities to passengers waiting for delayed or canceled flights , even in the absence of the promise of food in the contract of carriage . in these cases , additional accommodations may be publicly announced on airline websites , by social media accounts , or through statements to the press , or they may be provided directly to individual flights or passengers at the airport . for example , in response to severe thunderstorms in 2017 , delta had pizza delivered to passengers waiting in airports across the southeast . monetary compensation or travel credit . inconvenienced passengers are not entitled to monetary compensation in the case of a flight delay or cancellation in the united states , and none of the airlines in our review includes such compensation in their contracts of carriage . nevertheless , two airline contracts of carriage include provisions for travel credit — above and beyond a refund — for flight disruptions . jetblue's contract of carriage provides for travel credit for canceled or delayed flights with several tiers , depending on the timing of the cancellation or length of the delay . for example , passengers delayed over 6 hours are entitled to $250 credit for future travel on jetblue . likewise , alaska's contract provides for a discount code for future travel ( and a letter of apology ) for passengers delayed longer than 2 hours . although not included in delta's contract of carriage , the airline provided $200 in travel vouchers to all customers with flight disruptions lasting at least 3 hours for two of the it outages we identified , according to airline representatives . as mentioned above , collecting and analyzing passenger complaints is one way dot helps ensure that an airline fulfills its obligations included in its contract of carriage and customer service plan , as well as any additional accommodations that may be publicly offered . our review of passenger complaints filed with dot stemming from airline it outages found that they included complaints related to the lack of monetary compensation for delayed or canceled flights and refusals to refund other expenses , such as rental cars or missed hotel or cruise reservations , among other concerns . for example , complaints related to a southwest outage in 2016 included several related to lack of compensation or other amenities , such as food or hotel stays offered by the airline . as noted above , southwest's contract of carriage does not provide for compensation , food , or hotel stays in the event of a delay or cancellation . complaints filed after the delta outage of 2016 acknowledged receipt of a $200 travel voucher in compensation or a hotel voucher , but pointed to other non - refunded expenses incurred or difficulties in redeeming these vouchers . the three consumer or passenger advocacy groups with whom we spoke raised several concerns with regard to passengers inconvenienced by airline it outages .