part 1500-1508 . to determine how agencies implement their legislative requirements , we interviewed u.s. government officials from the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , usaid , and the departments of state and the treasury ( treasury ) , as well as expert staff from environmental non - governmental organizations . because not every agency keeps complete records of its environmental oversight activities or has internal policies governing such actions , certain procedural documentation could not be provided . in such cases , we relied on agency officials' testimonial evidence . to examine agencies' ability to identify and address environmental concerns of proposed world bank group projects , we reviewed agency documents such as periodic reports to congress , agency decision memos , and the u.s. government's voting record on world bank group proposals . we also interviewed u.s. government officials from epa , usaid , and the departments of commerce , state , and treasury . in addition , we interviewed relevant world bank group officials from the international bank for reconstruction and development , the international development association , the international finance corporation , and the multilateral investment guarantee agency , as well as environmental experts from nongovernmental organizations , and the private sector . to determine the number of world bank group projects that the u.s. executive director abstained from voting on due to the requirements of the pelosi amendment , we collected data from treasury on the u.s. executive director's voting record from january 2004 through may 2008 . we also used these data to identify projects supported by the u.s. executive director that treasury determined may have significant environmental impacts , but that the u.s. executive director supported based on treasury's determination that such impacts have been addressed and mitigated in the design of the project . to assess the reliability of treasury's data on the u.s. executive director's voting record , we ( 1 ) interviewed the treasury official responsible for managing the team of analysts who record data on the status of multilateral development bank projects ; and ( 2 ) reviewed the voting record data . during the course of our review , we identified incomplete data fields and manual data entry errors , such as duplicate entries of the same project . however , based on our intended use of the data — to identify how the u.s. executive director voted on particular world bank group projects — and the results of our assessment , we determined that the data provided were sufficiently reliable for the this purpose . because treasury does not maintain a database of the projects it reviews for compliance with the pelosi amendment , we requested that the agency create a list of projects receiving such a review for calendar years 2006 through 2008 . the treasury analyst conducting these reviews compiled for us an estimate of the projects she reviewed during this time frame . she stated that she compiled the list from a manual log she keeps along with archived emails . although the analyst stated that the list was generally accurate it is possible that a few projects may not have been captured . we determined , however , that the data provided were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .