researchers . the seven researchers reported mixed views of the prv programs as an incentive for drug development , and their perceptions of the three programs varied . for example , when asked to describe the incentive for drug development provided by the tropical disease prv program , two researchers described it as “not significant,” and two researchers described it as “somewhat significant.” however , one of these researchers told us the tropical disease prv program encouraged drug development , particularly for diseases such as tuberculosis and malaria for which a drug is potentially more commercially viable . regarding the rare pediatric disease prv program , three researchers told us they have heard anecdotally that the program is an incentive to develop or continue development of rare pediatric disease drugs . in contrast , one researcher told us many drug sponsors have received a rare pediatric disease prv for drugs they would have produced anyway , and another told us he did not believe the rare pediatric disease prv provided an adequate incentive for adding new drugs into a drug sponsor's pipeline . finally , four researchers told us it was too early to evaluate the medical countermeasure prv program as an incentive . stakeholders . the seven stakeholders also reported mixed views on the prv programs as an incentive for drug development . for example , one stakeholder told us that drug sponsors have entered particular drug development areas because of the prv programs , and the prv program has been pivotal to the financial planning of small drug sponsors working in the medical countermeasures and rare pediatric disease spaces . in contrast , two other stakeholders told us the prv programs are an incentive to obtain fda approval for a drug that has already been developed and marketed outside of the united states but are not an incentive for developing new drugs . one of these stakeholders and an additional stakeholder also noted that prvs are often a source of additional revenue to drug sponsors that would have developed their prv drug anyway and did not need the prv to finance drug development . the number of prvs awarded by fda could influence the effectiveness of the prv programs as incentives , according to several drug sponsors , researchers , and stakeholders we contacted . specifically , some indicated that the potential revenue from the sale of a prv could decline if more prvs are awarded , and there is an increased supply of prvs available for sale . specific comments included the following: one drug sponsor told us that , while the number of prvs on the market was a concern , they have remained valuable . another drug sponsor told us it was not concerned with the relative value of prvs , because it did not plan to sell its remaining prvs and would purchase more in the future if prvs would benefit drugs in its pipeline . one researcher told us lower prices for prvs merited concern , because the prv alone might not be sufficient to motivate drug development . the researcher indicated that a drug would also need either sufficient sales or additional government incentives .