taos . taos , which has received state and local subsidies since 2000 , also continues to struggle to generate enough passenger demand . though the state renewed the original 1-year state grant twice for a total of $570,000 ( in addition to local matching funds ) , monthly enplanements have not exceeded 295 ( march 2000 ) . according to an airline official , the service is still not profitable . available studies presaged some communities' inability to develop sustainable service . what implications does this analysis have for federal efforts to assist small community airports ? to answer these questions , we analyzed department of transportation ( dot ) information and contacted numerous state , airport , community , airline and industry trade group officials . we defined small communities as those served by small hub or nonhub airports . this encompassed a wide variation in communities , from isolated areas with populations of a few thousand and no scheduled air service to urban areas with populations of several hundred thousand and service from multiple airlines . using federal grant applications and interviews with officials throughout the aviation community , we identified 292 small communities that had taken some steps ( many as part of state - commissioned air service studies ) to try to increase passenger demand or increase or enhance the supply of air service . to determine what challenges they faced , what actions they had taken to improve air service , and how successful some of these communities have been , we interviewed officials at 98 airports where efforts appeared to be more extensive . to develop further information on the factors that may increase the likelihood of success , we studied 12 of these communities in more detail . we selected these communities principally because they had used a variety of programs to improve their air service . we also selected them because they varied in population , level of economic activity and geographic location . we conducted our work from march 2002 to december 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . additional information on our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . in 1978 the congress deregulated the airline industry , phasing out the federal government's control over domestic fares and routes served and allowing market forces to determine the price , quantity , and quality of service . most major “network” carriers , free to determine their own routes , developed “hub - and - spoke” networks . these carriers provide nonstop service to many spoke cities from their hubs . the airports in the small spoke communities include the smallest airports in the nation's commercial air system . depending on the size of those markets ( i.e. , the number of passengers flying nonstop between the hub and the spoke community ) , the network airlines may operate their own large jets or use regional affiliate carriers to provide service , usually with regional jet or turboprop aircraft . however , low - fare carriers , such as southwest airlines and jetblue airways , use a different model , flying point - to - point generally to and from secondary airports in or near major metropolitan areas , such as ontario international near los angeles and chicago midway .