doj did not have comments . fcc in commenting on the draft report supported our recommendations and indicated it would work with ntia to incorporate the report's findings and recommendations in future work . fcc also emphasized a number of actions it has taken to encourage and facilitate new technologies that might improve spectrum efficiency . the department of commerce did not comment on our recommendations but noted that ntia and fcc “have met regularly to explore areas of common focus in spectrum management.” while we agree that meeting regularly is an important step toward building a more cohesive spectrum management process , it is not clear that these discussions have addressed or will address our recommendations to improve spectrum efficiency . continued difficulty in reaching consensus between ntia and fcc will hinder opportunities to accommodate new technologies and users and improve spectrum efficiency . several of the agencies' comments indicated their commitment to promoting greater flexibility and more efficient use of radio spectrum . overall , the comments from agencies , other than ntia and fcc , were generally technical in nature and were incorporated where appropriate . in addition , the agencies provided a few comments relating to our findings and recommendations . most notably as follows: nsf observed that future use of spectrum through software - defined cognitive radios could adversely affect the operation of sensitive radio telescopes that nsf supports . we agree that this is a valid concern because these systems are “passive” — or receive only — and their use of spectrum could go unnoticed . as noted in this report , when seeking to increase spectrum sharing , spectrum leaders will need to carefully consider incumbent users operations and define appropriate rules to obviate those impacts . nsf , as well as dhs , also commented on our recommendations directed to the ntia administrator . specifically , nsf noted that incorporating spectrum efficiency measures into the certification process of major systems could prove difficult and suggested either deleting or modifying the recommendation to focus on incentives . however , our recommendation does not call for the creation of measures but rather emphasizes the need for ntia to focus on efficiency when considering certification . but in doing so , ntia may determine that measures are an appropriate means to help increase spectrum efficiency and may be applicable in some cases . further , we have recommended that ntia take action to determine appropriate incentives for agencies to use spectrum more efficiently . therefore , we did not modify our recommendations . table 1 describes each step . ntia and fcc implement the command - and - control approach differently because of differences in their missions . for example , ntia assigns spectrum resources through an administrative process that emphasizes interdepartmental advice and coordination among federal agencies , while fcc has used a number of administrative processes including comparative hearings and lotteries as well as its authority to assign spectrum through auctions . however , because so much of the spectrum is shared between federal and nonfederal users , fcc and ntia must coordinate their management of spectrum . for many decades , command - and - control has been the most commonly used approach for managing the spectrum .