distribution . the distribution system carries electric power out of the transmission system to industrial , commercial , residential , and other consumers . three large electric grids , or interconnections , exist in the contiguous united states that collectively constitute the u.s. electric grid: the eastern interconnection , western interconnection , and electric reliability council of texas interconnection ( see fig . these interconnections , which extend into parts of canada and mexico , operate independently with limited ability to move electric power between them ; electric power is produced within an interconnection to meet demand in the same interconnection . the grid is generally considered to be resilient . historically , grid operators have been able to respond quickly to the adverse consequences of an incident — whether it is damage from a major hurricane or a falling tree — and quickly restore service . in some cases , electricity may be restored long before utilities fully recover from an incident . for example , in instances with physical damage to grid components , such as an event that damages many substations , it could take months or years to fully restore the equipment . the electricity industry has refined its power restoration processes after decades of experience in responding to disaster - related events , but restoration from a cyber - related event may be more challenging . for example , disaster - related events — such as hurricanes — may involve significant lead time before the incident . this allows owners and operators to take preemptive measures to protect their systems , develop restoration plans , and activate personnel . in contrast , cyberattacks may occur without warning , leaving owners and operators no time to prepare for a response . in addition , cyberattacks could target and damage specific types of components or facilities across a dispersed geographic area . responding to such an attack could be more difficult than to a localized disaster - related event since resources may be geographically distributed rather than concentrated in the same area . industrial control systems are typically network - based systems that monitor and control sensitive processes and physical functions , such as the opening and closing of circuit breakers on the grid . these systems support the control of electric power generation , transmission , and distribution . system operators — which are sometimes affiliated with a particular utility or sometimes independent and responsible for multiple utility areas — manage electricity flows through these systems . early industrial control systems operated in isolation , running proprietary control protocols using specialized hardware and software . in addition , many industrial control system components were in physically secured areas , and the components were not connected to it systems or the internet . however , industrial control systems are changing in ways that offer advantages to system operators but that also make them more vulnerable to cyberattacks . in particular , proprietary devices in these systems are being replaced by cheaper and more widely available devices that use traditional it networking protocols — including those that support remote access .