qms . as we reported in 2002 , the validity of the qms cms proposed to publicly report in november 2002 was unclear . although the validation study commissioned by cms found that most of the publicly reported qms were valid and reflected the quality of care delivered by facilities , long - term care experts have criticized the study on several grounds . for example , a 2005 report concluded that ( 1 ) the statistical criteria for the validity assessments were not stringent and ( 2 ) the researchers did not attempt to determine whether qms were associated with quality of care at the resident level . as a result , it is not clear whether a resident who triggers a qm ( eg , is assessed as having his or her pain managed inadequately ) is actually receiving poor care . the lack of correlation among the qms⎯a home may score well on some qms and poorly on others⎯also calls into question their validity as measures of overall quality . for example , for the 7th sow , cms contracted for one nursing home satisfaction survey to be conducted near the end of the contract period — too late to be of use in interim monitoring of the qios' performance . for the 8th sow , cms had planned to contract for two surveys but was forced to cancel the one planned for early in the contract period because it was unable to provide the names of intensive participants to its survey contractor . moreover , the lack of these data would preclude cms from independently verifying qio compliance with such contract requirements as the geographic dispersion of intensive participants in each state . cms evaluated qios' work with nursing homes primarily on the basis of changes in qm scores ; given the weaknesses of qm data , the current reliance on these data appears unwarranted . while cms actions to improve the mds instrument as a quality measurement tool are important , the agency has not yet established an implementation date . although multiple long - term care professionals believe that multiple indicators of quality , including deficiencies on homes' standard and complaint surveys and residents' and family members' satisfaction with care , should be used to measure quality improvement , cms is not currently drawing on these data sources to evaluate qios' efforts . recognized shortcomings in these other data sources — such as the understatement of survey deficiencies by state surveyors — underscore the importance of using multiple data sources to evaluate qio outcomes . to ensure that available resources are better targeted to the nursing homes and quality - of - care areas most in need of improvement , we recommend that the administrator of cms take the following two actions: further increase the number of low - performing homes that qios assist intensively . direct qios to focus intensive assistance on those quality - of - care areas on which homes most need improvement .