this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to questions . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact cody j. goebel at ( 202 ) 512-8678 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include toayoa aldridge , james lawrence , and david tarosky . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . many of these major initiatives are still in process . these projects include implementing a document management and imaging initiative , intended to eventually eliminate paper documents and allow sec staff to review and electronically file the large volumes of information that are part of litigation , examination , and enforcement activities . staff told us that the planned system will provide an agencywide electronic capture , search , and retrieval mechanism for all investigative and examination materials . converting sec's electronic data gathering analysis and retrieval ( edgar ) system into a searchable database that would help sec conduct various types of industry and trend analyses . edgar is the database system that public companies use to file registration statements , periodic reports , and other forms electronically . currently , edgar receives and archives data , but staff cannot immediately and easily analyze it . the goal is to create filings that will allow anyone to extract relevant data . implementing a disaster recovery program that is being designed to store and move large amounts of data among regional or district offices without first going through washington , d.c . the current project , when completed , will allow the agency to back up critical information and data on a daily basis at multiple locations . in addition to these agencywide initiatives , staff in the units responsible for mutual fund oversight have identified a number of other technology projects that could help to improve the efficiency of their operations . for example , ocie officials told us that they would like to provide audit guidance in an electronic format for examination staff , and create web site links for staff to use in accessing information useful in an examination . they said that having these capabilities would likely reduce the time required to complete examinations . ocie officials also stated that they are considering a longer - term project involving the development of a mutual fund surveillance program . on march 5 , 2004 , the sec chairman announced the formation of an internal task force to draft the outlines of this new surveillance program . previously turnover had been as high as almost 14 percent . ocie's director stated that the goal of such a surveillance program would be to identify indications of problems , and then target the particular fund or adviser for a follow - up inquiry . the units responsible for mutual fund oversight generally have been making progress in meeting their goals for hiring additional staff , but demands on their staff continue to grow .