( see fig . on average , disenrollees from pffs plans were generally sicker compared to the average for all beneficiaries in pffs plans . this pattern was also evident in other ma plans , although the average health status difference between disenrollees and all beneficiaries in these plans was less pronounced . beneficiaries' risk scores indicated that the projected health care expenditures , on average , of disenrollees from pffs plans were estimated to be about 6 percent higher than the average for all pffs beneficiaries . similarly , beneficiaries who disenrolled from other ma plans had projected health care expenditures that were , on average , estimated to be about 3 percent higher compared to average projected health care expenditures for all beneficiaries in other ma plans . pffs disenrollment rates differed depending on beneficiaries' age group and location ( see table 4 ) . older beneficiaries in pffs plans tended to disenroll at higher rates . for example , pffs beneficiaries age 85 and older had the highest disenrollment rate ( about 25 percent ) while beneficiaries younger than age 65 had the lowest disenrollment rate ( about 18 percent ) . see appendix i for more details on our scope and methodology . medicare is the federal government's health insurance program that covers more than 44 million people age 65 and older and certain individuals who are disabled or have end - stage renal disease . most medicare beneficiaries can choose to receive covered services through medicare ffs or through an ma plan if one is offered where they live . beneficiaries in medicare ffs and in ma plans , including pffs plans , pay monthly premiums and are responsible for cost sharing , which can be in the form of coinsurance ( a percentage payment for a given service that a beneficiary must pay ) , a copayment ( a standard amount a beneficiary must pay for a medical service ) , or a deductible ( the amount a beneficiary must pay before medicare ffs or an ma plan begins to pay ) . ma plans operate under annual contracts between ma plan sponsors and cms and provide medicare benefits in exchange for a monthly payment from cms for each beneficiary enrolled in the plan . beneficiaries can disenroll from ma plans during the annual coordinated election period , from november 15 through december 31 of a given year by enrolling in another plan or in medicare ffs . changes made during the annual coordinated election period take effect on january 1 of the following year . beneficiaries can also disenroll from ma plans once during the open enrollment period , from january 1 through march 31 of a given year . changes made during this time period take effect on the first day of the month following the plan's receipt of the beneficiary's request . relative to beneficiaries in other ma plans and medicare ffs in april 2007 , beneficiaries in pffs plans were healthier , generally younger , and more likely to live in rural areas with fewer ma options .