postal service . to respond to the second objective , we also contacted state and local government officials associated with the designated host city for the games , and we made inquiries of the 22 federal organizations listed above . the effort to identify federal funding and support was aided considerably by omb's implementation of our past recommendation to require a consolidated reporting of federal agency funding and support for the olympic games . specifically , the president's 2002 budget listed for the first time all federal olympic spending in one table , which identified the federal agencies and the amounts spent or planned to be spent for the 2002 games in salt lake city . we began with these listed agencies and obtained the necessary supporting information to verify or update their reported figures . how does the total cost of the various games compare with the various domestic and foreign governments' share of the cost ? how do the government - sponsored olympic - related projects and activities compare among the various games ? to meet your immediate need for information , we agreed to respond to these questions in two separate reports . this report addresses the first three questions listed above , as they pertain to the olympic and paralympic games held in the united states . specifically , this report identifies the reported total direct cost of planning and staging the winter olympic games held in 1980 at lake placid , ny ; the winter olympic games and paralympic games planned for 2002 at salt lake city , ut ; the summer olympic games held in 1984 at los angeles , ca ; and the summer olympic games and paralympic games held in 1996 at atlanta , ga . this report also identifies , to the maximum extent possible , total direct government funding and support at the local , state , and federal levels in the united states for each of these games . additionally , this report focuses on how the direct federal funding and support were used , and it identifies all of the reported federally sponsored projects and activities for each of the games . finally , this report identifies the federal funding and support specifically designated by congress for olympic - related purposes for each of the games in the united states and the amount of federal funding and support approved by the federal agencies and provided through their normal funding procedures . the second report will update the information presented herein and will respond to the last two questions you asked regarding the games discussed in this report . additionally , the second report will address all of your questions regarding the olympic winter games held in 1988 at calgary , canada ; and in 1994 at lillehammer , norway ; the olympic summer games held in 1992 at barcelona , spain ; and in 2000 at sydney , australia . the second report will be issued in 2002 . because there is no central source for all of the information you requested , we obtained cost data reported by the principal parties that funded and supported these events .