the fbi did not have any comments . the oig described actions planned and under way to address each of our recommendations . specifically , the oig stated that it is revising its online allegation form to ( 1 ) ensure complainants do not inadvertently provide personal data when their intent was to remain anonymous and ( 2 ) simplify and clarify to complainants the distinctions between filing an anonymous complaint versus filing a confidential complaint . the oig anticipates completing the changes to the online allegation form within 90 days of its letter . according to the oig , it has also implemented supervisory controls to provide oversight and quality control of intake analysts' work , including the movement or referral of complaints to dhs components . the oig also stated that it plans to develop policy and guidelines within 90 days of its letter to describe the circumstances under which the ig can obtain legal advice from dhs's office of legal counsel . in addition , the oig plans to revise its audit manual by october 31 , 2014 , to require the office of integrity and quality oversight to collect and maintain senior executives' signed annual independence statements . if implemented effectively , the oig's planned actions should address the intent of our recommendations . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of homeland security , and the dhs inspector general . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9869 or khana@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . the joint explanatory statement accompanying the department of homeland security ( dhs ) appropriations act , 2013 , directed gao to review the office of inspector general's ( oig ) organizational structure and whether its audit , investigation , and inspection functions are organizationally structured to ensure that independence standards are met . to meet the committee's time frames established in the explanatory statement , we briefed committee staffs on our preliminary observations in november 2013 . this report provides the results of our review to determine ( 1 ) the coverage that the oig's audits and inspections provided of dhs's key component agencies , management challenges , and high - risk areas ; ( 2 ) the extent to which the oig's organizational structure and roles and responsibilities were consistent with the inspector general act of 1978 , as amended ( ig act ) ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which the design of oig's policies and procedures for planning , reviewing , and reporting on audit , inspection , and investigation results was consistent with applicable independence standards . to determine the coverage that dhs oig's audits and inspections provided of dhs's key component agencies , management challenges , and high - risk areas , we reviewed the dhs agency financial reports for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 to identify dhs's key operational components .