( app . iii contains additional information on these oversight boards. ) gao has previously reported on oversight deficiencies related to the dhs irb , such as the board's failure to conduct required departmental reviews of major dhs investments ( including the failure to review and approve a key secure flight requirements document ) . to address these deficiencies , gao made a number of recommendations to dhs , such as ensuring that investment decisions are transparent and documented as required . dhs generally agreed with these recommendations . moving forward , it will be critical for these oversight entities to actively monitor secure flight as it progresses through future phases of systems development and implementation and ensure that the recommendations we make in this report are addressed . conditions 5 and 6 require tsa to build in sufficient operational safeguards to reduce the opportunities for abuse , and to ensure substantial security measures are in place to protect the secure flight system from unauthorized access by hackers and other intruders . tsa has generally achieved the statutory requirements related to systems information security based on , among other things , actions to mitigate high - and moderate - risk vulnerabilities associated with release 3 . to its credit , tsa had performed several of these key security steps for release 1 , such as: categorizing the system as high - impact , performing a risk assessment , and identifying and documenting the associated recommended security control requirements ; preparing security documentation such as a system security plan and loading security requirements into the developer's requirements management tool ; testing and evaluating security controls for the secure flight system and incorporating identified weaknesses in remedial action plans ; and conducting security certification and accreditation activities . tsa determined a criteria range for a date - of - birth match that was consistent with tsa office of intelligence policy . according to tsa officials , these matching criteria are consistent with secure flight's responsibilities as a screening program — that is , the system must process high passenger volumes and quickly provide results to air carriers — and that those responsibilities were considered when balancing the risk presented by the system's false - positive and false - negative rates . the contractor's date - of - birth criteria range , however , was wider than the range used by tsa , which the contractor stated was established based on expert analysis of an excerpt from the watch list . according to tsa officials , officials from tsa's office of intelligence reviewed the test results and determined that the records identified as false negatives by the contractor — that is , the records that were matched by the contractor but not by the secure flight system — did not pose an unacceptable risk and should not have been flagged , and that these nonmatches were designated as such in accordance with office of intelligence policies and tsa's no fly list security directive . these officials further stated that increasing the date - of - birth range would unacceptably increase the number of false positives generated by the system . federal law , standards , and guidance identify the need to address information security throughout the life cycle of information systems .