ero is divided into two steps . in the first step , a trained deca facilitator attempts to resolve a claim before the start of the informal stage of the current process . employees at stores participating in ero can call a toll - free number to discuss their concerns with a trained facilitator . for example , an employee could call about perceived discrimination over schedule changes , and the facilitator may discuss what had occurred and rationale for schedule changes ( eg , to cover absences ) . according to deca officials , some employees “self screen” during the facilitation process , deciding not to pursue an eeo complaint or to pursue another avenue , such as the negotiated grievance process . the second step of ero , which follows if facilitation is unsuccessful in resolving the employee's concerns , involves calling in a third - party mediator . according to a deca official , deca uses mediators from dod's office of complaint investigations , because they are trained , experienced adr professionals , and have a greater perception of neutrality as they do not work for deca . if mediation fails , an individual may choose to file a formal complaint . according to a deca official , ero seeks to reduce the processing time of the formal stage . to help achieve this goal , deca reduces processing times for two phases of the formal stage of the complaint process: ( 1 ) after a complainant files a formal complaint , deca has set a goal in ero of 14 days to accept , partially accept , or dismiss it ; and ( 2 ) after the report of investigation is completed , deca sends a notice informing the complainant that he or she has 7 days to either request a hearing or a final agency decision , reducing the time from 30 days under eeoc regulations . in addition , to further reduce processing time for ero cases , paper documents are replaced with electronic files . finally , according to a deca official , officials from deca and the office of complaint investigations can download relevant case documents from a secure shared drive for complaints filed under both ero and under the current eeo process . usaf's program , called compressed orderly rapid equitable ( core ) , focuses on the formal phase of the eeo complaint process . the program began january 1 , 2005 , at 29 continental u.s. sites and 2 overseas offices that we refer to as test bases . although the 31 test bases account for less than one - third of all usaf bases with eeo programs , they produce over 80 percent of all usaf eeo complaints . cases that involve class and mixed - case complaints or cases related to claims already accepted under the current federal eeo complaint process are not eligible to participate in core . core has a two - step process that begins at the time the complainant files a formal complaint . until a complaint is filed , usaf officials attempt early resolution of allegations of discrimination in the informal stage using the current federal eeo process .