uscis has reported a substantial reduction in its backlog . not all information held by the government is subject to foia . the act prescribes nine specific categories of information that can be exempt from disclosure , including , but not limited to , trade secrets and certain confidential commercial or financial information , certain personnel and medical files , and certain law enforcement records . when agencies deny all or part of a request , the act requires that agencies notify requesters of the reasons for the adverse determination and grants requesters the right to appeal the decision . the centralization enabled them to maximize their resources and focus on reducing their backlog of overdue requests . the component has also hired 10 additional staff since the centralization . in addition , in july 2008 , uscis awarded a backlog reduction contract intended to eliminate its backlog within 15 to 18 months from the award of the contract . each month , uscis sends reports to its field sites and other components that have outstanding records in order to expedite the process . according to program officials , these monitoring and oversight mechanisms have contributed to the reduction of the backlog of overdue requests . ice officials also reported that they have implemented monitoring and oversight mechanisms . the component operates a centralized program , where all of the requests are received at the main office . after a request is received , staff input it into a tracking system , and then it is assigned to the appropriate office for processing . the tracking system allows staff to obtain key information about the request , such as the responsible office , the date by which the records need to be received at the main office , and if applicable , the number of days by which the request is overdue . in addition , the program director generates a weekly report that identifies any requests that have not been responded to within the allotted time and sends messages to notify program offices of their overdue responses . in order to facilitate timely and efficient retrieval of records , program offices have the ability to provide their responses via e - mail to the main office . the program director stated that this monitoring process and the ability of program offices to send responsive records by e - mail have greatly improved the timeliness of responses to information requests and reduced the backlog of overdue requests . in technical comments on a draft of this report , usss stated that it has a system for tracking due dates for incoming requests and also has the ability to generate reports to monitor overdue requests to ensure timely responses . in contrast to these examples , the other major components have not yet implemented comparable monitoring and oversight mechanisms . for example , although cbp , fema , and tsa operate centralized foia programs where all requests are received or tracked at one location , none currently has a mechanism for obtaining responsive records from field offices expeditiously .