developing and selecting measures . cms funds and directs , primarily through contracts , the development of new cost and quality measures that can then be reported in both cms and state and private sector transparency tools . it also selects among available measures for reporting information in its own tools . through these two activities cms influences the extent to which relevant cost and quality information are made available to consumers . although cms's transparency tools are intended to provide consumers with the cost and quality information that they need to assess their health care options , the tools also serve a different role for providers . cms has released more detailed patient - level claims data to cms - approved qualified entities ( qe ) . established under ppaca , qes are organizations that are given access to medicare claims data to enable evaluation of the performance of providers and suppliers.cms officials , by having access to more detailed patient - level data , qes — selected based in part on their expertise in analyzing complex claims data — could help make available to consumers information on quality measures that use claims data , such as mortality and readmissions for specific conditions or procedures . hhs has begun to according to share these data with 13 organizations that have been approved to become qes , according to cms officials , but the organizations have only just begun to publicly share new cost or quality information based on these data . therefore , it is too early to tell to what extent the qe program will expand the cost and quality information available to consumers . although hhs has included transparency as part of its strategic plan , and set a specific goal to report on measures that meet consumer needs , it has not established specific procedures or performance metrics to ensure that the cost and quality information that it collects and publicly reports accomplish this goal . a key part of hhs's strategic plan to ensure optimal health care is to give the public the means to make more informed health care choices by improving transparency and providing public access to hhs's data on provider performance , among other things . furthermore , hhs has set a specific goal to report on measures that are important to consumers and other key audiences in ways that can be easily understood and readily acted upon . however , despite this goal , neither hhs , through its department - wide strategy , nor cms , through its agency - specific strategic plans , have established specific procedures or performance metrics to clarify how they will ensure that the particular needs of consumers are met , in the midst of competing demands from providers . in particular , they have not specified how the particular needs of consumers , as distinct from those of providers , should be determined , and how to assess progress in addressing those needs: in an analysis conducted for hhs of its public reporting efforts , researchers proposed that hhs develop and adopt processes and criteria to select measures for reporting to consumers as well as for reporting to more specialized audiences . hhs subsequently released a framework to guide its public reporting activities in december 2013 .