pub . law . 105-220. and once enrolled , could usually remain in the program as long as needed . the program design included many of the strategies experts have suggested are effective in serving at - risk youth , including providing a safe place for young people to go , assigning a key adult to monitor their progress , and offering a wide array of services . the program also provided a system for grantees to report performance information and included plans for an extensive evaluation study . the program began in 2000 and was funded for 5 years . in order to understand what can be learned from the youth opportunity grant program , you asked us to examine the following: ( 1 ) how did grantees implement the youth opportunity grant program ? ( 2 ) what challenges did they face , and what can be learned from their experiences in addressing them ? in addition , we reviewed agency documents and interviewed agency officials and relevant experts . to address the third question regarding outcomes and impact , we also analyzed electronic data the department of labor collected from the grantees in a management information system developed specifically for the program . we conducted our work from september 2004 through november 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the workforce investment act of 1998 authorized youth opportunity grants ( yo ) , a $1 billion , 5-year program aimed at increasing the educational attainment and long - term employment of youth residing in high poverty areas . the program was designed to assist at - risk , hard - to - serve youth and the communities in which they live by concentrating resources into a targeted geographic area . ( 3 ) what is known about the outcomes and impact of this program , both on the participants and on their communities ? the department of labor ( the department ) announced the 36 yo grantees — 24 urban , 6 rural , and 6 native american — in february 2000 and set a goal for the grantees to have their programs operational by september of that year . to answer these questions , we surveyed the 36 youth opportunity grant program directors , visited 7 grantees , and analyzed program data provided by the department of labor . all of the program directors completed the survey , which we conducted between march and may 2005 . we conducted five in - depth site visits to grantees , during which we interviewed program administrators , staff , youth , and other members of the community . we also toured youth opportunity centers , in - school facilities , and observed program activities . we selected these five sites according to the proportionate representation of urban , rural , and native american grantees as well as for their geographic distribution . we briefly visited two additional grantees while pretesting the survey , and at these sites , we toured grantees' centers and spoke with program administrators , staff , and youth . yo expanded on earlier demonstration programs that were based on a similar design , the most recent of which were known as kulick grants .