occ viewed the matter as miscommunication between the bank and consumer . the regulator may determine that the complaint should be forwarded to a different regulator . when appropriate , all four federal regulators directly refer consumers , or forward their complaints , to other federal and state agencies . we found that three federal regulators — the federal reserve , fdic , and occ — referred a considerable number of consumers who contacted them to another federal agency to have their complaints or inquiries addressed . occ , during this same period , referred approximately 38 percent of its callers to another federal agency . for occ , the second most frequent type of complaint resolution was “withdrawn” or “complaint in litigation,” while it was the least common for the federal reserve and ots and the third most common for fdic . these are complaints that , by and large , the regulator is not able to address . occ officials explained that the differences between its reported figures and our analyses are the result of differences in the consumer complaint data on which each is based . the annual reports stated that the agency closed 69,044 complaints in 2003 and 68,104 complaints in 2004 . however , these totals include inquiries that the agency handled , not just complaints . inquiries — which may be questions or comments subject to an immediate , simple answer — can typically be handled at the initial contact between the consumer and occ , while some complaints can take well over the 60-day time frame to investigate and resolve . also , we reviewed the related queries , data extracts , and the output for logical consistency . we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for use in our report . to make general comparisons about the source and resolution of complaints between the four regulators , we created categories that include all of the codes each regulator used to describe the sources and resolutions of complaints . officials of the federal reserve , fdic , ots and occ agreed with our categorization of their respective source and resolution codes . the source categories were “consumer,” “federal,” “state,” and “other.” the resolution categories consisted of ( 1 ) regulators provide consumers additional information , ( 2 ) complaint is withdrawn or tabled due to litigation , ( 3 ) regulators determine that bank was not in error , and ( 4 ) regulators determine that bank was in error . using the codes , we sorted each of the regulators' complaints and tallied the number of complaints that fell into each category . we also sorted the complaints by codes indicating the type of bank product or service and confirmed for certain products , such as credit cards , that the codes represented the entire universe of complaints about the product . to describe how long it takes to resolve a complaint , we requested from each regulator a frequency count of how many complaints were resolved within and over 60 days . to describe how cag's efforts related to occ's supervision of national banks , we interviewed occ officials and reviewed related documents about how consumer complaint data influence bank examinations and guidance .