the modernization efforts are described as follows . in 2001 , va undertook its first vista modernization project , the healthevet initiative , with the goals of standardizing the department's health care system and eliminating the approximately 130 different systems used by its field locations at that time . healthevet was scheduled to be fully implemented by 2018 at a total estimated development and deployment cost of about $11 billion . as part of the effort , the department had planned to develop or enhance specific areas of system functionality through six projects , which were to be completed between 2006 and 2012 . specifically , these projects were to provide capabilities to support va's health data repository and patient financial services system , as well as the laboratory , pharmacy , imaging , and scheduling functions . in june 2008 , we reported that the department had made progress on the healthevet initiative , but noted issues with project planning and governance . these plans should identify key aspects of a project , such as the scope , responsible organizations , costs , schedules , and risks . additionally , planning should begin early in the project's life cycle and be updated as the project progresses . since the va secretary announced that the department would acquire the same electronic health record system as dod , va has begun planning for the transition from vista evolution to ehrm . however , the department is still early in its efforts , pending the contract award . in this regard , the department has begun developing plans that are intended to guide the new ehrm program . in june 2009 , the secretary of veterans affairs announced that va would stop financing failed projects and improve the management of its it development projects . subsequently in august 2010 , the department reported that it had terminated the healthevet initiative . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of veterans affairs , the under secretary for health , the chief information officer , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov if you or your staffs have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . the objectives for this study were to ( 1 ) identify the efforts that the department of veterans affairs ( va ) has undertaken to modernize vista , including key contractors , contract costs , and expected contractor activities and ( 2 ) to determine the department's current plans for , and progress to date , in modernizing vista . to address the first objective , we reviewed va's prior budget submissions , in addition to vista evolution planning documentation , such as the vista 4 product roadmap , vista 4 life cycle cost estimate , vista evolution integrated master plan , and vista evolution business case .