the results of our analysis are as follows . we found a wide range of time intervals for the 129 contract awards we reviewed , which ranged from about $5 million to over $12 billion . we observed that both shortest and the longest time intervals from solicitation to contract award were for contracts valued under $50 million . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics ; the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force ; the director , defense logistics agency ; appropriate congressional committees ; and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by e - mail at woodsw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . we were asked to evaluate the length of time taken to award weapon systems - related contracts . this report examines ( 1 ) the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts to determine the time it takes to award weapon systems contracts ; ( 2 ) what available data show regarding the time between solicitation issuance and award for selected weapon systems - related contracts ; and ( 3 ) factors identified as contributing to contract award time frames . to understand the procedures dod follows to award contracts and dod's efforts to determine the time it takes to award contracts , we reviewed relevant sections of the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , such as part 6: competition requirements , and part 15: contracting by negotiation , and relevant sections of the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement . in addition , we analyzed dod - level and component - level guidance , policies , memorandums , and training materials on the contract award process . we also reviewed standards for internal control in the federal government and prior gao reports . to determine the extent dod components ( air force , army , navy and the defense logistics agency ) collected and analyzed data and how they are managing the time from solicitation issuance to contract award , we analyzed relevant documentation , such as monthly or quarterly management reviews and briefings . we interviewed acquisition officials at dod and the components regarding studies or analysis conducted related to the time to award contracts . we selected the components based on the highest total number of contracts and highest total contract value . we discussed contract award time frames included in studies or analysis to determine the selected components' or commands' reasons for conducting the analysis , any challenges identified , actions taken to address those challenges , and ongoing efforts to reduce the time needed to complete the contract award process . we also discussed their data collection and verification process , but we did not independently verify the data that were reported in the studies and analyses .