( see fig . officials we interviewed in four of the six states and officials in six additional states in their responses to open - ended survey questions reported they would like to use the hub for snap determinations or that it was challenging they were not able to do so . during interviews , officials from two of these states noted that this was challenging given that households that participate in snap are often also enrolled in medicaid . for instance , an official from one state we interviewed expressed frustration with the duplicative work caused by not being able to use data accessed through the hub for medicaid eligibility verifications , to also verify snap or tanf eligibility , when applicable . to what extent do states use data matching to obtain income information for snap eligibility purposes and how useful do they find these matches ? what challenges , if any , do states experience with their use of data matching ? what actions has fns taken to promote data matching and what additional actions , if any , are needed ? to address these questions , we collected and analyzed information using several methods . we administered a survey by e - mail to state snap directors of all 50 states and the district of columbia from february to may 2016 to obtain information on all three research questions . we obtained a 100 percent response rate . while we generally did not validate specific information administrators reported through our survey , we reviewed their responses and conducted follow - up , as necessary , to determine that their responses were complete , reasonable , and sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . as part of our survey development , we pretested the questionnaire with four states , had internal and external experts review it , and incorporated comments as appropriate . once we received the survey responses , they were subjected to data entry , processing , and analysis . we verified the accuracy at each step in the process with independent reviews . to ask for elaborations on survey responses and other related questions , we conducted semi - structured phone interviews with state snap officials from six states that represented 31 percent of the national snap caseload in fiscal year 2014 ( california , florida , massachusetts , texas , virginia , and washington ) . criteria for states we selected included caseload size , geographic location , whether snap is state or county - administered , and participation in relevant demonstrations or pilots . we also visited two to three local offices in three of these states ( california , virginia , and washington ) to obtain perspectives from local program managers and eligibility staff and to observe eligibility processes and systems . our selection criteria for localities within each state included variation in population density and geographic location . the information gathered from interviews with officials from selected states and localities is not generalizable to all states and localities and is meant to provide illustrative examples . to obtain pertinent federal - level information , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , guidance , and other information and interviewed federal agency officials .