these adjustments did not resolve the related errors . in june 2001 , we reported that dod's financial systems could not adequately track and report on whether the $1.1 billion in earmarked funds that the congress provided to dod for spare parts and associated logistical support were actually used for their intended purpose . the vast majority of the funds — 92 percent — were transferred to the military services operation and maintenance accounts . once transferred , the department could not separately track the use of the funds . as a result , dod lost its ability to assure the congress that the funds it received for spare parts purchases were used for , and only for , the designated purpose . in april 2003 , we reported that dod was not able to separately track emergency response funds provided under appropriations in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 ( $20.5 billion ) . these funds were commingled in dod's regular appropriations accounts with funds appropriated for other purposes . because dod's accounting system only captures data on total obligations and does not distinguish among original sources of funds , dod is not able to identify those obligations that are funded from emergency response funds . in december 2000 , we reported that our review of dod functions that were studied over the past 5 years for potential outsourcing under omb circular a - 76 showed that while dod reported that savings had occurred as a result of these studies , we could not determine the precise amount of any such savings because the department lacked actual cost data . further , in march 2002 , we testified that while significant savings were being achieved , it has been difficult to determine the magnitude of those savings . dod's continuing inability to capture and report the full cost of its programs represents one of the most significant impediments facing the department . dod does not have the systems and processes in place to capture the required cost information from the hundreds of millions of transactions it processes each year . lacking complete and accurate overall life - cycle cost information for weapon systems impairs dod's and congressional decision makers' ability to make fully informed judgments about which weapons , or how many , to buy . dod has acknowledged that the lack of a cost accounting system is its largest impediment to controlling and managing weapon systems costs . an april 2001 report on the results of an independent study of dod's financial operations commissioned by the secretary of defense concluded that dod lacked the ability to routinely generate cost - based metrics to link financial management to dod's goals . for example , dod's reporting under the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) often did not address the cost - based efficiency aspect of performance , making it difficult for dod to fully assess the efficiency of its performance . dod's most recent performance plan ( fiscal year 2001 ) included 45 unclassified metrics but only a few of those contained efficiency measures based on costs . for fiscal year 2003 , dod estimated that it would spend approximately $18 billion to operate , maintain , and develop business systems .