fsm . in 2005 , the fsm established its compact management board and ocm . the board consists of seven members: two fsm national government appointees , a member appointed by each state , and the head of ocm . the board is responsible for actions such as formulating guidelines for fsm jemco members and providing oversight of compact implementation , including conducting investigations to ensure compliance with all terms of the compact . ocm , which has five staff members , is principally responsible for daily communications with jemco and the united states regarding jemco and compact matters . ocm is expected to undertake various actions , such as visiting the fsm states , to monitor compliance with compact terms . rmi . the rmi government identified the office of the chief secretary as the official point of contact for all communication and correspondence with the u.s. government concerning compact sector grant assistance . among the chief secretary's responsibilities are providing oversight management and monitoring of sector grants and activities and coordination . its role is supported by the economic policy , planning , and statistics office , which works with the ministries receiving grants to prepare the annual budget proposals ; quarterly reports , including developing performance indicators ; and annual monitoring and evaluation reports . the ministries conduct day - to - day oversight . in addition to receiving compact sector grants , the fsm and the rmi are eligible for a supplemental education grant ( seg ) . the amended compacts' implementing legislation authorized appropriations beginning in 2005 to the secretary of education to supplement the education grants under the amended compacts . the seg is awarded in place of grant assistance formerly awarded to the countries under several u.s. education , health , and labor programs . under the fiscal procedures agreements , seg funds are to be used to support “direct educational services at the local school level focused on school readiness , early childhood education , primary and secondary education , vocational training , adult and family literacy , and the smooth transition of students from high school to postsecondary educational pursuits or rewarding career endeavors.” funding for the seg is appropriated to a department of education account and transferred to an interior account for disbursement , with interior responsible for ensuring that the use , administration , and monitoring of seg funds are in accordance with a memorandum of agreement among the departments of education , hhs , labor , and the interior as well as with the fiscal procedures agreements . the u.s. appointees to jemco and jemfac are required by the compacts' implementing legislation to “consult with the secretary of education regarding the objectives , use , and monitoring of united states financial , program , and technical assistance made available for educational purposes.” jemco and jemfac are responsible for approving the seg grants annually . jemco and jemfac approved allocations of compact grants primarily to the infrastructure , education , and health sectors . the fsm and the rmi also both received a new seg , meant to support the goals and objectives in the education sector development plans .