timeliness of guidance and feedback . fdic and the federal reserve have taken about 9 months on average to review resolution plans and jointly provide companies with guidance or feedback . because the resolution plan rule requires companies to file plans annually , some companies may not have sufficient time to fully incorporate such guidance or feedback into their subsequent plans and obtain their board of directors' approval of the plans by the submission deadline . for example , some companies completed and submitted their 2014 plans before receiving the regulators' feedback on their previous year's plans , resulting in a less effective and efficient use of time and resources for both the companies and the regulators . we are making the following three recommendations: to enhance disclosure and strengthen transparency and accountability , fdic and the federal reserve should take the following actions: publicly disclose information about their respective frameworks for assessing and recommending to their boards whether a plan is not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the code . for example , the regulators could disclose aspects of their assessment frameworks as a supplement to their initial guidance publicly issued in april 2013 . publicly disclose aspects of their criteria used to decide which wave 3 companies are allowed to file a reduced plan . in addition , to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of resolution planning , fdic and the federal reserve should revise the resolution plan rule's annual filing requirement to provide sufficient time not only for the regulators to complete their plan reviews and provide feedback but also for companies to address and incorporate regulators' feedback in subsequent plan filings . for example , the regulators could extend the annual filing cycle to every 2 years or provide companies at least 6 months from the date of feedback or guidance to file another plan . we provided a draft of this report to fdic and the federal reserve for review and comment . in their joint written comments ( reproduced in appendix ii ) , the regulators concurred with our findings and recommendations regarding transparency and timeliness . they stated that they are committed to enhancing public disclosure around resolution planning and plan to make public the information needed to understand their frameworks . they also stated that they intend to work to find the most appropriate way to ensure that sufficient time is provided for the regulators to complete their reviews and for plan filers to incorporate the regulators' feedback in their subsequent plan filings . fdic and the federal reserve also provided technical comments on the draft report , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the house committee on financial services , fdic , and the federal reserve . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or evansl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .