marshals service . among other responsibilities , under section 142 of the walsh act , the attorney general is required to use the resources of federal law enforcement , including the u.s . marshals service , to assist jurisdictions in locating and apprehending sex offenders who violate sex offender registration requirements . we conducted this performance audit from july 2006 through december 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . this appendix presents an overview of driver's license - related processes that states use for encouraging registration or providing additional monitoring of convicted sex offenders . such processes may be based on statutory requirements or on agency initiatives , as indicated in the following respective sections . to identify states that have statutory requirements for using driver's license - related processes for encouraging registration or providing additional monitoring of convicted sex offenders , we reviewed states statutes through the end of july 2007 . table 2 presents the results of our research . as shown , we identified a total of 20 relevant state statutes as of july 2007 . given the degree of legislative interest in monitoring sex offenders , as indicated by the relatively recent effective dates of many of the state statutes , table 2 should be considered a snapshot of state information as of july 2007 , with changes likely to occur in the future . in addition , because we did not confirm our statutory research by interviewing state officials , table 2 reflects our interpretation of the statutory requirements we identified and does not include any information on how states may be implementing these requirements . as table 2 indicates , the 20 states reflect various types of driver's license - related processes for encouraging registration or providing additional monitoring of convicted sex offenders . generally , these processes can be grouped within the following five categories: mandatory - identification states: alabama , arizona , delaware , florida , indiana , louisiana , michigan , mississippi , and texas require convicted sex offenders to obtain identification in the form of a driver's license , an identification card , or a sex offender registration card issued through driver's license - related processes . of these states , alabama , arizona , indiana , and louisiana explicitly require convicted sex offenders to carry their identification . annual - renewal states: in arizona , illinois , kansas , louisiana , oklahoma , texas , and utah , the driver's licenses or identification cards of convicted sex offenders expire annually and are subject to annual renewal . of these states , arizona , louisiana , and texas mandate that sex offenders obtain a driver's license or an identification card , making the annual renewal process mandatory . in the remaining states , annual renewal is contingent upon the sex offender's decision to maintain a valid driver's license or identification card , though penalties would apply for driving with an invalid license .