vii ) . expulsions for pre - k students remained very low — there were zero pre - k expulsions in 2013-14 compared to two expulsions in 2011-12 — an expulsion rate of less than .01 percent . pcsb has not received any federal grant funds since fy 2014 . other revenues include school closure funds and sponsorship income , among other sources . other expenditures include facilities costs , community events , w ebsite costs , and other overhead expenses . appendix vii: public charter school board's discipline and demographic data suspension rate ( percent ) . in addition to the contact named above , sherri doughty ( assistant director ) , lauren gilbertson ( analyst - in - charge ) , melinda bowman , jean mcsween , john mingus , james rebbe , alexandra squitieri , and sonya vartivarian made key contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were deborah bland , grace cho , sara daleski , holly dye , lauren kirkpatrick , sheila r. mccoy , mimi nguyen , sara pelton , and ronni schwartz . these other d.c. agencies were deputy mayor for education ; state board of education , including the ombudsman for public education and the chief student advocate ; and d.c. office of the inspector general . we evaluated pcsb's oversight of charter school discipline against federal standards for internal control for communicating quality information to external parties and establishing structure , responsibility , and authority , and evaluated d.c. education agencies' collaboration on this issue against leading practices for interagency collaboration . we also reviewed selected research studies that provided further context and insight into school discipline in charter schools . to obtain additional context and insights , we selected and interviewed researchers and officials from advocacy groups and associations with different perspectives on charter schools and discipline . the researchers and officials we interviewed were located at the center for civil rights remedies at the civil rights project , the center on reinventing public education , the children's law center , the council for court excellence , the d.c. association of chartered public schools , d.c. lawyers for youth , the dignity in schools campaign , and the national association of charter school authorizers . in order to obtain the views of charter school officials with diverse perspectives on discipline policies and practices , reasons for high discipline rates , and experiences with pcsb oversight , we interviewed school and local educational agency ( lea ) officials at three d.c. charter schools . we selected two schools that had high suspension and / or expulsion rates in school year 2014-15 , as well as one school with formerly high discipline rates , according to d.c. data .