this is true . however , the trucking industry's concerns are not with the 2000 rulemaking process , but with the process epa has used since then to involve stakeholders in implementing the standards . for example , as we note in the report , epa officials acknowledged that the agency initially did not invite anyone from the trucking industry to participate on the 2002 clean diesel independent review panel and only did so after the industry lobbied the agency . as to gao's recommendations , epa agrees with the merits of providing financial incentives — although the agency does not see a role for itself in this action — and disagrees with the merits of convening an independent panel . we want to clarify that gao is recommending that the agency consider additional steps to alleviate existing concerns , avoid a significant pre - buy of older engines , and better guarantee that the emissions and health benefits are achieved . we thereby offer several alternative actions for the agency to consider , but do not intend to limit the agency in any way to these alternatives or suggest that they are the only effective means to resolve concerns . that said , with regard to the suggestion of using financial incentives , we recognize that the congress must provide the agency direction and funding for such an approach , but expect that it would also look to the agency to play a role , such as submitting a proposal for incentives or at least helping to determine their merits and costs . as to convening an independent review panel , we appreciate epa's concerns that this could unnecessarily delay the schedule for implementing the standards , and the agency is in the best position to determine this . but , if epa has the necessary evidence available to demonstrate technologies are ready as it contends it does , it should not be difficult or take considerable time for an independent body to review the data and validate this conclusion for all affected stakeholders . otherwise , if the trucking industry remains concerned and pre - buys older engines prior to 2007 , this will in effect delay implementation of the standards and their anticipated benefits . in addition to the individuals named above , charles w. bausell , jr. , tyra dipalma - vigil , richard frankel , terence lam , and eugene wisnoski made key contributions to this report . important contributions were also made by nancy crothers and amy webbink . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet .