pennsylvania's university - based program . the pennsylvania consultation program operates out of the indiana university of pennsylvania and is one of eight state programs located at a state university . between fiscal years 1996 and 2000 , the program experienced an 88-percent increase in requests for consultation visits , while nationwide requests for consultation visits increased only marginally . operating out of a university has allowed the pennsylvania program a number of benefits . about 98 percent of these employers chose the former . according to a maine consultation program official , many of these employers turned to the maine consultation program for assistance in identifying and correcting hazards . maine consultants added that subsequent enforcement programs , focused on local employers , have also been very successful in encouraging employers to use the consultation program . in 1994 , california initiated a state - funded consultation program , called the targeted high hazard consultation program , through which california sends letters to employers with high workers' compensation rates to notify them that they will be inspected unless they seek help from available consultation programs or their insurance carrier . according to california program officials , this effort increased the number of consultations requested from the state - funded consultation program . this program was recently merged with the state osha - funded consultation program . industry association officials and employers we interviewed identified concerns about the costs of correcting hazards and the qualifications of program consultants as disincentives . first , officials from both groups stated that employers are concerned that the cost of correcting the hazards identified by a consultation might be prohibitive . they feared that if they could not afford to correct all the hazards in an acceptable time frame , the consultant might report them to osha for an inspection . consultants and state program managers we interviewed said that , in their experience , the costs associated with addressing hazards are generally manageable , but fears about costs still persist among employers . second , industry associations and employee representatives expressed concern that some state consultation programs employ individuals who lack the appropriate credentials or experience to serve as workplace safety and health consultants . some states do not require that consultants have advanced or specialized degrees . other industry associations and employee representatives said that even those consultants with credentials in workplace safety or health - related fields might not have the industry expertise necessary to identify and suggest remedies for hazards . one area identified with regard to this concern was the health industry . general distrust of osha was another factor identified as a disincentive for participation in consultations . employers feared that consultants would inappropriately provide information about the consultation to osha , prompting an inspection . however , none of the industry association representatives or employers we spoke with knew of any instances where this had actually happened . related to this concern was the perception that state consultation programs were oriented more favorably toward workers than employers . industry associations and employers identified recently developed regulatory requirements that they believed reinforced this perception .