( see table 1. ) in addition , pmocs conduct monthly and quarterly oversight reviews . for some reviews that pmocs conduct , such as real estate reviews , pmocs retain the services of subcontractors with specific industry experience . pmocs perform many of these reviews repeatedly throughout the new starts process , tailoring them to the stage of a project's development . for example , fta directs pmocs to review a project sponsor's technical capacity and capability three times — before the project enters the preliminary engineering phase , enters the final design phase , and again when the sponsor requests an ffga . according to fta guidance , some reviews , such as the technical capacity and capability review , require more detail during the early stages of a project ( i.e. , during preliminary engineering ) ; however , during later stages of a project ( i.e. under the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act - a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ) , we are required to report annually on the federal transit administration's ( fta ) new starts process . fta has acknowledged that its current new starts process can be lengthy and frustrating . in an october 2009 speech , the fta administrator stated that fta currently has a decision - making process that is frustrating , lengthy , and incomprehensible , and that fta is working on a streamlined decision - making process ; he cautioned however , that the decision may not always be to approve a project . appendix i contains additional information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from january to september 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . project sponsors can begin constructing and operating new starts projects upon the successful completion of specific project development milestones and upon obtaining an ffga from fta . to obtain an ffga , project sponsors are required by law to go through a planning and project development process , which is divided into three phases: alternatives analysis , preliminary engineering , and final design , followed by construction . in the alternatives analysis phase of the new starts process , project sponsors identify the transportation needs in the corridor and evaluate a range of modal and alignment alternatives to address the locally identified problems in a specific corridor . project sponsors complete the alternatives analysis phase by selecting a locally preferred alternative ( lpa ) , which is the new starts project that fta evaluates for funding . during the preliminary engineering phase , project sponsors refine the design of the lpa , taking into consideration all reasonable design options and estimating each option's costs , benefits , and impacts ( eg , financial or environmental ) .