no antidote is available . dhs and the fbi are enhancing nbfac's biological toxin analysis capabilities for current bioforensics casework: based on our review and dhs's responses , dhs's primary focus is on bioforensics capabilities in the short term to address the fbi's current casework needs . such casework has involved the fbi's investigation of multiple biocrimes involving the use of ricin , including a case in 2013 in which ricin was sent to the u.s. president . nbfac analyzed some of the samples in that case , according to the fbi's responses to our questions . fbi casework carried out by nbfac involves the fbi's transporting evidentiary samples to nbfac , which ( 1 ) develops a sample analysis plan ( which could involve traditional as well as bioforensics analyses ) for fbi approval , ( 2 ) conducts analyses , and ( 3 ) reports the results to law enforcement , which uses them to inform the bioforensics investigation . based on our review , for prosecution in a case involving ricin , the scientific evidence may need to establish that the toxin is present in an evidentiary sample . we found that a combination of analytical capabilities may be used to confirm this , with each detecting a specific target . for example , to confirm the presence of ricin in a sample , antibody tests , such as elisa , and mass spectrometry can be used for detecting the presence of ricin , and examining the protein , respectively . added to them can be cell - free translation assays , another type of antibody test , which also detects ricin . we also found that nbfac's capabilities for analyzing ricin toxins initially included all the independent capabilities above , with the exception of an accredited mass spectrometry capability for characterizing ricin and other toxins . based on our review , we found that nbfac had contracted with a laboratory to examine protein toxins by mass spectrometry when it did not yet have that capability . doing so , according to their responses , resulted in a 2 — 3 day delay , and the laboratory was also not accredited under iso 17025 . as a result , the fbi further responded that it requested that dhs develop an in - house iso 17025 accredited toxin analysis capability at nbfac . the fbi provided the equipment and funding for this transition to nbfac . enhancing genomics and proteomics is a long - term effort: according to a dhs official , dhs is continuing to enhance both genomics and proteomics capabilities , which is expected to provide a complementary capability that will link proteomic analysis to metagenomics analysis of complex samples , thereby providing additional information about an agent . further , according to this official , genomics and mass spectrometry will support developing metagenomics and proteomics . based on our review , some of the ways in which metagenomics capabilities may be used are as follows: metagenomics: it allows sampling of the genomes of microbes without culturing them ; rather , the dna is directly isolated from the sample before genome sequencing . a dhs official stated that dhs plans to provide comprehensive metagenomics analysis of complex evidentiary samples .