about $2.6 billion ( see fig . among the four gulf coast states in our review , louisiana small businesses directly received the greatest amount of federal contract funds , about $1.4 billion . however , alabama had the highest proportion ( 47 percent ) of total prime contract dollars awarded to small businesses ( see fig . in the four states , the amount of federal contract funds directly awarded to specific types of small businesses for hurricanes katrina - and rita - related recovery efforts varied ( see fig . small disadvantaged businesses: of the approximately $2.7 billion that went directly to small businesses , about $804 million ( 29 percent ) went to small disadvantaged businesses . small disadvantaged businesses in louisiana received the greatest amount of federal contract funds awarded to this category ( more than $420 million ) . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . dod did not concur with the implication that its contracting personnel did not enforce requirements . we recently received information from both dod and the corps that indicates that they have initiated actions to address our recommendation . women - owned small businesses: about $381 million were directly awarded to women - owned small businesses ( 14 percent of all federal contract funds directly awarded to gulf coast small businesses ) . women - owned small businesses in louisiana received the greatest amount ( approximately $182 million ) . veteran - owned small businesses: about $270 million ( or 10 percent of federal contracts directly awarded to gulf coast small businesses ) went to this category . veteran - owned small businesses in louisiana received about $180 million , the most in the gulf coast states . the corps and dod could not demonstrate that they consistently were monitoring subcontracting accomplishment information as required . as we have previously discussed , subcontracting plans are generally required for construction contracts ( or modifications to contracts ) that are expected to exceed $1.5 million and that have subcontracting possibilities . the far states that subcontracting plans must include assurances that prime contractors will report on their progress toward reaching their subcontracting goals . generally , contracts that offer subcontracting possibilities and are expected to exceed the monetary thresholds above are to include certain clauses . in general , these clauses require contractors to submit these reports semiannually and at project completion . the corps and dod use these reports to monitor contractor performance under subcontracting plans . we reviewed the 57 construction contracts that the corps , dhs , dod , and gsa awarded directly to large businesses in fiscal years 2005 – 2009 for hurricane - related recovery and that were listed in fpds - ng as having subcontracting plans . the corps awarded 29 of these contracts but could not provide subcontracting accomplishment report information for 11 . dod awarded 14 contracts and could not provide information for 2 ( see table 1 ) . without these reports , either in esrs or paper form , contracting officials lacked a key tool for monitoring contractors' performance under subcontracting plans .