gao - 11-69 . washington , d.c.: december 6 , 2010 . military and veterans disability system: preliminary observations on evaluation and planned expansion of dod / va pilot . gao - 11-191t . washington , d.c.: november 18 , 2010 . due to staff turnover or caseload surges . ensuring sufficient housing and organizational oversight for ides participants: although the site assessment matrix asks sites whether they will have sufficient temporary housing available for servicemembers going through the ides , the matrix requires only a yes or no response and does not ensure that sites will have conducted a thorough review of their housing capacity . in addition , the site assessment matrix does not address plans for ensuring that ides participants are gainfully employed or sufficiently supported by their organizational units . we recommended that prior to implementing the ides at mtfs , dod ensure thorough assessments are conducted on the availability of housing for servicemembers and on the capacity of organizational units to absorb servicemembers undergoing the disability evaluation ; alternative housing options are identified when sites lack adequate capacity ; and plans are in place for ensuring that servicemembers are appropriately and constructively engaged . addressing differences in diagnoses: according to agency officials , dod is currently developing guidance on how staff should address differences in diagnoses . however , since the new guidance and procedures are still being developed , we cannot determine whether they will aid in resolving discrepancies or disagreements . significantly , dod and va do not have a mechanism for tracking when and where disagreements about diagnoses and ratings occur and , consequently , may not be able to determine whether the guidance sufficiently addresses the discrepancies . therefore , we recommended that dod and va conduct a study to assess the prevalence and causes of such disagreements and establish a mechanism to continuously monitor diagnostic disagreements . va has since indicated it plans to conduct such a study and make a determination by july 2011 regarding what , if any , mechanisms are needed . further , despite regular reporting of data on caseloads , processing times , and servicemember satisfaction , and preparation of an annual report on challenges in the ides , we determined that dod and va did not have a systemwide monitoring mechanism to help ensure that steps they took to address challenges are sufficient and to identify problems in a more timely basis . for example , they did not collect data centrally on staffing levels at each site relative to caseload . as a result , dod and va may be delayed in taking corrective action since it takes time to assess what types of staff are needed at a site and to hire or reassign staff . dod and va also lacked mechanisms or forums for systematically sharing information on challenges , as well as best practices between and among sites . for example , dod and va have not established a process for local sites to systematically report challenges to dod and va management and for lessons learned to be systematically shared systemwide . during the pilot phase , va surveyed pilot sites on a monthly basis about challenges they faced in completing single exams .