dhs concurred with our recommendation . cost - benefit analyses are important because they help decision makers determine which protective measures , for instance , investments in technologies or in other security programs , will provide the greatest mitigation of risk for the resources that are available . tsa officials stated that a cost - benefit analysis was not completed for the ait because one is not required under dhs acquisition guidance . however , these officials reported that they had completed , earlier in the program , a life - cycle cost estimate and an analysis of alternatives for the ait as required by dhs , which , according to agency officials , provides equivalent information to a cost - benefit analysis . we are in the process of reviewing the alternatives analysis that was completed in 2008 and life - cycle cost estimates which tsa provided to us on march 12 , 2010 , to determine the extent to which these estimates reflect the additional costs to staff these units . we estimate that , based on tsa's fiscal year 2011 budget request and current ait deployment strategy , increases in staffing costs due to doubling the number of aits that tsa plans to deploy could add up to $2.4 billion over the expected service life of this investment . while we recognize that tsa is taking action to address a vulnerability of the passenger checkpoint exposed by the december 25 , 2009 , attempted attack , we continue to believe that , given tsa's expanded deployment strategy , conducting a cost - benefit analysis of tsa's ait deployment is important . an updated cost - benefit analysis would help inform tsa's judgment about the optimal deployment strategy for the aits , as well as provide information to inform the best path forward , considering all elements of the screening system , for addressing the vulnerability identified by this attempted terrorist attack . as we previously reported in march 2009 , based on preliminary observations from ongoing work , tsa has taken several key steps to meet the statutory mandate to screen 100 percent of air cargo transported on passenger aircraft by august 2010 . among the steps that tsa has taken to address domestic air cargo screening , the agency has revised its security programs to require more cargo to be screened ; created the certified cargo screening program ( ccsp ) , a voluntary program to allow screening to take place earlier in the shipping process and at various points in the air cargo supply chain — including before the cargo is consolidated ; issued an interim final rule , effective november 16 , 2009 , that , among other things , codifies the statutory air cargo screening requirements of the 9 / 11 commission act and establishes requirements for entities participating in the ccsp ; established a technology pilot progra to operationally test explosives trace detection ( etd ) and x - ray technology ; and expanded its explosives detection canine program . m while these steps are encouraging , tsa faces several challenges in meeting the air cargo screening mandate .