these studies have not yet been completed . navy officials stated that the possible changes are low risk and would not affect lcs performance requirements . however , some changes , including those related to habitability , are likely to add weight . according to the program office , weight considerations occur for every change and corresponding trades are required to be made in order to approve the change . for example: early estimates indicate that roughly 10 to 20 metric tons could be added due to accommodations for a larger crew , and would require pervasive modifications to each seaframe design . if so , these changes would heighten weight challenges and resulting service life allowance shortfalls . a change was made to lcs 2 in a recent maintenance period to increase the size of the rescue boat from 5 meters to 7 meters , which will make the boat more stable in heavier seas . this change resulted in an approximately 15 metric ton weight increase to lcs 2 ; it is planned for all independence variant seaframes . according to the contractor , by removing weight from other areas of lcs 6 and follow - on ships designs , the larger rescue boat will add 1.3 metric tons . another proposed change would increase commonality and combat capability by replacing the freedom variant's rolling airframe missile system with the heavier missile system found on the independence variant . while the specifics of this potential change have not yet been determined or approved , navy technical experts told us that such a modification would subsequently increase the freedom variant's weight and could also result in center of gravity changes . weight constraints could make future modifications more costly than anticipated . for instance , subject matter experts in naval architecture told us that the navy may find it has to seek lighter alternatives to the systems or equipment it wants , which could complicate the redesign and construction modification efforts or make them more costly — or both . because the navy has not yet completed technical studies evaluating its possible changes , the weight effects remain unknown . according to navy officials , preliminary studies on the habitability changes should be completed this year , and more detailed design work will not occur until fiscal year 2015 . the navy has established a weight working group with navy and shipyard representatives that program officials said is intended to try and identify ways to offset weight growth from some of these design changes . additionally , once a ship is delivered and handed over to the fleet , fleet operators and maintainers assume responsibility for these weight management processes , which continue throughout the ship's service life . for ships that are weight constrained — meaning , at or nearing their naval architectural limits for displacement — these weight management processes are typically more robust and costly . for instance , a navy instruction states that weight must be kept within naval architectural limits and provides that for ships that are weight constrained , any additional weight must be compensated for by removing weight from the ship . inclining experiments must usually be completed following maintenance periods to ensure the ship's naval architectural limits remain unbreached .