however , all six recommendations remain open . we have discussed the preliminary observations included in this testimony with dhs officials . to address these objectives , we reviewed the january 2009 request for proposal and its attachments , such as the statement of objectives and solution process overview , to understand dhs' plans for implementing the tasc program . we also reviewed other available planning documents , such as the acquisition plan and the draft concept of operations , and determined the status of these plans and others to see if dhs had fully implemented our recommendations . we interviewed key officials from dhs' office of the chief financial officer and its resource management transformation office ( rmto ) , including its director and deputy director for elaboration and to provide additional perspectives to the information contained in these documents . effectively implementing the disciplined processes necessary to reduce project risks to acceptable levels is hard to achieve because a project must effectively implement several best practices , and inadequate implementation of any one may significantly reduce or even eliminate the positive benefits of the others . although , dhs has identified nine end - to - end business processes that will be addressed as part of the tasc program , the department has not yet identified all of its existing business processes that will be reengineered and standardized as part of the tasc program . it is important for dhs to identify all of its business processes so that the department can analyze the offerors' proposed systems to assess how closely each of these systems aligns with dhs' business processes . such an analysis would position dhs to determine whether a proposed system would work well in its future environment or whether the department should consider modifying its business processes . without this analysis , dhs will find it challenging to assess the difficulties of implementing the selected system to meet dhs' unique needs . for the nine processes identified , dhs has not yet begun the process of reengineering and standardizing those processes . however , the protestor filed an appeal of this dismissal in july 2009 . dhs responded to the july 2009 appeal in september 2009 and dhs officials indicated that the protestor responded to dhs' response in october 2009 . in june 2007 , we made six recommendations to dhs to help the department reduce the risks associated with acquiring and implementing a departmentwide financial management system . our preliminary analysis indicates that dhs has begun to take actions toward the implementation of four of the recommendations , as shown in table 1 . we do recognize that dhs cannot fully implement all of our recommendations until a contract is awarded because of its selected acquisition approach . dhs has developed certain elements for its financial management strategy and plan for moving forward with its financial system integration efforts but it faces significant challenges in completing and implementing its strategy . one of these key events was the filing of a bid protest regarding dhs' initial tasc approach to migrate its components to two financial management systems already in use .