these amounts have been growing . according to the officials of a mutual fund research organization , revenue sharing costs are hard to quantify but are rising . for example , the organization reports that about 80 percent of fund companies that partner with major broker - dealers make cash revenue sharing payments . the increased use of revenue sharing payments is raising concerns among some industry participants . although revenue sharing payments are becoming a major expense for fund advisers , industry research organization officials told us that most fund advisers are not willing to publicly discuss the extent to which they are making such payments . a 2001 report on fund distribution practices states that “the details and levels of revenue sharing vary widely across the industry and are seldom codified in written contracts.” in one industry magazine article , a mutual fund industry researcher referred to revenue sharing as “the dirty little secret of the mutual fund industry.” one of the concerns raised about revenue sharing payments is the effect on overall fund expenses . the 2001 research organization report on fund distribution practices noted that the extent to which revenue sharing may affect other fees that funds charge , such as 12b - 1 fees or management fees , is uncertain . for example , the report noted that it was not clear whether the increase in revenue sharing payments had increased any fund's fees but noted that by reducing fund adviser profits , revenue sharing would likely prevent advisers from lowering their fees . in addition , fund directors normally would not question revenue sharing arrangements because they are paid from the adviser's profits , unless the payments are financed directly from fund assets as part of the adviser's management fee or a 12b - 1 plan . fund directors , however , in the course of their review of the advisory contract , consider the adviser's profits before marketing and distribution expenses , which also may limit the ability of advisers to shift these costs to the fund . revenue sharing payments may also create conflicts of interest between broker - dealers and their customers . by receiving compensation to emphasize the marketing of particular funds , broker - dealers and their sales representatives may have incentives to offer funds for reasons other than the needs of the investor . for example , these revenue sharing arrangements may have the effect of unduly focusing the attention of investors and their broker - dealers on particular mutual fund choices , which can reduce the number of funds they consider as part of the investment decision . that not only may lead to inferior investment choices , but may also reduce fee competition among funds . finally , concerns have been raised that revenue sharing arrangements may conflict with securities self - regulatory organization rules requiring that brokers recommend purchasing a security only after ensuring that the investment is suitable given the investor's financial situation and risk profile . mutual fund officials' opinions about revenue sharing were mixed .