this has not always been the case . for example , although 19 colombian army personnel were qualified to serve as pilots - in - command on uh - 1n helicopters , only 1 pilot was assigned to serve in this position . the remaining pilots - in - command were provided by a u.s. contractor . of the funds appropriated for fiscal year 2002 , $140 million was used to support colombian army counternarcotics efforts . most of this amount was used for u.s. - provided helicopter operations and maintenance , logistical , and training support . however , not all the funding could be released until the secretary of state certified , in two separate reports to appropriate congressional committees , that the colombian military was making progress meeting certain human rights conditions . because state was late in providing these reports , the u.s. embassy could not use this funding for operations and training on two occasions for a total of about 5 months during 2002 . these delays resulted in fewer counternarcotics operations and limited the training and experience colombian army pilots could obtain to qualify as pilots - in - command . u.s. assistance to support the helicopters provided as part of plan colombia was originally planned to end in 2006 with the colombian army taking over these responsibilities . however , u.s. embassy and colombian army officials stated that a continued level of u.s. contractor presence will be needed beyond this date because the aviation battalion is not expected to have the personnel trained or the resources necessary . although the embassy officials stated that they have not officially estimated what this assistance level will be , they tentatively projected that it would cost between $100 million and $150 million annually to sustain the u.s. - supported counternarcotics programs . moreover , other recently initiated u.s. programs will likely require u.s. assistance and contractor support , but the long - term costs of sustaining such programs are not known . since the early 1990s , state's bureau for international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( through the u.s. embassy's narcotics affairs section ( nas ) and the office of aviation ) has supported the colombian national police's efforts to significantly reduce , if not eliminate , the cultivation of coca and opium poppy . however , for the most part , the net hectares of coca under cultivation in colombia continued to rise until 2002 , and the net hectares of opium poppy under cultivation remained relatively steady until 2001-02 . in addition , the u.s. embassy has made little progress in having the colombian national police assume more responsibility for the aerial eradication program , which requires costly u.s. contractor assistance to carry out . as shown in figure 1 , the number of hectares under coca cultivation rose more than threefold from 1995 to 2001 — from 50,900 hectares to 169,800 hectares — despite substantially increased eradication efforts . but in 2002 , the office of aviation estimated that the program eradicated 102,225 hectares of coca — a record high .