omb guidance . omb issues guidance for agencies to implement various requirements of the improper payment laws . specifically , omb is required by iperia to issue guidance to set standards for agencies to follow in determining the underlying validity of sampled payments to ensure that amounts being billed , paid , or obligated for payment are proper . although existing omb guidance addresses requirements for sampling , it does not address how agencies test to identify improper payments , such as using a risk - based approach to help ensure that key risks of improper payments , like eligibility , are addressed through testing processes . without such guidance , there is increased risk that agencies' processes may not address key risks of improper payments in their programs — for example , the cases of dod military pay and opm retirement described above — calling into question the improper payment estimates for such programs and their usefulness for developing effective corrective actions . according to omb guidance , when an agency's review is unable to determine whether a payment was proper because of insufficient or lack of documentation , the payment must be considered an improper payment . among the six agencies and 10 programs we reviewed , treatment of insufficient documentation varied by program , as did the classification of these issues for root cause reporting in the afrs . hhs's programs were the only ones we reviewed that reported improper payments in the insufficient documentation root cause category for fiscal years 2016 or 2017 , as shown in table 6 . some agencies stated that they report insufficient documentation in other root cause categories that they consider more appropriate . for example , education officials stated that for the direct loan program , payments that lack sufficient supporting documentation may be placed in the “administrative or process error made by other party” root cause category . in these cases , a third party — such as a loan servicer — is unable to provide sufficient documentation supporting that the sampled payment was proper . omb guidance states that in cases where the agency believes that more than one root cause category might be suitable , the agency should determine which category it believes to be the most appropriate . additionally , some agencies stated that the “insufficient documentation” category was not always relevant when they recreated sampled cases to estimate a program's improper payments . for example , according to officials , to complete an oasdi stewardship review of a sampled case , a social security administration ( ssa ) quality reviewer reviews the documentation related to the original determination and then independently re - develops all factors of the payment and interviews the associated beneficiary . according to agency officials , insufficient documentation would not apply as all improper payments identified in the stewardship sample are supported by documentation and payment has been verified in all reviewed cases . as noted previously , the processes for estimating dod military pay and opm retirement improper payments were limited , and these limitations may have an impact on the agencies' ability to identify improper payments related to insufficient documentation . treatment of cases of nonresponse . dod military pay .