( app . i lists the 32 medical specialty societies that responded. ) we evaluated cms's review of the supplemental total practice expense data by examining specialty societies' submissions and reports from the contractor cms hired to provide technical assistance to the specialty societies and cms on the supplemental data submission process . we also interviewed cms officials and the contractor about the process cms uses to review submissions . to evaluate cms's process for updating resource estimates for individual services , we interviewed the specialties' representatives , attended peac meetings , and examined supporting materials that specialties provided to the peac . to determine cms's decisions on peac recommendations and cms's rationale for other changes to resource estimates for individual services , we reviewed relevant documents published in the federal register and an hhs office of inspector general ( oig ) report . we also discussed with cms staff cms's rationale for decisions regarding the refinement processes and its views about prospects for obtaining data to perform the mandated reviews . we performed our work from november 2001 through december 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . while it is true that other parts of the payment method affect the final payment amounts , the practice expense estimates remain an important determinant . asco disagreed with our concerns about its supplemental survey data . it reiterated that it had discussions with cms regarding the few practices with high costs for certain items that had no significant effect on the average hourly practice expense estimates used in cms's methodology . as noted earlier , our replication of the hourly practice expense calculations and discussions with cms's contractor led us to conclude that including the few practices with high costs did in fact raise the average hourly practice expense estimates . we have revised the report to include this information . we are sending copies of this report to the administrator of cms and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request . this report also is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 if you or your staffs have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . to evaluate the process that cms uses to review specialty - submitted supplemental practice expense data , we interviewed representatives from medical specialty societies . we identified 50 medical specialty societies by searching the internet using ama's categories of major specialties . we contacted each group and met with representatives from the 32 specialty societies that responded ( listed in app . using structured interviews , we asked the specialty society representatives whether they were satisfied that ama socioeconomic monitoring system ( sms ) survey data used to estimate their specialty's total practice expenses were representative . we obtained their views about whether the supplemental data submissions improved the practice expense estimates and about cms's process for evaluating the data . we reviewed written materials provided by specialty societies and followed up by telephone when necessary . we reviewed relevant federal register documents to determine how cms evaluated the supplemental data submissions and reviewed cms's decisions about whether to accept the data .