gao - 06-495 . washington , d.c.: may 17 , 2006 . social security numbers: more could be done to protect ssns . gao - 06-586t . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2006 . social security numbers: stronger protections needed when contractors have access to ssns . gao - 06-238 . washington , d.c.: january 23 , 2006 . some states have also enacted other types of restrictions on the uses of ssns . for example , arkansas , colorado , and wisconsin prohibit the use of a student's ssn as an identification number . other recent state legislation places restrictions on state and local government agencies , such as indiana's law that generally prohibits state agencies from releasing ssns unless otherwise required by law . a number of federal laws and regulations require agencies at all levels of government to frequently collect and use ssns for various purposes . beginning with a 1943 executive order issued by president franklin d. roosevelt , all federal agencies were required to use the ssn exclusively for identification systems of individuals , rather than set up a new identification system . in later years , the number of federal agencies and others relying on the ssn as a primary identifier escalated dramatically , in part , because a number of federal laws were passed that authorized or required its use for specific activities . for example , agencies use ssns for internal administrative purposes , which include activities such as identifying , retrieving , and updating records ; to collect debts owed to the government and conduct or support research and evaluations , as well as use employees' ssns for activities such as payroll , wage reporting , and providing employee benefits ; to ensure program integrity , such as matching records with state and local correctional facilities to identify individuals for whom the agency should terminate benefit payments ; and for statistics , research , and evaluation . table 2 provides an overview of federal statutes that address government collection and use of ssns . in some cases , these statutes require that state and local government entities collect ssns . some government agencies also collect ssns because of their responsibility for maintaining public records , which are those records generally made available to the public for inspection by the government . because these records are open to the public , such government agencies , primarily at the state and local levels , provide access to the ssns sometimes contained in those records . based on a survey of federal , state , and local governments , we reported in 2004 that state agencies in 41 states and the district of columbia displayed ssns in public records ; this was also true in 75 percent of u.s. counties . we also found that while the number and type of records in which ssns were displayed varied greatly across states and counties , ssns were most often found in court and property records . public records displaying ssns are stored in multiple formats , such as electronic , microfiche and microfilm , or paper copy .