techstat reviews . in january 2010 , the federal cio began leading techstat sessions — face - to - face meetings to terminate or turn around it investments that are failing or are not producing results . these meetings involve omb and agency leadership and are intended to increase accountability and improve performance . omb also empowered agency cios to begin to hold their own techstat sessions within their respective agencies by june 2012 . in june 2013 , we reported that omb and selected agencies held multiple techstats , but additional omb oversight was needed to ensure that these meetings were having the appropriate impact on underperforming projects and that resulting cost savings were valid . among other things , we recommended that omb require agencies to address high - risk investments . omb generally agreed with this recommendation . however , as of october 28 , 2015 , omb had only conducted one techstat review in the prior 2 years and omb had not listed any savings from techstats in its quarterly reporting to congress since june 2012 . cloud computing strategy . in order to accelerate the adoption of cloud computing solutions across the government , omb's 25-point it reform plan included a “cloud first” policy that required each agency cio to , among other things , implement cloud - based solutions whenever a secure , reliable , and cost - effective cloud option exists . building on this requirement , in february 2011 , omb issued the federal cloud computing strategy , which provided definitions of cloud computing services ; benefits of cloud services , such as accelerating data center consolidations ; case studies to support agencies' migration to cloud computing ; and roles and responsibilities for federal agencies . in april 2016 , we reported , among other things , that we had identified 10 key practices that if included in cloud service agreements can help agencies ensure services are performed effectively , efficiently , and securely . omb's guidance , released in february 2012 , included most of the key practices , and we recommended that omb include all 10 key practices in future guidance . portfoliostat reviews . to better manage existing it systems , omb launched the portfoliostat initiative in march 2012 , which requires agencies to conduct an annual , agency - wide it portfolio review to , among other things , reduce commodity it spending and demonstrate how their it investments align with the agency's mission and business functions . in 2013 and 2015 we reported that agencies had the potential to save at least $3.8 billion through this initiative . however , we noted that weaknesses existed in agencies' implementation of the initiative ; therefore , we made more than 60 recommendations to omb and agencies . omb partially agreed with our recommendations , and responses from 21 of the agencies varied , with some agreeing and others not . it shared services strategy . in may 2012 , omb released its federal it shared services strategy .