reg . 81,807 ( dec. 29 , 2011 ) ( to be codified at 32 c.f.r . pt . 158 ) ; department of defense instruction 3020.41 , operational contract support ( ocs ) ( dec. 20 , 2011 ) . officials , most of the annexes that had been drafted at that time restated broad language from existing dod guidance on the use of contractors to support deployed forces but included few details on the type of contractors needed to execute a given plan . we also found shortcomings in guidance for planners on how and when to develop contract support annexes , which resulted in a mismatch of expectations between senior dod leadership and combatant command planners regarding the degree to which annex ws would contain specific information on contract support requirements . overall , we found that requiring consideration of potential contract support requirements raised awareness of the importance of operational contract support and led to some improvements in planning for contract support . nevertheless , we found that dod still risked not fully understanding the extent to which it would be relying on contractors to support combat operations and being unprepared to provide the necessary management and oversight of deployed contractor personnel . one way to help address this risk is to ensure military commanders and senior leaders are cognizant of the roles contractors have in supporting dod's efforts , as well as the role that dod military personnel have in managing and overseeing contractors . in 2006 and again in 2012 , we recommended that operational contract support training , with a particular emphasis on contingency operations , be included in professional military education to ensure that all military personnel expected to perform contract or contractor management duties , including commanders and senior leaders , receive training prior to deployment . military commanders and senior leaders have used contractors to perform a variety of services to help their units execute the mission , including life support , security , and communications support . we previously found that dod officials in afghanistan did not always receive training that adequately prepared them for their contract management and oversight duties , and according to dod officials , the training did not necessarily make them sufficiently capable for their particular assignments . further , contracting personnel have told us that commanders , particularly those in combat units , do not perceive operational contract support as a warfighter task . dod has developed a program of instruction on contingency acquisition to be taught at some of the military and senior staff colleges . however , we have previously reported that commanders and senior leaders are not required to take these courses before assuming their contract management roles and responsibilities . in contingencies , having the right people , with the right skills , in the right numbers can make the difference between success and failure . these individuals — whether acquisition professionals or non - acquisition personnel , including military commanders — play critical roles in defining requirements , managing and overseeing contracts and contractors , and helping to ensure that the warfighter receives the goods and services needed in a timely manner while serving to mitigate the risks of fraud , waste , and abuse .