sampling error . the report provides no information on the precision of its estimates . usually , this is expressed in a confidence interval . we cannot , therefore , judge the reliability of the point estimates . nonresponse error . the report mentions a process of reserve replacement sampled households in the event of a noncontact . however , no data is kept on how frequently these were used , so it is not possible to calculate a response rate . officials reported that this replacement rate was low . coverage error . sixty - eight of the 2441 primary sampling units were replaced , mostly due to security concerns . such coverage errors could lead to a coverage bias if those covered are categorically different from those not covered with respect to variables of interest . measurement error . while most of the questionnaire is not of a sensitive nature , we have to be aware that farmers might not be completely honest with a government interviewer when it comes to the cultivation of illicit crops . as such , our assessment was based only on information that was made available about the survey methodology . we conducted this performance audit from march 2009 through july 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . summary financial information about the eight agriculture programs discussed in our report is reported in table 5 . because we selected relatively large programs , the total amount of funds that usaid planned to spend on these eight programs over $1 billion or 75 percent of the total awards for all 41 agriculture programs . one program , the afghanistan vouchers for increased production in agriculture program , accounts for 26 percent of all agricultural awards . as of the end of fiscal year 2009 , these eight programs accounted for 69 percent of total usaid agricultural assistance disbursements , with one program accounting for 18 percent of all disbursements . the following figure shows the provinces in which the eight agricultural programs we reviewed were active and an example of the types of activities they undertook . the following tables provide information on the annual number of indicators that fell into one of the eight percentage categories . performance is measured by comparing results against targets . we assessed annual performance — the number of indicators that met or exceeded their target — for each of the eight programs to highlight improvements and declines in performance that took place in a given fiscal year .