in addition , the u.s . marshals service , within the department of justice , modified an existing agreement with foh in 2003 for foh to screen approximately 200 u.s . marshals service employees assigned to the wtc or pentagon recovery sites . the one - time assessment includes a screening questionnaire and a medical examination . ( see table 2. ) two of these programs — the fdny wtc medical monitoring program and the worker and volunteer program — are tracking the health of wtc rescue , recovery , and cleanup workers and volunteers over time . the third program , the new york state responder screening program , offered one - time screening examinations to state employees , including national guard personnel , who participated in wtc rescue , recovery , and cleanup work . for example , the wtc health registry received funding in july 2002 but did not begin collecting data until september 2003 — 2 years after the disaster . from july 2002 through september 2003 , the program's activities included developing the registry protocol , testing the questionnaire , and obtaining approval from institutional review boards . to expedite such information collection during the response to future disasters , atsdr officials have developed a model data collection instrument , known as the rapid response registry , to allow officials to identify and locate potentially affected individuals immediately after a disaster and collect basic preliminary information , such as their current contact information and their location during the disaster . atsdr officials expect that using this instrument would reduce delays in collecting time - sensitive information while officials take the time necessary to develop a monitoring program for disaster - related health effects . according to atsdr officials , state and local agencies can request the instrument and adapt it to their specific needs , and atsdr can provide technical assistance on how to use the instrument . to date , 14 states have requested the rapid response registry from atsdr . furthermore , officials told us that health monitoring for future disasters could benefit from additional centrally coordinated planning . such planning could facilitate the collection of compatible data among monitoring efforts , to the extent that this is appropriate . federal employees who responded to the wtc disaster in an official capacity were not eligible for any of these programs because it was expected that another program would be developed for them . ( see table 1. ) none of the monitoring programs receives federal funds to provide clinical treatment for health problems that are identified . the majority of federal funding for these monitoring programs was provided by dhs's federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , as part of the approximately $8.8 billion in federal assistance that the congress appropriated to fema for response and recovery activities after the wtc disaster . one appropriation in 2003 specifically authorized fema to use a portion of its wtc - related funding for screening and long - term monitoring of emergency services and rescue and recovery personnel . generally , however , fema may fund only short - term care after a disaster , such as emergency medical services , and not ongoing clinical treatment .