sustainability of funding . although most of the federal programs we identified were not established as a direct result of hurricane katrina , the programs that are hurricane - related have been an important source of support for mental health services for children in the greater new orleans area . however , much of this funding is temporary . for example , three hurricane - related grant programs — cms's pcasg and professional workforce supply grant and acf's 2006 ssbg supplemental funding — will no longer be available to grantees after 2010 . although the pcasg was created with the expectation that providing short - term financial relief would significantly increase the likelihood of the pcasg fund recipients' sustainability , and pcasg recipients were required to prepare sustainability strategies as part of their application , it is too early to know whether these organizations will achieve sustainability . since hurricane katrina , the number of sbhcs in the greater new orleans area has increased . at the start of the 2005-06 school year , there were seven sbhcs providing mental health and other primary care services to children in the greater new orleans area . most of these sbhcs were closed as a result of damage from hurricanes katrina and rita , and the ones that remained open had also sustained damage . during the 2007-08 school year , there were nine sbhcs in the greater new orleans area , and state officials told us in february 2009 that at least four more sbhcs were in the planning stages for this area . louisiana's sbhcs receive their funding from several sources . the ldhh office of public health , which oversees sbhcs in the state , provides some state funding . there is no federal program whose specific purpose is to support sbhcs , but ldhh and local providers have used funding from various federal sources to support sbhcs . for example , a state official told us that the office of public health has used a small portion of ldhh's annual maternal and child health services block grant from hrsa to support sbhcs . some organizations that support sbhcs in the greater new orleans area have also received temporary funding , such as from the pcasg and the hurricane - related ssbg supplemental funding . in addition , the jefferson parish human services authority , which provides mental health services at sbhcs , has received funding allocated by ldhh's office of mental health from samhsa's community mental health services block grant . furthermore , providers at some sbhcs told us they could receive medicaid reimbursement for some mental health services , including those related to psychiatric care . state officials told us that although cms permitted the reimbursement of social work services provided at sbhcs , the louisiana medicaid program had not provided reimbursement for social work services because of state funding constraints . some sbhcs may also obtain funding from nonprofit organizations . for example , grant funding from the w.k . kellogg foundation was significant in the rebuilding and expansion of sbhcs after hurricane katrina . because louisiana requires sbhcs to have mental health staff on - site , sbhcs can be an access point for children who need mental health services in the greater new orleans area .