we have taken no position on the formula to be used . our report points out the advantages and disadvantages of potential formulas and that some agencies may benefit at the expense of others , depending on the formula used . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees . we are also providing copies of this report to the secretaries of agriculture , commerce , defense , health and human services , homeland security , justice , state , and the treasury ; the administrator , u.s. agency for international development ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the librarian of congress . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4128 . john brummet , lynn cothern , martin de alteriis , mary moutsos , julia a. roberts , and george taylor made key contributions to this report . our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the department of state's rationale for and development of the proposed capital security cost - sharing program , ( 2 ) agency concerns about the program , and ( 3 ) the influence of the proposed program on agencies' decisions on overseas staff levels . to complete our work , we analyzed data , reviewed documents , and discussed the program in washington , d.c. , with officials of state's bureau of overseas buildings operations ( obo ) , which is responsible for the embassy construction program ; the office of management and budget ( omb ) ; and eight other executive branch departments and agencies , including the departments of agriculture , commerce , defense , health and human services , homeland security , justice , and the treasury , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . we also reviewed documents and held discussions in washington , d.c. , with officials of the library of congress , a legislative branch agency . we selected the executive branch departments and agencies because they have staff overseas and , under the current proposal , would have the largest annual cost - sharing charges . we selected the library of congress because it is the only nonexecutive branch agency that would pay cost - sharing fees . to describe the overall rationale for and development of the proposed program , we examined numerous reports and other documents , including those issued by obo , the overseas presence advisory panel , and other working groups and committees . we reviewed historical information dating back to 1999 , including the alternative formulas obo considered before selecting the head - count formula to assess agencies' fees for embassy construction . we reviewed documents and held discussions in washington , d.c. , with officials of nine executive branch agencies or departments with the largest cost - sharing fee assessments and with the library of congress .