administration . gao's 2009 congressional and presidential transition web site: http: / / www.gao.gov / transition_2009 . house committee on homeland security,getting beyond getting ready for pandemic influenza , a report prepared by the majority staff , 111th cong. , 1st sess. , january 2009 . the strategy was built around six key themes as shown in figure 1 . while all of these themes are interrelated , our earlier work underscored the importance of leadership , authority , and coordination , a theme that touches on all aspects of preparing for , responding to , and recovering from an influenza pandemic . at your request , this report synthesizes the work thus far completed under this strategy . in the past 3 years , we have issued 11 reports and two testimonies on influenza pandemic planning , which address these key themes . we have made 23 recommendations based on the findings from many of these reports and testimonies . thirteen of these recommendations have been acted upon by the responsible federal agencies , but while the responsible federal agencies have generally agreed with our recommendations , 10 recommendations have not yet been implemented . we also have three pandemic - related reviews underway on the following topics: ( 1 ) the status of implementing the national strategy for pandemic influenza implementation plan ( national pandemic implementation plan ) ; ( 2 ) plans to protect the federal workforce in a pandemic ; and ( 3 ) the effect of a pandemic on the telecommunications capacity needed to sustain critical financial market activities . a list of our open and implemented recommendations can be found in appendices i and ii . while this report makes no new recommendations , we have updated the status of recommendations that have not yet been implemented . a list of our related gao products that are referenced throughout this report is located after appendix iii . we also collaborated with several state and local audit offices on coordinated audits of state and local pandemic planning and consulted with audit offices from a number of countries on pandemic - related activities through our external partnerships . these countries include austria , belgium , cambodia , canada , germany , indonesia , japan , kazakhstan , sweden , the united kingdom , and vietnam . we have also drawn from audits of pandemic planning and exercising conducted by audit officials in portland , oregon ; kansas city , missouri ; and new york state . finally , we have incorporated recent studies conducted by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , national governors association ( nga ) , united nations system influenza coordinator ( unsic ) , and the world bank . this report is largely based on our prior work , which was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .