( see fig . the agency is headquartered in washington , d.c. , and maintains 10 field offices nationwide and a training academy in ashburn , virginia , in suburban washington , d.c . in recent years , the agency has shrunk in size due to budget constraints , which it has largely dealt with by using attrition to downsize the staff . in 2003 , ntsb had 438 full time employees compared with the current level of 396 . during the same period , the number of full - time investigators decreased from 234 to 210 . ntsb's modal offices vary in size , with the aviation office having 125 employees ; the rail , pipeline , and hazardous materials office having 38 ; the highway office having 30 ; and the marine office having 16 employees as of may 2006 . an additional 42 employees work in the office of research and engineering , which provides technical , laboratory , analytical , and engineering support for the modal investigation offices . for example , it is responsible for interpreting data recorders , creating accident computer simulations , and publishing general safety studies . ntsb's budget increased from $62.9 million in fiscal year 2001 to $76.7 million in fiscal year 2006 , or about 22 percent . after adjusting for inflation , this represents an increase of about 9 percent . the president has requested $79.6 million for ntsb in fiscal year 2007 . since 1966 , ntsb has investigated over 124,000 aviation accidents and over 10,000 surface transportation accidents . figure 3 shows the total number of aviation investigations that ntsb has undertaken over the past 6 years and the degree to which ntsb was involved in the investigations . ntsb lacks the resources to conduct on - scene investigations of all aviation accidents . as a result , for general aviation accidents , ntsb delegates the gathering of on - scene information to faa investigators , as allowed by statute . in these limited investigations , faa sends the accident information to ntsb , and ntsb then determines a probable cause for the accident . in addition , ntsb participates in the investigations of foreign aviation accidents in conformance with annex 13 of the international civil aeronautics organization treaty . these investigations involve a u.s. carrier or u.s. - built aircraft , or occur at the request of a foreign government . ntsb aviation investigators told us that there is often significant value in participating in such investigations ; the findings often have safety implications for u.s. carriers , since most foreign airlines use u.s. - made aircraft , engines , and other parts and multiple foreign air carriers operate within the united states . through our work government wide we have identified a number of key functional areas and leading practices in areas that are important for managing an agency . this testimony focuses on ntsb's performance in five key functional areas — strategic planning , performance management , human capital , financial management , and communications — and how ntsb's practices compare to leading practices in those areas .