these leases were then broken down into subsets for specific analysis . the pool of leases analyzed for each of the clauses and actions varies based on the compliance of those leases to the criteria for that pool . there was symmetry in the dispersion , again indicating a valid sampling of leases . misclassified properties were identified within this data set , and outliers were not analyzed or included in the subsequent data sets . the rental rates per square foot analyzed were all - inclusive . the collection of private sector lease data for markets nationwide for each year of the analytical period included the collection and consideration of: quarterly and annual published market reports for 151 markets and submarkets nationwide , collected from 58 national and regional brokerage companies and used to summarize market rent based on actual leases and listings in each market and submarket . fifteen private sector office leases for national companies , often publically traded and viewed as credit - worthy tenants by brokers and landlords who were parties to the lease . additional examples from our analysis are illustrated in figure 5 . although agencies typically lack the resources to fund improvements at the outset of a lease according to gsa officials , there may be opportunities to reduce overall federal leasing costs by identifying funds to reduce the amount of interest paid to private lessors . the federal management regulation states that the basic real estate acquisition policy is to acquire real estate in an efficient and cost - effective manner . we have previously reported that lack of capital to finance real property investments , including tenant improvements , has been a long - standing challenge for gsa and other federal agencies . however , identifying sources of capital to fund tenant improvement costs at the outset would reduce federal agencies' leasing costs . one possible option to reduce the costs paid by tenant agencies could be to provide budget authority for gsa to finance the capital needed for tenant improvements to be paid at the outset of a new lease and have the tenant pay it back over the term , without the interest charges a tenant agency currently pays . for example , it is possible that gsa could use available balances from the federal buildings fund ( fbf ) to fund tenant improvement costs , with sufficient controls in place , at the outset of a lease . the fbf is administered by gsa and was established in 1972 as the primary source of funds for operating and capital costs associated with federal space . gsa collects rent from tenant agencies , deposits it into the fbf , and uses that money — as authorized by congress — to fund real property acquisition , operation , maintenance , and disposal . the fbf has contained unobligated balances for several years and , as of february 2015 , the fund had an unobligated balance of $3.6 billion . however , gsa does not currently have the budget authority to use the unobligated balances in the fbf to fund tenant improvements . gsa officials said that the concept of funding agencies' tenant improvements using unobligated fbf balances has potential , but also said that gsa has not formally considered this approach .