public roads . border patrol has access to public roads — those under the jurisdiction of and maintained by a public authority ( federal , state , local , or tribal entity ) and open to public travel — to the same extent as other users of such public routes . while border patrol has authority to use such public roads for border security operations , cbp is statutorily prohibited from maintaining and repairing nonfederal ( state , local , county , and city ) public roads because performing such work without a specific appropriation could violate the anti - deficiency act and 41 u.s.c . § 6303 which prohibits the u.s. government from making or authorizing an expenditure exceeding available appropriated funds . laredo sector officials stated that sometimes they receive pushback from landowners regarding border patrol accessing their land , but in general , most landowners want border patrol on their property . conversely , el centro and el paso sector officials reported that they do not have documented license agreements with private landowners regarding the maintenance of privately owned roads . in the el centro sector , officials stated that they typically have verbal and not documented agreements with private landowners for maintenance . these officials stated , however , that documenting agreements would provide a clearer understanding of how privately owned roads are to be maintained . a number of factors contribute to the lack of documented road maintenance arrangements between border patrol and private landowners . first , some landowners choose not to pursue a license agreement with border patrol to address maintenance of their roads as a condition of access to the roads because they support border patrol's mission and need the security provided by the agency . in these instances , landowners have no concerns about border patrol agents accessing their land without a documented agreement . for example , five private landowners we met with individually , as well as others we met with in three separate community group meetings , told us they did not have a documented license agreement with border patrol ; but some of them nonetheless allow border patrol to continue using their roads without addressing maintenance . however , one private landowner we interviewed told us that regardless of whether a ranch owner wants border patrol agents on his or her property for the security they provide , the additional money the owner must spend to maintain his or her roads used by border patrol is a financial burden . second , some landowners are not aware that border patrol can enter into arrangements with them to address maintenance of their roads . for example , two of the five landowners who lack documented license agreements with border patrol told us this . third , some landowners are interested in maintenance agreements but have not received them . for example , three landowners told us they had requested an agreement to address maintenance of their roads ; however , border patrol had not worked with them on such an agreement . two of these landowners said they generally incur an additional maintenance cost due to border patrol's regular use and lack of maintenance of their roads .