( see fig . officials in both europe and korea expressed their views that ibcts could be used effectively in their theaters of operation . officials of the u.s. central command , which covers southwest asia , said that an ibct had utility in their theater — notably africa — where fighting in urban terrain might occur . according to pacific command officials , their theater could use army forces that are more deployable , lethal , and sustainable than currently assigned , especially for use in the urban areas prevalent in that theater . cinc representatives generally did not expect the ibct to substitute for forces currently assigned . rather , they saw the ibct as providing them with a broader choice of capabilities to meet their operational needs . the european command wants the army to station an ibct in its area of responsibility . the central command's primary area of responsibility is southwest asia and is one of two geographic areas that have required war planning for a major theater war . one official noted that an ibct could provide significant capability to the cinc's theater engagement plans by providing mobile training teams and other military - to - military missions with developing nations . command officials stated that the ibcts would offer new capabilities to their theater in certain circumstances . for example , had an ibct been available during the persian gulf war , the ibct could have been used rather than the 82nd airborne division since the ibct's planned anti - armor capability far exceeds that of a light division . moreover , the ibct would be useful in conducting missions such as reconnaissance and security and securing main supply routes . command officials stated that an ibct would have been valuable had it been available for the urban mission in mogadishu , somalia , during october 1993 . they added that the ibct could also be used for evacuating noncombatants . command officials noted that even though the ibct offers them new capabilities , they would not substitute it for the heavy combat forces that are required for a major war such as the gulf war . army officials in korea have stated that they want to station an ibct in korea . according to one senior army official in korea , the ibct would provide the maneuverability and combat power needed to operate in the mountains and the increasingly urbanized areas of korea . war planners in korea expressed their view that the ibct is optimized to meet the operational requirements of the korean peninsula and that the ibct would have more utility than bradley fighting vehicles and m1 tanks . they explained that these latter weapons would have to be used primarily as stationary weapon platforms because the terrain and the sprawling urban terrain limit their use . they noted that ibcts are more mobile than light forces and once equipped with all their new weapon systems will have good lethality and be survivable . further , according to cinc officials , the theater will not lose or diminish its combat capability by substituting ibcts for heavy forces .