i had to search for it . you want at the top .” recall notification e - mail system sign - up some consumers suggested improvements to make the recall notification e - mail system sign - up easier to locate on the homepage . nhtsa first made its recall notification e - mail system sign - up available in march 2008 . of the 94 consumers in our testing sessions , 66 found it either “somewhat” or “very easy” to find the recall notification e - mail system sign - up — making this the least easy of the three tasks we asked consumers to perform . specifically , several consumers said the recall notification e - mail system sign - up should include a clearer description , be easier to find , and be located at the top of the homepage ( see fig . these improvements are particularly important because some consumers in our focus group sessions told us that the ability to sign up for auto recall e - mail notifications was the most useful part of the auto recall areas of nhtsa.gov . ( 2 ) how easy or difficult to use do consumers find the auto recall areas of nhtsa.gov ? ( 3 ) what steps , if any , has nhtsa taken to raise consumer awareness about auto recalls and how has nhtsa evaluated the effectiveness of these steps ? for purposes of this report we define publicly available auto recall information to include information on the auto recall areas of nhtsa.gov , such as examples of notification letters that manufacturers mail to consumers . this report focuses on safety defect vehicle recalls affecting passenger vehicles that are initiated when a defect in a vehicle or vehicle equipment creates an unreasonable safety risk , as determined by nhtsa or a manufacturer . to inform the first two objectives , we conducted 12 focus groups with new and used vehicle owners who had experienced an auto recall in the last 24 months . each focus group was split into two sessions: ( 1 ) a discussion session to explore participants' thoughts , experiences , and preferences about auto recall information and ( 2 ) a session to test the usability of the auto recall areas of nhtsa.gov . we conducted focus groups at six locations across the country to provide population and geographic dispersion , with each group including 7 or 8 consumers for a total of 94 participants . half of the focus groups were comprised of consumers who had completed the repair and the remaining half included consumers who had not completed the repair . we selected focus group participants based on age , income , gender , education level , race , and ethnicity to ensure we collected a range of perspectives . we evaluated transcripts of each focus group session using systematic content analysis to identify how consumers used auto recall information and to evaluate how easy or difficult consumers found the auto recall areas of nhtsa.gov to use .