other data also suggest growth in the sector . as shown in figure 2 , the number of 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations completing the form 990 has almost tripled over the last two decades ( from 1986 to 2006 ) from about 148,000 to about 427,000 . experts have identified several possible contributing reasons for this increase: a shift in recent decades away from government providing most services directly ; the expansion of service - related industries in the u.s. , of which many nonprofits are a part ; deinstitutionalization during the 1960s and 1970s that eliminated large , public care facilities in favor of smaller , community - based organizations , often operated by nonprofit entities ; and the trend in devolution in certain policy areas such as welfare , which contributed to a lessening role of the federal government and more localized control in the hands of state , local , and nonprofit organizations . nonprofit organizations are found in a wide variety of policy areas such as health care , education , and human services , and include many prominent and highly visible community institutions , such as hospitals , museums , job training centers , and churches . ( see a list of categories in app . these organizations also represent a diverse range of sizes . according to the independent sector , 73 percent had annual budgets of less than $500,000 in 2004 and only 4 percent had budgets exceeding $10 million . much of the data on the sector come from the irs form 990 , but those data have limitations . for example , returned forms 990 are sometimes incomplete or inaccurate and are not consistently followed up on , and some nonprofit organizations required to submit forms 990 do not do so . in addition , for certain types of funding , the form 990 does not distinguish between government and private sources of support . it also does not break out the sources of government grants by federal , state , or local level . we have pointed out in the past the importance of requiring information in a more timely and user - friendly way on irs forms 990 . nonprofit organizations bring many strengths to their partnerships with the federal government . their breadth and diversity allow the sector to address the specific needs of communities and of individuals . researchers commenting on the advantages of nonprofits point out the provision of benefits in the public interest , often with greater flexibility and access than can be achieved by the public sector . their work offers a glimpse into the magnitude of federal funds going to nonprofits , but does not provide a comprehensive analysis of the various funding streams . for example: researchers have reported that the federal government provided about $115 billion directly to nonprofits in fiscal year 2001 , the majority of which hospitals received through the medicare program . indirect federal funds through state and local governments to nonprofits were an estimated $84 billion , totaling about $199 billion , or about 15 percent of federal payments and grants . data from other researchers indicate that the federal government spent an estimated $317 billion on nonprofit organizations in fiscal year 2004 .