they called the expanded program idr . according to program officials , the agency's vision was for idr to become the single repository for cms's data and enable data analysis within and across programs . specifically , this repository was to establish the infrastructure for storing data related to medicaid and medicare parts a , b , and d claims processing , as well as a variety of other agency functions , such as program management , research , analytics , and business intelligence . cms envisioned an incremental approach to incorporating data into idr . specifically , it intended to incorporate data related to paid claims for medicare part d by the end of fiscal year 2006 , and for medicare parts a and b by the end of fiscal year 2007 . the agency also planned to begin to incrementally add all medicaid data for the 50 states in fiscal year 2009 and to complete this effort by the end of fiscal year 2012 . initial program plans and schedules also included the incorporation of additional data from legacy cms claims - processing systems that store and process data related to the entry , correction , and adjustment of claims as they are being processed , along with detailed financial data related to paid claims . according to program officials , these data , called “shared systems” data , are needed to support the agency's plans to incorporate tools to conduct predictive analysis of claims as they are being processed , helping to prevent improper payments . shared systems data , such as check numbers and amounts related to claims that have been paid , are also needed by law enforcement agencies to help with fraud investigations . cms initially planned to have all the shared systems data included in idr by july 2008 . table 1 , presented in our prior report , summarized cms's original planned dates and actual dates for incorporating the various types of data into idr as of the end of fiscal year 2010 . also in 2006 , cms initiated the one pi program with the intention of developing and implementing a portal and software tools that would enable access to and analysis of claims , provider , and beneficiary data from a centralized source . additional information on our scope and methodology is available in the issued report . we also obtained and conducted a review of more recent documentation pertaining to the agency's efforts to develop and implement the systems . we conducted this work in support of our testimony during november and december 2011 at cms headquarters in baltimore , maryland . all work on which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . like financial institutions , credit card companies , telecommunications firms , and other private sector companies that take steps to protect customers' accounts , cms uses information technology to help predict or detect cases of improper claims and payments . for more than a decade , the agency and its contractors have used automated software tools to analyze data from various sources to detect patterns of unusual activities or financial transactions that indicate payments could be made for fraudulent charges or improper payments .