i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact mark gaffigan or anu k. mittal at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or gaffiganm@gao.gov and mittala@gao.gov , respectively . overall , we found many more examples of noncompliance with guidance than violations of the law . we did not find intentional actions on the part of blm staff to circumvent the law ; rather , our findings reflected what appear to be honest mistakes stemming from confusion in implementing a new law with evolving guidance . a detailed description of our scope and methodology in presented in appendix i of the september 2009 report . under the federal land policy and management act of 1976 , as amended ( flpma ) , blm manages about 250 million acres of federal land for multiple uses , including recreation ; range ; timber ; minerals ; watershed ; wildlife and fish ; and natural scenic , scientific , and historical values , as well as for the sustained yield of renewable resources . in addition , the mineral leasing act of 1920 charges interior with responsibility for oil and gas leasing on federal and private lands where the federal government has retained mineral rights . blm is responsible for managing approximately 700 million mineral onshore acres , which include the acreage leased for oil and gas development . to manage its responsibilities , blm administers its programs through its headquarters office in washington , d.c. ; 12 state offices ; 45 district offices ; and 128 field offices . blm headquarters develops guidance and regulations for the agency , while the state , district , and field offices manage and implement the agency's programs . thirty blm field offices , located primarily in the mountain west , were involved in oil and gas development . to drill for oil or natural gas on leased lands , a company must submit an apd to blm . apds are used to approve drilling and all related activities on land leased by a company , including road building ; digging pits to store drilling effluent ; placing pipelines to carry oil and gas to market ; and building roads to transport equipment , personnel , and other production - related materials . after an apd is approved , operators can submit proposals to blm , in the form of a sundry notice , for modifications to their approved apd . sundry notices may involve activities like changing the location of a well , adding an additional pipeline , or adding remote communications equipment . interior and blm have administrative categorical exclusions in place for numerous types of activities , such as constructing nesting platforms for wild birds and constructing snow fences for safety . to use such an administrative categorical exclusion in approving a project on blm land , the agency screens each proposed project for extraordinary circumstances , such as significant impacts to threatened and endangered species , historic or cultural resources , or human health and safety or potentially significant cumulative environmental effects when coupled with other actions . when one or more extraordinary circumstances exist , blm guidance precludes staff from using an administrative categorical exclusion for the project .