the mig does have an earnings test . each $1 of benefit is withdrawn for each $1 in earnings above the mig level . in october 2003 , the government will replace the mig with the pension credit , in part to reduce the mig's earnings test . with the pension credit , each $1 of income will lead to a $0.40 decrease in benefits , increasing the worker's overall income by $0.60 . the pension credit consists of two elements: ( 1 ) a guarantee credit which tops up the income of a single person to £102 per week ( about $163 per week or about $8,500 per year ) and ( 2 ) a savings credit which provides a benefit to those with modest savings , pension income , or earnings . ( 3 ) what did these nations learn from enacting policies that may increase the labor force participation of older workers ? to answer these questions , we compiled and analyzed demographic and labor force data from the oecd , the united nations population division , and the international labour organization ( ilo ) , highlighting data from the united states and seven other comparison oecd nations . in addition , we consulted with individual experts in national pension policy and conducted an extensive review of the international retirement literature . on the basis of this preliminary research , we identified three nations — japan , sweden , and the united kingdom — that had displayed high levels of older worker labor force participation in the past and were now implementing policy reforms that continued to emphasize the importance of older worker labor force participation . we then examined these nations' pension systems — both national and employer - provided — and labor market policies through interviews , literature reviews , and site visits . we met with key government officials concerning pension and labor market policy , representatives from employer organizations and labor unions , and well - known scholars who have studied older worker issues in each nation . we conducted our work between february 2002 and january 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for more details on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . for more details on the pension systems and labor market policies of our sample of nations , see appendixes ii to iv . the number of persons in the united states over age 55 will grow substantially over the next two decades . due to the aging of the baby boom generation , older persons are becoming an increasingly significant proportion of all persons and workers . in 2002 , the u.s. census bureau estimates that there were 61 million people over age 55 and their numbers are projected to grow to 103 million in 2025 . this growth will increase the percentage of the population that is over 55 from 22 percent to 30 percent . this shift in population age will affect the composition of the labor force . the number of older workers in the united states is projected to grow substantially over the next two decades , and they will become an increasingly significant proportion of all workers .