david j . wise at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov , or debra a. draper at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or draperd@gao.gov . in addition to the contacts named above , keith cunningham , assistant director ; jeff mayhew , analyst - in - charge ; colleen taylor ; laurie f. thurber ; and michelle weathers made key contributions to this report . also contributing were jacquelyn hamilton , john mingus , sara ann moessbauer , malika rice , and crystal wesco . there are 737 cbocs . health care center: a medical facility that provides the same services as cbocs , but also ambulatory surgical procedures that may require moderate sedation . there are 22 health care centers . other outpatient service: a medical facility that provides care to veterans but is not classified as a cboc or health care center , such as a mobile treatment facility . there are 305 other outpatient services sites . in order to meet the needs of the veterans it serves , va is authorized to pay for veteran health care services from non - va providers through both the non - va medical care program and clinical contracts . in fiscal year 2015 , va obligated about $10.1 billion to purchase care from non - va providers . the non - va medical care program , including the choice program and patient - centered community care , is referred to as “care in the community” by va , and allows va to offer care to veterans in non - va facilities , such as physicians' offices and hospitals in the community , and pay for this care using a fee - for - service arrangement . clinical contracts are used by va to bring non - va providers — such as physicians , pharmacists , and nurses — into va facilities to provide services to veterans . va works with the visns , and medical facilities to manage its real property assets through va's capital - planning process . the scip process — established in 2010 to assess and identify long - term capital needs — is va's main mechanism for planning and prioritizing capital - planning projects , but is affected by the va's budgetary resources , which will determine how many projects will be funded . the goal of scip is to identify the full capital need to address va's service and infrastructure gaps , and to demonstrate that all project requests are centrally reviewed in an equitable and consistent way throughout va , including across market areas within va's health care system given competing capital needs . the scip process for that particular fiscal year's projects begins approximately 23 months before the start of the fiscal year with va providing a set of guidelines to the visns and medical facilities . scip uses information from models to identify excesses and deficits in the services at the local level — called “gaps” within va — and justify capital investments . for example , scip uses data from the ehcpm , a model for projecting veteran enrollment , utilization of va health care , and the associated expenditures va needs to meet the expected demand for most of the health care services it provides .