the case is then closed . if bepr concurs with the case development team's findings that other misconduct may have occurred , bepr is to recommend a referral to tigta or irs management for investgation , and regular disciplinary procedures are to apply . if bepr agrees with the case development team's findings that section 1203 misconduct may have occurred , bepr is to recommend a referral to tigta for investigation . once tigta or bepr determines an allegation to have investigative merit as a possible section 1203 violation , tigta is to perform the investigation . specifically , tigta may review records , interview witnesses , and consult technical experts as necessary to develop information relevant to the alleged violation . in some cases , the possible section 1203 misconduct may also be a potential violation of criminal law . in these cases , tigta is to refer its findings to a local u.s. attorney office for consideration of criminal prosecution . after the investigation is completed , and a referral is made to a u.s. attorney , if appropriate , tigta is to provide a report of investigation to ccpag . all tigta reports of investigation on allegations of section 1203 violations are first to be reviewed by ccpag to determine whether the evidence can support the allegation for a section 1203 violation . we did not assess the impact of the nonrespondents on our results . to the extent that the nonrespondents had different views than the respondents , then our findings would be biased . the response rates for the revenue agent , revenue officer , and tax compliance officer strata are fairly high and give us a high degree of confidence that our findings for these groups are likely to be representative of the fuller populations . the 44 percent response rate for the tax auditor strata raises the possibility that the results for this group may have been different if more employees had chosen to complete the survey . to ensure the integrity of the survey data , we performed a quality control check on the surveys that were keyed into an automated data file . we found no keying errors . we identified areas to cover in the survey based on our congressional request and initial interviews with irs and national treasury employees union officials . we pretested the survey to irs revenue agents , revenue officers , and tax compliance officers at three irs field offices ( at the time of the pretests , tax auditors were unavailable ) . two of the offices were located in suburban maryland and another was located in washington , d.c . in doing the pretest , we evaluated the appropriateness of the survey questions and the various formats we planned to use in administering the survey . based on the pretests , we made necessary changes to the survey prior to its nationwide implementation . we administered the survey in three ways: mail , internet , and as a portable document format ( pdf ) attachment sent out via e - mail . the respondents could submit their completed surveys through regular mail , fax , or the internet .