figure 2 . percentage of time that close air support operations met ground commander's intent at army's national training center ( calendar years1998-2000 ) the task force attributed this low success rate to several factors , in particular the lack of integration between the air force controllers and army fire support teams , whose mission is to coordinate different types of firepower . standardize airborne controller training . expand air liaison officer course . expand fire support element curriculum . produce joint mission essential task lists . establish joint integrated training plans . increase use of simulated training . increase joint exercises . include new concepts in joint publication 3-09.3 . update service tactic techniques and procedures to reflect joint publication 3-09.3 revisions . develop new concepts experiments to validate systems and procedures . publish a capstone requirements document . explore joint air force - marine corps ground controller equipment procurement . standardize symbols and graphics . coordinate with combat identification action plan team on overlapping issues . in addition to the 12 remaining items , of which 2 have been combined , the executive steering committee has proposed adding 3 new items to the updated plan . these are the inclusion of unmanned aerial vehicles in joint close air support operations , an increased emphasis on precision targeting , and an increase in live sortie and artillery resources . ideally , air power would be employed seamlessly along with artillery and other fire support . we heard frequently about this issue from the commanders of army units we visited in the united states , germany , and korea . they told us that army teams did not view assigned aircraft controllers as a part of their teams and , thus , were not as comfortable relying on the controllers to provide support as they were with their own unit personnel . army unit personnel work with the controllers only a few times a month or during field training exercises . consequently , a deployed army team may have to rely on controllers with whom they have not worked during training and in whom they have not developed confidence . on the other hand , air force controllers who are trying to integrate themselves into the army structure must still report to air force leadership , and thus they have to satisfy the needs of two different commanders . perhaps most telling , the task force observers also noted that integrating close air support was often an “afterthought” during ground maneuver exercises . some participants they interviewed expressed concerns about how well they were prepared for the mission . air force participants , for example , noted they did not get enough practice with the army's teams , and army participants pointed out that training for this mission was often overlooked and underemphasized . in addition to infrequent training opportunities , many of the unit leaders and soldiers we interviewed expressed disappointment with the effectiveness of the close air support training they received at the army's training centers . pilots told us that because training scenarios at the centers are scripted to maximize training benefits for maneuver forces , ground commanders fail to use aircrews effectively . in short , available aircraft are underutilized , thus limiting the training pilots receive .