ao . ov . gg if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 or crossem@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . to examine trends in pharmaceutical industry spending on direct - to - consumer ( dtc ) advertising , promotion to medical professionals , and research and development of new drugs , we reviewed publicly reported data . for overall drug company spending from 1997 through 2005 on dtc advertising and promotion to medical professionals , we obtained data from ims health . we interviewed knowledgeable ims health officials to verify the data's accuracy and the methodologies used for collecting them and reviewed related documentation and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . in addition , we obtained data on drug company spending from 1997 through 2005 on research and development of new drugs from the pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america ( phrma ) , which represents u.s. pharmaceutical research and biotechnology companies . for 2005 , we reviewed more detailed data on dtc advertising by prescription drug from neilsen monitor - plus , which were reported in the may 2006 edition of med ad news , a publication targeted to the pharmaceutical industry . for the phrma and neilsen monitor - plus data , we reviewed related documentation and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . the scope of our analysis focuses on trends since 1997 because in that year the food and drug administration ( fda ) issued its draft guidance clarifying the requirements for broadcast advertising . to examine the relationship between dtc advertising and prescription drug spending and utilization , we conducted a literature review . we conducted a structured search of 33 databases that included peer - reviewed journal articles , dissertations , and industry articles issued from january 2000 through february 2006 . we searched these databases for articles with key words in their title or abstract related to dtc advertising , such as various versions of the word “advertising,” “consumer,” “patient,” “physician,” “doctor,” and “return on investment.” we supplemented this list with searches of the references in articles identified through the database search . we also included articles cited during our interviews with representatives from advocacy organizations — consumers union and public citizen — and industry representatives from phrma , astrazeneca pharmaceuticals lp , and pfizer inc. from all of these sources , we identified over 600 articles published from 1982 through 2006 . within the more than 600 articles , we identified for detailed review 64 journal articles and dissertations that were original research and had subject matter directly relevant to the relationship between dtc advertising and prescription drug spending and utilization . to examine the dtc advertising materials that fda reviews , we reviewed applicable laws and regulations and data from fda on the number and type of advertising materials that the agency receives and reviews .