i for more information on our selected states. ) for our selected states , we reviewed the contracts between the states and their mcos that were most recently approved as of december 2015 ; these contracts generally covered all or part of 2015 . states may limit some of these populations to adults or may include both children and adults . flexibility in determining whether enrollment will be mandatory or voluntary . generally , states with mandatory enrollment can require beneficiaries to be in the mltss program , whereas states with voluntary enrollment offer beneficiaries a choice between the mltss program and receiving similar services through fee - for - service ( ffs ) . flexibility in the services included and the extent to which mltss is part of a comprehensive managed care program . states can cover a variety of services , including community - based care and institutional care . in addition , some states choose to have mltss as part of a broader , comprehensive managed care program that also includes physical and behavioral health , while others have mltss as a separate managed care program . to be eligible for mltss , beneficiaries must meet income and asset requirements , and also meet state - established criteria on the level of care needed , such as needing an institutional level of care . once a person is determined eligible by the state medicaid agency , they can be enrolled in an mco . the mco then develops a service plan , which includes determining the types and amount of services expected to be needed by the beneficiary . ( see fig . for example , for a beneficiary receiving care in the home , the mco determines if personal care services are needed and , if so , the amount of services , such as the number of hours , needed per week . states are required to seek cms approval for their mltss programs , including their payment structures , which they can implement through several different authorities . among the most commonly used authorities are section 1115 demonstrations and section 1915 ( b ) waivers . in cms's 2013 guidance on its expectations for states' mltss programs using either of those two authorities , the guidance noted that states' programs should enhance the provision of community - based care . in addition , the guidance noted that , consistent with the intent of the americans with disabilities act and the olmstead decision , rate structures must encourage the delivery of community - based care , and other payments and penalties linked to performance must also support mltss program goals . other program goals could include provision of supports to aid beneficiaries in achieving competitive employment , provision of services in the most integrated setting , and consumer satisfaction . before approving an mltss program under one of these authorities , cms engages with states to shape the structure of the program , including alignment with cms's 2013 guidance . for example , a state generally goes through a design phase during which the state engages in discussions with cms .