development of the ground project is under way . after awarding the contract for the core ground system in may 2009 , the contractor has been conducting system definition activities and plans to conduct a preliminary design review in february 2011 to assess the readiness of the program to proceed with detailed design activities . however , the awards of two additional ground project contracts have been delayed and important work remains to be completed . for example , contract award for the goes - r access subsystem has slipped 6 months , from january 2010 to july 2010 . these delays were due , in part , to delays in releasing the request for proposals . award of the antennas contract has also been delayed by 3 months . both contracts are critical to ensuring that goes - r data are received , stored , and distributed to users . the status and program - identified risk level of each of the components of the ground project is described in table 7 . our analysis of contractor - provided earned value management data for the core ground system indicates that cost and schedule performance were generally on track between june 2009 and april 2010 . between these dates , the contractor for the core ground system completed work slightly under budget . over the last few years , noaa has delayed the satellite launch dates several times . we previously reported that , since 2006 , the launch of the first satellite had been delayed from september 2012 to april 2015 — a slip of more than 30 months . these delays were due , in part , to delays in releasing the requests for proposals for the spacecraft and core ground system and additional time needed to evaluate the contract proposals . since our last report , noaa further delayed key goes - r program milestones by 6 months , including the dates when the first two satellites in the series would be available for launch . these recent delays were due to bid protests of the award of the spacecraft contract in december 2008 , which delayed the start of work until august 2009 . in order to allow sufficient time for the 72-month development cycle required for the spacecraft , noaa approved a 6-month delay in the launch dates for the first two satellites in the series . table 8 identifies the delays in the satellite launch dates over time . while noaa's policy is to have two operational satellites and one backup satellite in orbit at all times , continued delays in the launch of the first goes - r satellite could lead to a gap in satellite coverage . this policy proved useful in december 2008 , when noaa experienced problems with goes - 12 , but was able to use goes - 13 as an operational satellite until the problems were resolved .