( app . iii discusses in greater detail responses to our survey with regard to receiving applications from external organizations. ) election officials representing 7 of the 14 jurisdictions also reported that their staff experienced challenges , to some extent or a great extent , checking voter registration applications for completeness , accuracy , or duplicates . during interviews we conducted prior to the november 2004 election , state and local election officials told us that they take specific steps to check voter registration applications before entering voter information into voter registration lists . all of the officials told us that they check applications for completeness before entering voter information into voter registration lists , and with regard to accuracy , took steps to verify eligibility when an applicant applies to register . for example , officials in arizona , texas , virginia , and new york said that their voter registration computer systems are programmed to calculate the age of the applicant , on the basis of the date of birth the registrant provides , and reject applications of individuals who will be younger than 18 years of age on the day of the next election . at the same time , arizona and michigan match their voter registration applications against state motor vehicle agency records to verify information . also , officials we spoke with in the seven states said that they initially verify that an applicant resides in the jurisdiction . finally , to identify duplicate registrations , election officials said that they check existing voter lists before adding new voters to the registration lists . our survey asked election officials in the 14 jurisdictions the extent to which their offices experienced challenges checking voter registration applications for completeness , accuracy , or duplicates and officials representing 7 of the 14 jurisdictions responded that their staff experienced , to some or a great extent , challenges in at least one of these three areas . figure 5 shows how election officials in the 14 jurisdictions responded to our survey regarding checking applications for completeness , or accuracy , or duplicates . in those instances where officials responded that checking applications for completeness , accuracy , and duplication was a challenge to some or a great extent , they also identified what caused the challenges to occur and what actions they took to try to address them . according to officials in 7 of the 14 jurisdictions , challenges occurred for various reasons — including difficulties determining what information on the application was inaccurate , problems contacting individuals to obtain complete and accurate information , insufficient time between receiving the applications and the state's registration deadline , and lack of sufficient resources or staff to check the applications . officials from these jurisdictions reported that they tried to address these challenges by , among other things , sending letters or calling applicants to get the correct information , asking individuals to provide information at the polls , and hiring additional staff or having staff work additional hours . ( app . iv discusses responses to our survey regarding checking voter registration applications in greater detail. )