vera was intended to correct these regional inequities . vera allocates nearly 90 percent of va's medical care appropriation . these allocations are for six categories of expenses: complex patient care , basic patient care , equipment , nonrecurring maintenance , education support , and research support . resources for the first four categories are allocated on the basis of patient workload and account for approximately 96 percent of the resources vera allocates . allocations for education support and research support are based on workload measures specific to those activities within the va health care system . yet va needs to correct weaknesses in vera's implementation to better align resources with workload and to adequately account for important variations in health care needs among networks . our analysis shows that doing so would better allocate about $200 million annually . these include the health care needs of veterans and certain local cost differences . in addition , vera's design protects patients from the effects of network budget shortfalls . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 or james musselwhite at ( 202 ) 512-7259 . marcia mann and thomas walke also contributed to this statement . but implementation weaknesses we identified result in approximately $200 million annually that could be reallocated to better align network resources with workloads . the allocation change would represent about 2 percent of networks' budgets but would be more substantial for some networks . the two networks with the largest percentage change are network 1 ( boston ) with an approximate 5 percent increase and network 20 ( portland ) with an approximate 5 percent decrease . while va concurred with our recommendations to better align vera's measure of workload with actual workload served and to incorporate more ( not necessarily 44 ) categories into vera's case - mix adjustment , it plans to wait for further study before making a decision about modifications to vera for the fiscal year 2003 allocation . va and others have conducted various studies on including all priority 7 workload in vera and increasing the number of vera case - mix categories . given the extensive studies by va and others of vera's workload and case - mix measures , we believe that va should make needed improvements to vera for the fiscal year 2003 allocation and further refine vera as needed in subsequent years . to improve its process to protect patients from network budget shortfalls , we also recommend that va's supplemental funding process determine to what extent networks need supplemental resources due to such factors as imperfections in vera , lack of network efficiency , or lack of managerial flexibility to close or consolidate programs or facilities . va's supplemental funding processes have not collected the information necessary to make these determinations . as a result , va cannot provide adequate assurance that supplemental allocations are appropriate or correct problems that cause networks to have budget shortfalls . va has focused its process for providing supplemental funding from the national reserve fund almost solely on providing supplemental resources to networks to get through a fiscal year , but it has not included in this process an examination of the root causes of networks' needs for additional resources .