this category also includes the following . biomass - based diesel: advanced biomass - based diesel must have life - cycle greenhouse gas emissions at least 50 percent lower than traditional petroleum - based diesel fuels . cellulosic biofuel: advanced biofuel derived from any cellulose , hemicellulose , or lignin that is derived from renewable biomass must have life - cycle greenhouse gas emissions at least 60 percent lower than traditional petroleum - based fuels . this category of fuel may include cellulosic ethanol , renewable gasoline , cellulosic diesel , and renewable natural gas from landfills that can be used to generate electricity for electric vehicles or used in vehicles designed to run on liquefied or compressed natural gas . as a result , the rfs is unlikely to achieve greenhouse gas emissions reductions as envisioned . for example , the cellulosic biofuel blended into the domestic transportation fuel supply in 2015 was less than 5 percent of the statutory target of 3 billion gallons . partly as a result of low production of advanced biofuels , epa has reduced the rfs targets for such fuels through waivers in each of the last 4 years . according to experts we interviewed , the shortfall of advanced biofuels is the result of high production costs , and the investments in further r&d required to make these fuels more cost - competitive with petroleum - based fuels , even in the longer run , are unlikely in the current investment climate . given the relative scarcity of advanced biofuels , most of the biofuel blended under the rfs to date has been conventional corn - starch ethanol , which achieves smaller greenhouse gas emission reductions than advanced biofuels . the use of corn - starch ethanol has been effectively capped at 15 billion gallons . as a result , expanded use of biofuels will require increasing use of advanced biofuels , and experts told us the most likely advanced biofuel to be commercially produced in the near - to mid - term will be cellulosic ethanol . however , the ability to add ethanol to the transportation fuel market to meet expanding rfs requirements is limited by the incompatibility of ethanol blends above e10 ( up to 10 percent ethanol ) with the existing vehicle fleet and fueling infrastructure . many experts and stakeholders refer to this infrastructure limitation as the “blend wall.” if ethanol continues to be the primary biofuel produced to meet the rfs , these infrastructure limitations will have to be addressed . several experts raised concerns about the extent to which the rfs is achieving its goal for reducing greenhouse gas emissions , given that most biofuel blended under the rfs is corn - starch ethanol . more specifically , some experts were critical of the life - cycle analysis epa used to determine the greenhouse gas emissions reductions for corn - starch ethanol . further , corn - starch ethanol plants that were in operation or under construction before december 19 , 2007 , are not subject to the requirement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20 percent .