we have footnoted the latter . ( see appendix ii. ) to identify the challenges , if any , that doe faces in ensuring the effectiveness of its contract reform initiatives , we reviewed the reports of the national research council on improving doe project management . in addition , we reviewed reports and other documentation from the national academy of public administration , the project management institute , and prior gao work to develop best practices criteria for managing improvement initiatives . we compared doe's implementation of its contract reform initiative to these best practices criteria to determine areas of concern . to identify the other management improvement initiatives that could impact contract reform , we reviewed the reports of the national research council , gao and inspector general ; the president's management agenda for fiscal year 2002 ; and doe's 5-year workforce restructuring plans . we also interviewed doe officials in the office of engineering and construction management and the office of program analysis and evaluation . we conducted our review from october 2001 through august 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to those named above , carole blackwell , robert crystal , doreen feldman , molly laster , patricia rennie , carol shulman , stan stenersen , and arvin wu made key contributions to this report . implementing an alternative contracting and financing approach called privatization . doe started its “privatization initiative” in 1995 as a way to reduce the cost and speed the cleanup of its contaminated sites . this initiative was primarily an alternative contracting and financing strategy to foster open competition for fixed - price contracts ; to require the contractor to design , finance , build , own , and operate the facilities necessary to meet waste treatment requirements ; and to pay the contractor for units of successfully treated waste . doe's experiences with this approach showed that privatization could achieve cost savings on projects with a well - defined scope of work and few uncertainties , such as laundry facilities for contaminated uniforms and other items at the hanford site . however , on complex cleanup projects such as the effort at idaho falls to clean up pit 9 , privatization had little success in achieving cost savings , keeping the project moving forward on schedule , or getting improved contractor performance . establishing “closure contracts” that tie performance incentives to contract completion , not to annual activities . doe has used closure contracts at several sites that are scheduled for cleanup and closure , including the rocky flats site in colorado and the fernald site in ohio . these contracts emphasize completing all work at a site or a portion of a site by a target date and at a target cost . most of the fee or profit to be earned by the contractor depends upon meeting the schedule and cost targets . if the contractor can complete all work on time or sooner and below the target cost , then the contractor can earn additional fee . for example , under the rocky flats closure contract , the amount of incentive fee that the contractor can earn ranges from $130 million to $460 million , depending on cost and schedule performance against the targets .