efforts . coast guard: changes to deepwater plan appear sound , and program management has improved , but continued monitoring is warranted . gao - 06-546 . washington , d.c.: april 28 , 2006 . coast guard: progress being made on addressing deepwater legacy asset condition issues and program management , but acquisition challenges remain . gao - 05-757 . washington , d.c.: july 22 , 2005 . coast guard: preliminary observations on the condition of deepwater legacy assets and acquisition management challenges . gao - 05-651t washington , d.c.: june 21 , 2005. . coast guard: deepwater program acquisition schedule update needed . gao - 04-695 . washington , d.c.: june 14 , 2004 . contract management: coast guard's deepwater program needs increased attention to management and contractor oversight . gao - 04-380 . washington , d.c.: march 9 , 2004 . coast guard: actions needed to mitigate deepwater project risks . gao - 01-659t . washington , d.c.: may 3 , 2001 . we have not yet reviewed this study . dhs also agreed with our three recommendations to increase confidence that the assets bought will meet mission needs . with respect to c4isr , dhs stated that the coast guard remains committed to the system - of - systems concept and plans to provide dhs with an affordable and executable c4isr acquisition program baseline that leverages work already completed . with respect to the mission system pallet , dhs stated that the coast guard plans to present a revised mission system pallet acquisition strategy to the dhs acquisition review board for the full - rate production decision planned for the fourth quarter fiscal year 2012 . this will follow initial operational test and evaluation of the current configuration of both the maritime patrol aircraft and the mission system pallet . finally , dhs stated that the coast guard will work with the department to determine the appropriate acquisition level for the small boats project . dhs also noted that the current approved project plan is for 27 small boats which have a life - cycle cost estimate that categorizes the project as a non major acquisition . the response , however , did not address the fact that the approved project plan recognizes the potential to buy up to 101 small boats . we maintain that , moving forward , the coast guard needs to specify the quantities of small boats it plans to purchase to ensure that the project's acquisition level is appropriately categorized . coast guard also provided technical comments which we incorporated into the report as appropriate , such as when we were provided with documentation to support the comments . the coast guard requested that we remove the term “deepwater” and replace it with “major acquisitions.” we did not make this change because , at the time of this report , congress had not yet passed the fiscal year 2012 appropriations act which may address dhs's and coast guard's proposal to eliminate the term “integrated deepwater system” from its annual appropriation . furthermore , the program baseline for one of the coast guard's largest major acquisitions — the opc — still remains part of the 2007 deepwater acquisition program baseline .