the requirements in h.r . 3043 that prospective zero down payment loans go through fha's total scorecard and that borrowers receive prepurchase counseling are consistent with stricter underwriting . however , in addressing the final recommendations in our february report , fha wrote that is unlikely to mandate a credit score threshold for a new zero down payment product because the new product is intended to serve borrowers who are underserved by the conventional market including those who lack credit scores . also , fha wrote that it is unlikely to mandate borrower reserve requirements since the purpose of a zero down payment product is to serve borrowers with little wealth or personal savings . mortgage institutions can increase fees or charge higher premiums to help offset the potential costs of a program that is believed to have greater risk . for example , fannie mae officials stated that they would charge higher guarantee fees on low and no down payment loans if they were not able to require higher insurance coverage . fha could set higher premiums in anticipation of higher claims from no down payment loans . within statutory limits , the hud secretary has the authority to set up - front and annual premiums that are charged to borrowers who have fha - insured loans . in fact , in the administration's 2006 budget proposal for a zero down payment product , it included higher up front and annual premiums for these loans . some mortgage institutions may limit in some way a new product before fully implementing the new product . for example , fannie mae and freddie mac sometimes use pilots , or limited offerings of new products , to build experience with a new product type or to learn about particular variables that can help them better understand the factors that contribute to risk for these products . freddie mac and fannie mae also sometimes set volume limits for the percentage of their business that could be low and no down payment lending . fannie mae and freddie mac officials provided numerous examples of products that they now offer as standard products but which began as part of underwriting experiments . these include the fannie mae flexible 97® product , as well as the freddie mac 100 product . fha has utilized pilots or demonstrations as well when making changes to its single - family mortgage insurance . generally , hud has done this in response to legislation that requires a pilot and not on its own initiative . for example , fha's home equity conversion mortgage ( hecm ) insurance program started as a pilot . congress initiated hecm in 1987 ; the program is designed to provide elderly homeowners a financial vehicle to tap the equity in their homes without selling or moving from their homes ( sometimes called a “reverse mortgage” ) . through statute , hecm started as a demonstration program that authorized fha to insure 2,500 reverse mortgages . through subsequent legislation , fha was authorized to insure an increasing number of these mortgages until congress made the program permanent in 1998 . under the national housing act , the hecm program was required to undergo a series of evaluations and it has been evaluated four times since its inception .