revisions to regulations . va is continuing to make revisions to its program regulations . in 2013 we reported that va had begun the process of modifying the verification program regulations to extend the verification period from 1 year to 2 years and published an interim final rule to this effect in late june 2012 . in addition , va began a process in 2013 to revise program regulations in order to account for common business practices that might otherwise lead to a denial decision under the current regulation . for example , in addressing the challenges associated with one current regulatory provision , va officials told us that va plans to allow minority owners to vote on extraordinary business decisions such as closing or selling the business according to cve officials . officials stated that the revisions to the regulation are not expected to provide cost and resource efficiencies , but are intended to provide clarity for veterans and increase their satisfaction with the process . as of september 2015 , the regulation was undergoing internal review with va's office of general counsel according to cve officials . approach to site visits . according to cve officials , va plans to determine how many site visits should be conducted annually to maintain the quality of the program while minimizing cost . cve officials told us that they plan to visit a random sample of 300 of 2,312 verified firms that received va contracts from march 2014 through april 2015 fiscal years 2014 and 2015 and then calculate the percentage of firms found to be noncompliant with program requirements . a high noncompliance rate could indicate that va should increase the annual number of visits , while a low rate could indicate that va should decrease or maintain the annual number of site visits it conducts , according to cve officials . va officials said that the statistical analysis will allow them to validate the noncompliance rate obtained from site visits conducted in fiscal year 2014 and that va plans to complete its study by january 2016 . we plan to include additional information on this study in our upcoming report . reverification policy . va revised its reverification policy in an effort to improve efficiency and customer service . osdbu's executive director ( who has overseen the overall verification program since 2011 ) indicated that va would begin advertising for a cve director in october 2015 . va has developed a draft organizational structure and position descriptions for the new verification process . according to cve officials , it also has begun an analysis — using initial data from the new verification process pilot — to determine optimal staffing levels for implementing the new process and meeting the demand for verification . cve officials stated that va plans to continue using contractor staff to conduct its verification activities because the use of such staff allows va the flexibility to adjust staffing levels as needed . as discussed earlier , cve currently has 15 full - time federal employees and 156 contract staff . osdbu's executive director stated that va has contracts in place for the verification program through april 2016 and plans to start the process for securing new contracts in january 2016 . plans for case management system .