we commend sec for conducting this study . its findings confirm many of the workload and resource challenges we discussed in our march 2002 report , and it includes numerous recommendations for improving the agency's operations . sec has also initiated a number of other efforts but because all of them are grounded in sec having a clear strategic direction and goals , all of them hinge on sec completing a new strategic plan . among these are efforts to develop more outcome - oriented performance measures to gauge the effectiveness of its regulatory operations in fulfilling its statutory mission and formalization of its strategic human capital plan . in march 2002 , we reported that sec's workload and staffing imbalances had challenged sec's ability to protect investors and maintain the integrity of securities markets . appendix i graphically depicts sec's workload and staffing imbalance from 1990 through 2000 as reported in our 2002 report and appendix ii updates this graphic using sec budget documents including its 2003 and 2004 workload and staffing estimates . as reported in march 2002 , we found that sec generally managed to bridge the gap between its workload and staff by determining which of its statutorily mandated duties it could accomplish with existing resources or only marginally increased resource levels . this approach , while practical , forced sec to be largely reactive rather than proactive . we also reported that sec tended to develop its annual budget request based on the previous year's appropriation rather than on what it would actually need to fulfill its mission . in 2003 , this practice resulted in a modest increase over the previous year's request . we expect to complete our report on these matters in the fall . in advance of the completion of this study , this statement provides requested information on the status of sec's current spending plans for 2003 and 2004 and preliminary observations on sec's strategic planning and human capital planning efforts . our observations about the status of sec's 2003 and 2004 spending plans and related planning activities to date are based on our review and independent analysis of workload , budget , and staffing data provided by sec officials or presented in sec's 2003 revised budget estimate and 2004 budget request . in addition , we solicited views from a variety of sec officials , collected relevant information on sec's strategic planning and human capital efforts , and analyzed statistics on staff turnover . this study was completed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , the 2003 appropriation of $716 million in february 2003 increased sec's budget 45 percent over its previous year's spending level , giving it additional resources to address critical staffing shortages and information technology needs , among other things . however , sec spent the first 5 months of the fiscal year operating under a continuing resolution and thus could not fully implement a spending plan based on its new budget authority . in addition , sec faced difficulties in hiring accountants , economists , and examiners , further constraining its ability to acquire needed expertise .