, guidelines for developing programs ) . objectives also included developing program models to help inform communities of what works in preventing or reducing girls' delinquency , identifying gaps in girls' delinquency research and developing recommendations for future research , and disseminating findings to the girls' delinquency field about effective or promising programs . to meet ojjdp's objectives , among other activities , the study group identified studies of delinquency programs that specifically targeted girls by reviewing over 1,000 documents in relevant research areas . these included criminological and feminist explanations for girls' delinquency , patterns of delinquency , and the justice system's response to girls' delinquency . as part of its work , the group collected , reviewed , and analyzed the methodological quality of research on girls' delinquency programs . the use of such a group , including its review , is an acceptable approach for systematically identifying and reviewing research conducted in a field of study . this review helped consolidate the research and provide information to ojjdp for determining evaluation priorities . further , we reviewed the criteria the group used to assess the studies and found that they adhere to generally accepted social science standards for evaluation research . we also generally concurred with the group's assessments of the programs based on these criteria . according to the group's former principal investigator , the study group decided to use ojp's what works criteria to ensure that its assessment of program effectiveness would be based on highly rigorous evaluation standards , thus eliminating the potential that a program that may do harm would be endorsed by the group . however , 8 of the 18 experts we interviewed said that the criteria created an unrealistically high standard , which caused the group to overlook potentially promising programs . ojjdp officials stated that despite such concerns , they approved the group's use of the criteria because of the methodological rigor of the framework and their goal for the group to identify effective programs . in accordance with the internal control standard to communicate with external stakeholders , ojjdp sought to ensure a range of stakeholder perspectives related to girls' delinquency by requiring that study group members possess knowledge and experience with girls' delinquency and demonstrate expertise in relevant social science disciplines . the initial study group , which was convened by the research institute and approved by ojjdp , included 12 academic researchers and 1 practitioner ; someone with experience implementing girls' delinquency programs . however , 11 of the 18 experts we interviewed stated that this composition was imbalanced in favor of academic researchers . in addition , 6 of the 11 said that the composition led the group to focus its efforts on researching theories of girls' delinquency rather than gathering and disseminating actionable information for practitioners . according to ojjdp research and program officials , they acted to address this issue by adding a second practitioner as a member and involving two other practitioners in study group activities . ojjdp officials stated that they plan to more fully involve practitioners from the beginning when they organize study groups in the future and to include practitioners in the remaining activities of the study group , such as presenting successful girls' delinquency program practices at a national conference .