ozone . this disinfection method feeds ozone generated on - site from oxygen exposed to a high - voltage current into a contact chamber containing wastewater . according to epa , ozone is very effective at destroying viruses and bacteria , but it is the least used disinfection method in the united states largely because of its high capital and maintenance costs compared to available alternatives . according to epa , vulnerability assessments help water systems evaluate susceptibility to potential threats such as vandalism or terrorism and identify corrective actions that can reduce or mitigate the risk of serious consequences . the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( the bioterrorism act ) required drinking water utilities serving populations greater than 3,300 to complete vulnerability assessments by june 2004 . wastewater facilities are not required by law to complete vulnerability assessments . congress has considered bills that would have encouraged or required wastewater treatment plants to assess vulnerabilities , but no such requirement has become law . in our march 2006 report on wastewater facility security efforts , we found that many large wastewater facilities have either completed a vulnerability assessment or had one underway . of the 206 large wastewater facilities that responded to our survey , 106 facilities — or 51 percent — reported that they had completed a vulnerability assessment or were currently conducting one . several other facilities indicated they had conducted or planned to conduct other types of security assessments . facilities cited several reasons for completing a vulnerability assessment or some other type of security assessment , but most — roughly 77 percent — reported doing so on their own initiative . many facilities indicated they were combined systems — facilities that manage both drinking water and wastewater treatment . as such , 37 percent of facilities reported that they did some type of security assessment in conjunction with the required assessment for their drinking water facility . the clean air act requires wastewater facilities that use or store more than 2,500 pounds of chlorine gas to submit to epa a risk management plan that lays out accident prevention and emergency response activities . under this act , epa requires that about 15,000 facilities — including chemical , water , energy , and other sector facilities — that produce , use , or store more than threshold amounts of chemicals posing the greatest risk to human health and the environment take a number of steps to prevent and prepare for an accidental chemical release . epa regulations implementing the clean air act require that the owners and operators of chemical facilities include a facility hazard assessment , an accident prevention program , and an emergency response program as part of their risk management plans . the regulations required that a summary of each facility's risk management plan be submitted to epa by june 21 , 1999 . the plans are to be revised and resubmitted to epa at least every 5 years , and epa is to review them and require revisions , if necessary . although accurate information on the costs of vulnerability assessments and risk management plans is limited , available estimates suggest that their costs vary considerably .