ii. ) the largest program , p.l . 480 title ii , is managed by usaid and represents approximately 74 percent of total in - kind food aid allocations over the past 4 years , mostly to fund emergency programs ( see fig . in addition , p.l . 480 , as amended , authorizes usaid to preposition food aid both domestically and abroad with a cap on storage expenses for foreign prepositioning sites of $2 million per fiscal year . u.s. food aid programs also have multiple legislative and regulatory mandates that affect their operations . one mandate that governs u.s. food aid transportation is cargo preference , which is designed to support a u.s. - flag commercial fleet for national defense purposes . cargo preference requires that 75 percent of the gross tonnage of all government - generated cargo be transported on u.s. - flag vessels . a second transportation mandate , known as the great lakes set - aside , requires that up to 25 percent of title ii bagged food aid tonnage be allocated to great lakes ports each month . other mandates require that a minimum of 2.5 million metric tons of food aid be provided through title ii programs and that of this amount , a subminimum of 1.825 million metric tons be provided for nonemergency programs . ( for a summary of congressional mandates for p.l . 480 , see app . ii. ) multiple u.s. government agencies coordinate u.s. food aid programs . usda and usaid share in the administration of all u.s. food aid programs . usda's kcco manages the product standards , purchase , and delivery of all food aid commodities , while other branches of usda — such as the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) and the federal grain inspection service ( fgis ) — conduct quality reviews and certification of food aid products . dot / marad is also involved in supporting the ocean transport of food aid on u.s. vessels . finally , the u.s. department of state works to advance u.s. food aid as part of its international humanitarian and multilateral assistance initiatives . u.s. food aid programs also involve many stakeholders , including donors , implementing organizations ( also known as cooperating sponsors ) , agricultural commodity groups , and the maritime industry . u.s. agencies channel u.s. food aid contributions through organizations such as wfp , ngos , and recipient country governments that serve as implementing partners . the level of contributions that each implementing partner receives varies for each food aid program . for example , between 2001 and 2006 , wfp received the majority of u.s . title ii emergency food aid resources — approximately 78 percent — while ngos received 94 percent of nonemergency title ii resources . recipient country governments received considerable amounts of funding for usda food aid programs . for example , the governments received 43 percent of funding for the food for progress program , while ngos received 55 percent . stakeholders use various forums to discuss and coordinate u.s. food aid programs . the principal interagency forums are the food assistance policy council and the food aid consultative group .