some limitations are by design . for example , while fhwa's fiscal year 2005 performance plan discusses multidisciplinary skill training for its oversight managers and professional development program staff , it also specifically grants division administrators the discretion about whether to participate . fhwa officials acknowledged the challenges of consistently implementing national level goals and programs among the many division offices . our 2003 update to our high - risk series of reports recognizes that strategic management of human capital continues to be a high - risk area government wide . although considerable progress has been made since we first designated human capital a government wide high - risk area in 2001 , federal human capital strategies are not yet appropriately constituted to drive the transformation that is needed across the federal government . among the challenges agencies face are the need to improve their ability to acquire , develop , and retain talent , and the need to better and more fully integrate these and other human capital efforts with agencies' missions and program goals . for fhwa , this government wide challenge manifests itself in a number of ways , including the need to transform its workforce and culture to meet its evolving mission . fhwa's workforce partnered with the states to build the interstate highway system from 1956 into the 1990s . fhwa needed engineering skills to perform tasks , such as detailed reviews of design plans and inspections of construction progress to ensure that national uniformity in terms of design and safety was established throughout the interstate system . these skills were especially important because , according to fhwa and state officials , state transportation agencies did not have the equivalent capability to do the job at that time . in recent years congress has recognized the increased capacity of state transportation agencies and increasingly delegated approval authorities to the states , including the authority over design and construction decisions for most projects . as a consequence , fhwa's oversight role and mission have evolved to include , for example , greater reliance on broad reviews of state management processes . as fhwa's oversight role and mission evolves , fhwa faces the challenge of transforming its workforce and culture to evolve with this role and mission . in our discussions with fhwa field staff , we noted reluctance among some fhwa staff to focus on these broader reviews that fhwa increasingly relies on because they see these as less important than the traditional tasks of reviewing design plans and inspecting the progress of construction . division office officials in two states we visited told us that change has been an issue for its more tenured staff . for example , the administrator at one office had begun to hire staff with a variety of skills , while officials at the other office saw a need for more specialists , including staff with financial expertise . officials also said some staff have resisted doing process reviews because they see it as functioning as auditors rather than as partners with the state in delivering projects , which is how they prefer to be seen . overcoming these challenges will become even more important in the years ahead should proposed legislation increasing fhwa's oversight responsibilities be enacted .