we tested each college once . the experience of each of our undercover students is unique and cannot be generalized to other students taking courses offered by the for - profit colleges we tested or to other for - profit or nonprofit colleges . as part of an undercover investigation , our tests were designed to obtain observations from entities that were unaware of our true identities . in the remaining 2 instances ( colleges 7 and 8 ) , the student aid disbursements were fully kept by the school and applied toward the student's cost of attendance . education is responsible for overseeing college compliance with title iv laws and regulations and ensuring that only eligible students receive federal student aid . as part of its compliance monitoring , education relies on department employees and independent auditors of schools to conduct program reviews and audits of colleges . moreover , for - profit colleges participating in federal student aid programs must enter a program participation agreement with education that , among other things , requires the college to derive not less than 10 percent of revenues from sources other than federal student aid ( known as the “90 / 10 rule” ) . according to education , over 2,000 for - profit colleges participate in title iv programs . in august 2009 , we reported that students who attended for - profit colleges were more likely to default on federal student loans than were students from other colleges . additionally , our august 2010 testimony on for - profit college recruiting practices found that some colleges failed to provide clear information about program duration and cost and exaggerated applicants' potential salary after graduation , and made other deceptive statements . the stafford loans are the largest source of federal financial aid available to postsecondary students . in academic year 2009-10 , 35 percent of undergraduate students participated in the program , which provided an estimated $56.1 billion dollars to eligible students through subsidized and unsubsidized loans . to qualify for a subsidized loan , students must have a financial need as determined under federal law . a student's financial aid need is determined by a formula that subtracts a student's expected family contribution ( efc ) and certain other estimated financial assistance from their total cost of attendance . in contrast to subsidized loans , students can receive unsubsidized loans to pay for educational expenses regardless of their financial need . depending on their educational expenses and level of financial need , a student may be eligible to receive both subsidized and unsubsidized loans , which is generally referred to as a combined loan . student eligibility for grants and subsidized student loans is based on student financial need .