gao - 06-576r . washington , d.c.: march 28 , 2006 . ( see app . ii for cms regulations and interpretive guidelines related to evacuation planning and emergency preparedness. ) in addition to cms requirements , jcaho , aoa , and states can establish additional emergency management requirements for health care facilities . for hospitals that it accredits , jcaho requires that emergency plans include provisions for evacuating the entire building and transporting patients , supplies , staff , and equipment to alternate care sites if necessary . aoa requires that emergency plans for hospitals that it accredits include provisions for transferring patients and supplies to other settings for health care if necessary . ( see app . iii for a list of jcaho and aoa requirements related to evacuation planning and emergency preparedness. ) states can also establish additional requirements for facility evacuation planning that relate to transportation . for example , florida requires hospitals and nursing homes to have comprehensive emergency management plans that document transportation arrangements to be used to evacuate residents . mississippi requires nursing homes to maintain written transfer agreements with other facilities or alternative shelters in the event of a disaster . the state also requires hospitals to have written disaster preparedness plans that include relocation arrangements , including transportation arrangements , in the event of an evacuation . federal requirements for hospitals and nursing homes include provisions that the facilities plan for disasters and emergencies . however , when hurricanes charley and katrina hit the gulf coast area , they created significant challenges for health care facility administrators that faced evacuation , including deciding whether to evacuate , securing transportation , and maintaining communications outside of their facilities . in particular , securing transportation was challenging because when multiple health care facilities within a community decided to evacuate , they had difficulty obtaining the number and type of vehicles needed and competed with each other for a limited supply of vehicles . a federal role related to evacuation is described in various documents , including the ndms memorandum of agreement , the nrp , and its draft catastrophic incident supplement . however , the challenges faced by hospitals and nursing homes during hurricanes charley and katrina also revealed two limitations in the federal government's support to health care facilities that have to evacuate — the lack of assistance to states and localities to move people out of health care facilities to a mobilization point for federal transportation support and the lack of attention to nursing home residents needing evacuation . in terms of the first limitation , we found that the reliance in the ndms design on local and state resources to move people directly out of facilities is inadequate when multiple facilities in the community have to evacuate simultaneously and compete for too few vehicles . in addition , dhs's draft catastrophic incident supplement to the nrp , which is intended to offer guidance for a situation in which state and local resources are overwhelmed , also would leave responsibility for moving people out of health care facilities on state and local authorities . it does not describe the role the federal government may play in coordinating with state and local authorities during hospital and nursing home evacuations .