rather , the agency based allocation on contractor workload . further , we reported that the contracts outlined how vba could use performance data to administer financial incentives linked to performance targets . however , due to the lack of performance information , va had not yet administered these incentives at the time of our review in october 2018 . in our 2018 report , we recommended that vba take steps to address the oversight issues we identified by developing and implementing a plan for using data from the new exam management system to accurately assess contractor timeliness , monitor time spent correcting exams , and verify proper exam invoicing . vba has taken steps to address issues with both the incomplete quality information and inaccurate timeliness data . vba's delay in completing these reports meant that it had not administered other provisions of the contracts . for example , we reported in 2018 that the contracts stated that vba could use performance data to help determine how to allocate exams within specified areas in the united states that have two contractors ; in particular , vba could decide to allocate more exams to the contractor with higher performance results . however , vba did not have performance data on which it could base its allocation of exams . for example , to help resolve the delays in completing quality reviews , vba officials said in november 2018 that the agency had hired additional staff to assess quality of contract exam reports . as of september 2019 , officials said they have 16 out of 17 full - time positions filled in the quality review office because one employee left and that they are in the hiring phase for the final position . more detailed information on our scope and methodology is available in our issued report . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . va pays monthly disability compensation to veterans with service - connected disabilities according to the severity of the disability . according to vba officials , vba monitors a vha facility's capacity to conduct exams , and in instances when the facility may not have capacity to conduct a timely exam , vba will send an exam request to one of its contractors instead . once the contractor accepts the exam request from vba , it assigns a contracted examiner to conduct the exam and complete an exam report designed to capture essential medical information for purposes of determining entitlement to disability benefits . the contractors send the completed report to vba , which uses the information as part of the evidence to evaluate the claim and determine whether the veteran is eligible for benefits . in 2016 , vba established an exam program office to manage and oversee contractors , monitor their performance , and ensure that they meet contract requirements .