gao - 07-154 . washington , d.c.: march 15 , 2007 . ( see app . iii for an illustration of the timeline for the development and implementation of the advanced approaches. ) as noted earlier , the advanced approaches rule took effect on april 1 , 2008 . core banks generally must adopt an implementation plan approved by the bank's board of directors by october 1 , 2008 , but do not actually have to begin the four intermediate phases that lead to full implementation of basel ii until april 1 , 2010 . if banks begin then and each of the four intermediate phases takes a year , they would then be ready to fully adopt basel ii by april 1 , 2014 . at the time the rule took effect , banks could start their parallel run , the first of the four intermediate phases , at the beginning of any quarter ranging from the second quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of 2010 . the 2007 decision to offer non - core banks an option to adopt the standardized approach also has affected the pace of implementation in the united states . as a result of comments received on nprs related to basel ii in 2006 , u.s. regulators decided to offer non - core u.s. banking institutions the option of a standardized approach . regulators issued the npr in july 2008 but are uncertain as to when they will issue a final rule . in addition , the new npr again asks the question of whether core banks should be permitted to adopt the standardized approach rather than advanced approaches creating uncertainties that will be discussed later . a primary goal of federal bank regulators is to promote the safety and soundness of the banking institutions they oversee . to fulfill this obligation , bank regulators must have the authority and flexibility to take actions to achieve this objective . the federal reserve and occ have taken a number of steps to help ensure that basel ii is implemented consistently across the banking organizations they supervise and regulators have issued some joint statements and guidance to address some of the remaining uncertainty for banks . nonetheless , the flexibility afforded by the rule for the advanced approaches could lead to inconsistent application of the rules , which could , in turn , produce competitive differences among the banks or provide opportunities for regulatory arbitrage . a certain amount of flexibility for primary bank supervisors and related uncertainty for banks is necessary for maintaining the safety and soundness of the banking system . under the final rule for the advanced approaches , regulators can respond to new or unforeseen situations that pose risks to safety and soundness without having to first change the rule . the rule reserves the authority of primary federal bank regulators to require that banks hold an amount of capital greater than the minimums dictated by the rule .