110-329 , div . the department of justice did not have formal comments on our draft report , but provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . this process includes distributing appeal information to tsc , tsa oia , and tsa's office of chief counsel and conducting pre - meetings among stakeholders , including tsa oia , tsa's office of chief counsel , and dhs trip ; meetings with tsa leadership ; and , as appropriate , a decision meeting with the tsa administrator . it developed a draft of the functional roles and responsibilities document ( formerly known as the dhs trip standard operating procedures ) , which outlines the role of dhs trip officials in the appeals process . it developed and implemented a database to track appeals specifically and improve process timeliness . to what extent is dhs's redress process addressing the delays and inconveniences that result from secure flight screening ? to answer our first question , we reviewed our 2009 report on secure flight's implementation , which identified the privacy oversight mechanisms that tsa planned to implement at that time . we obtained and analyzed key tsa documents on these oversight mechanisms to assess tsa's progress in implementing them . specifically , we reviewed the basic , advanced , and refresher privacy training materials that tsa uses to train secure flight staff and assessed these trainings against the office of management and budget's ( omb ) privacy training requirements and our assessment guide for reviewing training and development efforts in the federal government . we also reviewed tsa's monthly purge status reports for the period from april 2012 through may 2013 to assess the extent to which tsa has purged secure flight passenger data in accordance with secure flight data retention requirements . in addition , to evaluate tsa's documentation of secure flight privacy issues and decisions , we reviewed relevant documents prepared by tsa privacy officials and contract staff , including privacy compliance validation reports for the period from april 2012 through april 2013 , monthly status reports prepared by tsa's privacy contractor for the period from march 2013 through april 2014 , and secure flight's privacy issue tracker . we assessed these documents against standards for internal control in the federal government . to clarify our understanding of secure flight's privacy requirements and the mechanisms for monitoring compliance with these requirements , we reviewed key tsa documents that provide information on secure flight privacy requirements , such as management directives , the secure flight privacy rules of behavior , and secure flight system of records notices and privacy impact assessments , and interviewed secure flight privacy officials and a representative of the contract staff who are responsible for monitoring compliance with these requirements . to answer our second question , we reviewed dhs trip standard operating procedures and other documentation related to the redress process , such as the standard letters dhs sends to redress applicants .