recommendation 17 . professional military education positions: commander , air university should develop a new baseline for its student and instructor positions to achieve a proportionate representation of the components on faculty and student body by fiscal year 2018 . status ( as of february 2016 ) open 18 . total force competency standard: the air force should develop a total force competency standard across all specialties and career fields before the end of fiscal year 2016 . figure 1 illustrates this process . in may 2015 , the air force issued its strategic master plan , which is intended , in part , to align activities across the air force in the areas of human capital , strategic posture , capabilities , and science and technology . the strategic master plan contains annexes for each of these areas , which are intended to translate the strategic master plan's goals and objectives into tangible actions and priorities . the strategic master plan has an overall goal for considering all components as a total force . the human capital annex expands upon the concept of a total force and specifies goals , objectives , and timeframes for recruiting and training , retention , component integration , and other topics . twenty - one of the commission's recommendations are aligned with four of the six objectives in the human capital annex , as part of the revised approach and as illustrated in appendix iii to this report . for example , the annex's goals for career progression are similar to the commission's recommendations on promotions , continuum of service , and multiple career track options . also , the annex's goals for increasing integration among the components are similar to the commission's recommendations for integrating headquarters' staffs , integrating personnel systems , and making transition between components easier . for the attribute “limited overlap” we determined that the attribute was “not applicable” if the implementation of the commission recommendation was not dependent on implementation of another recommendation . to supplement this analysis and gain further insight into issues of strategic import , we also interviewed cognizant officials from the air force team implementing the 3 , inter - related recommendations that have implementation plans , team leaders and members for seven recommendations , representatives from the air force reserves , air national guard , and air force headquarters staff from the total force continuum office within the headquarters air force strategic plans and programs directorate , and the office of the assistant secretary of the air force for financial management and comptroller . to describe how the air force has assessed the potential for increasing the proportion of reserve to active component forces as discussed in the commission's report , we identified the scope , content , and process for the air force's high velocity analysis ( referred to in the report as the force mix option process ) which is the process the air force developed to identify and assess force mix options .