ii ) . in the department's letter , noaa agreed with our recommendations and provided additional information on steps the agency has taken or plans to take to address the recommendations . for example , the agency reported that it is working with faa to refine its baseline metrics and plans to have baseline metrics in place by the end of fiscal year 2009 . nws also plans to establish a quality assurance manager to work with faa to develop additional measures and metrics as appropriate . in addition , noaa reported that since submitting its proposal in may 2008 and receiving a summary of our findings in june 2009 , nws and faa have made progress in working together . specifically , nws has assigned a liaison to the faa air traffic control system command center , met with officials from the joint planning and development office to discuss the linkage of plans for the center weather service units and nextgen , and held discussions to strengthen the nws and faa partnership . the department of transportation's deputy director of audit relations provided comments on a draft of this report via e - mail . in those comments , she noted that the department agreed to consider our recommendations . in addition , she noted a slight concern involving our discussion of the alignment of plans to restructure the center weather service units with nextgen . specifically , the department noted that current nextgen plans ( 1 ) include modifications to the weather systems used by center weather service units and ( 2 ) ensure the delivery of the functions currently provided by center weather service units . however , these statements do not alter the agencies' need to align any restructuring plans with the nextgen initiative — and that has not occurred . nextgen roadmaps do not include any discussion of plans to restructure the center weather service units or the potential impact that such a change could have on aviation weather systems . the importance of this alignment is underscored by the nws director's recommendation to faa to provide linkage between restructuring plans and nextgen plans since the specific role of the center weather service units during nextgen operations is not yet known . both departments also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of commerce , the secretary of transportation , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . table 8 lists key events . until the agencies agree on a common outcome , establish joint strategies to achieve the outcome , and agree on respective agency responsibilities , they are unlikely to move forward in efforts to restructure weather services . without sound interagency collaboration , both faa and nws will continue to spend time and resources proposing and rejecting options rather than implementing solutions . the two agencies' difficulties in determining how to proceed with their restructuring plans are due in part to a lack of stability in faa's requirements for center weather service units .