app . ii lists the members of the expert panel. ) a patent is the grant of a property right that a national government or an international intergovernmental authority issues for an invention . patents cover inventions of new products as well as new processes to make or use new or existing products . ( see section on “regulatory environments of other countries” for further discussion of this issue. ) what is the tendency for patent piracy and how strongly are patents enforced ? ( see section on “foreign patent infringement and enforcement” for further discussion of this topic. ) the experts held varying views about the correct number of markets in which small businesses should seek foreign patents . according to them , some small businesses typically patent in too few foreign locations , while others tend to patent in too many overseas locales . recognizing the high cost of foreign patents and the need for small businesses to focus their resources , several experts said that small businesses should only patent in the countries where their major markets are located or in a select number of countries that will give effective patent rights within a region . however , some patent attorneys held a different view , saying that small businesses should also consider obtaining patents in countries where markets don't currently exist but might develop in the future . one attorney acknowledged that at the time that foreign patent applications must be filed , it can be difficult to predict the future direction of foreign markets and the likelihood of any significant market developments occurring during the time that a foreign patent is still in force ( typically a 20-year period from the time of application ) . for example , one panelist said that recent revisions in china's patent laws , a country where patent enforcement has generally been regarded as low , now make china a location where patent protection should be considered for certain inventions . the experts pointed to a broad range of financial or competitive benefits that foreign patents can provide for small businesses . one expert said that small businesses need to identify which benefits they hope to achieve by obtaining foreign patents in order to better focus their decisions . potential benefits include protecting the company's technology , increasing the company's value and visibility , making the company more attractive to investors , and rewarding the inventor or raising the inventor's profile . holding foreign patents can also help small companies secure financing or possibly be acquired by another company . in addition , foreign patents enable businesses to demand higher prices , at home and abroad , for their products or services , expand their market share , and earn revenue from foreign sale or manufacture activities . similarly , businesses that hold such patents can further earn revenue by licensing to others , the right to sell or manufacture the company's products or services . several experts also highlighted the possibility of enhancing a company's competitive position through holding foreign patents . holding patents abroad may help disrupt a competitor's activities , discourage infringement , or provide the company leverage in future negotiations with private sector or government officials in other countries .