apprehension events . since data on asset assists are not required to be reported , it is unclear whether the data were not reported because an asset was not a contributing factor in the apprehension or seizure or whether an asset was a contributing factor but was not recorded by agents . as a result , cbp is not positioned to determine the contribution of surveillance technologies in the apprehension of illegal entrants and seizure of drugs and other contraband during the specified time frame . we reported that an associate chief at border patrol told us that while data on asset assists are not systematically recorded and tracked , border patrol recognizes the benefits of assessments of asset assists data , including those from surveillance technologies , such as the sbinet system . the associate chief further noted that these data in combination with other data , such as numbers of apprehensions and seizures , are used on a limited basis to help the agency make adjustments to its acquisition plans prior to deploying resources , thereby enabling the agency to make more informed deployment decisions . we recommended that cbp require data on asset assists to be recorded and tracked within eid and that once these data are required to recorded and tracked , analyze available data on apprehensions and technological assists , in combination with other relevant performance metrics or indicators , as appropriate , to determine the contribution of surveillance technologies to cbp's border security efforts . cbp concurred with our recommendations and stated that border patrol is changing its data collection process to allow for improved reporting on asset assists for apprehensions and seizures and intends to make it mandatory to record whether an asset assisted in an apprehension or seizure . dhs plans to change its process by december 31 , 2014 . chairwoman miller , ranking member jackson lee , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact rebecca gambler at ( 202 ) 512-6912 or gamblerr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . dhs did not concur with this recommendation . in particular , dhs stated that maintaining an integrated master schedule for the plan undermines the dhs - approved implementation strategy for the individual programs making up the plan and that a key element of the plan has been the disaggregation of technology procurements . however , we continue to believe that developing an integrated master schedule for the plan is needed . as we reported in march 2014 , this recommendation is not intended to imply that dhs needs to re - aggregate the plan's seven programs into a “system of systems” or change its procurement strategy in any form . the intent of the recommendation is for dhs to insert the individual schedules for each of the plan's programs into a single electronic integrated master schedule file in order to identify any resource allocation issues among the programs' schedules .