for example , both the u.s . as of march 2013 , doj officials reported that doj and treasury representatives had met several times in the fall of 2012 and thereafter agreed upon an approach to conduct the study and assess potential costs . doj officials noted that they would continue to meet with their treasury partners to execute their plan . since work remains under way , it is too soon to tell whether the departments' actions will fully address the recommendation . in july 2012 , we reported on the growth of revenues and expenses in doj's aff from fiscal years 2003 to 2011 , and the need for transparency in doj's process for carrying over funds from one fiscal year to the next . each year , doj earns revenue from the proceeds of the forfeited assets it collects . it then pays its expenses , which include payments to victims and the costs of storing and maintaining forfeited assets . doj uses any balance to help cover anticipated expenses in the next fiscal year that may not be covered by that year's revenues , and this is known as carrying over funds . for example , at the end of fiscal year 2003 , doj carried over approximately $365 million to cover expenditures in the next fiscal year . in contrast , at the end of fiscal year 2011 , doj carried over $844 million to cover expenses into fiscal year 2012 . after doj reserves funds to cover needed expenses , doj declares any remaining funds to be an excess unobligated balance and has the authority to use these funds for any of the department's authorized purposes . doj's asset forfeiture program represents the interests of law enforcement components within its department as well as several components outside the department , while treasury's program represents the interests of we recognized the separate legal treasury and dhs components.authorities of the two funds , but noted that those legal authorities did not preclude enhanced coordination within programs . thus , we recommended that doj and treasury conduct a study to determine the feasibility of consolidating potentially duplicative asset management activities including , but not limited to , the use of asset - tracking systems and the sharing of vendor and contract resources . the departments concurred with this recommendation . in recent years , doj also used these excess unobligated balances to cover rescissions . for example , in fiscal year 2011 , doj used excess unobligated balances to help cover a $495 million aff program rescission . also , in fiscal year 2012 , doj used $151 million of the remaining aff funds identified at the end of the fiscal year to acquire the thomson correctional center in thomson , illinois . at the time of our review , when determining the amounts to carryover , doj officials reviewed historical data on past program expenditures , analyzed known future expenses such as salaries and contracts , and estimated the costs of any potential new expenditures .