therefore , we reaffirm our recommendation . we discussed our observations of these reviews with arp staff . to determine the scope and frequency of the independent reviews , we examined certain recent audit reports and a summary of audit reports prepared by sec arp staff . we also discussed the results of our assessment of these reports with sec staff . specifically , we reviewed copies or summaries of 37 reviews done by sro internal audit staff for the 3 largest sros in 2000 . in addition , we examined seven independent reviews of five sros performed by external organizations that were included in the supporting work papers of the sec inspections we reviewed . to address how the voluntary nature of the arp programs affects sec oversight capabilities , we reviewed various documents prepared by the arp staff . the documents included analyses of sro systems , on - site inspection reports , a printout of sec staff's database of the status of recommendations made during inspections , and oversight work plans . we conducted this work in washington , d.c. , from november 2000 to june 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to plan and conduct inspections and other oversight activities , the arp program uses criteria from a variety of sources that address aspects of capacity planning , security , and other information system issues . the second arp policy statement discussed five primary areas that sec expected that sros would address regarding their information systems . using these areas , the arp staff work with sros to develop a checklist as an initial guide for use by sec staff in conducting their on - site inspections . this checklist was also provided to the sros in 1991 for use as part of the independent reviews of their systems . the arp program staff told us that they regularly update the inspection checklist by consulting professional standards and guidance relating to information systems established by other regulatory , audit , or industry bodies . securities pricing: actions needed for conversion to decimals , gao / t - ggd - 98-121 , may 8 , 1998 . financial markets: stronger system controls and oversight needed to prevent nasd computer outages , gao / aimd - 95-22 , dec. 21 , 1994 . financial markets: computer security controls at five stock exchanges need strengthening , gao / imtec - 91-56 , aug. 28 , 1991 . financial markets: active oversight of market automation by sec and cftc needed , gao / imtec - 91-21 , may 10 , 1991 . stock market automation: exchanges have increased systems' capacities since the 1987 market crash , gao / imtec - 91-37 , may 10 , 1991 . figure 1 shows how sec staff and the sros use the various sets of guidance . in our review of sec on - site inspection work papers , we observed instances in which arp staff used the steps from this checklist to plan certain segments of work they would perform at individual sros . sec officials said they also expect the areas examined during inspections of sro systems to be based on the arp policy statements as well as on industry standards for conducting systems audits and the reviewers' professional judgment .