figure 1 shows noaa's aircraft fleet . noaa's aircraft fly approximately 3,800 to 5,200 flight hours per year . the majority of these hours are funded by omao's budget . however , line offices may also request flight time on noaa - owned planes that is paid for with line office funds . for example , the national marine fisheries service is funding 210 flight hours to conduct steller sea lion and harbor seal surveys for june to september 2014 . noaa's planes conduct missions for other agencies on a reimbursable basis , as well . figure 2 shows noaa's aircraft flight hours and associated costs for fiscal years 2004 to 2013 . as noted , noaa's aircraft fleet capacity is limited , and line office needs exceed capacity . when noaa line office scientists are unable to obtain time on noaa - owned aircraft , they must wait until noaa aircraft become available , rely on chartered aircraft , contract for data , or forgo the use of aircraft . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or fennella@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . this report examines ( 1 ) the status of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's ( noaa ) efforts to improve its aircraft asset planning and management and the extent to which these efforts reflect leading practices and ( 2 ) the challenges noaa faces in improving its aircraft asset planning and management . to examine the status of noaa's efforts to improve its aircraft asset planning and management , we identified and reviewed relevant agency project and strategy documents detailing their improvement efforts , encompassing all projects and activities undertaken in support of the agency's strategic planning objectives laid out in the office of marine and aviation operations ( omao ) 2012 strategic plan . we reviewed these documents to identify efforts specific to aircraft asset management and excluded efforts related to other aspects of noaa's operations , such as efforts related to its ship fleet . we identified efforts that were completed , ongoing , or planned as of fiscal year 2013 , when we initiated our work . altogether , we identified 34 efforts related to aircraft asset planning management . for each improvement effort , we reviewed associated goals , methods , estimated schedules , and progress made to date . based on the descriptions of the efforts found in noaa documents we reviewed , and in consultation with noaa officials , we grouped these into one of five categories related to: ( 1 ) assets — upgrading , using , or disposing of certain aircraft assets ; ( 2 ) collaboration — improving collaboration with other federal agencies ; ( 3 ) measures — improving the quantity or accuracy of performance measures ; ( 4 ) plans — creating long - term plans ; or ( 5 ) policies and data — updating existing policies and conducting data analysis .