contract reimbursements . the contract between afeo and uso identifies the general categories of tour - related expenses for which uso can be reimbursed to include administrative support services ; honoraria ; and other direct costs such as production support / equipment rental , travel , lodging , and miscellaneous expenses . the contract contains numerous clauses and statements that indicate reimbursements will be made in the accordance with joint travel regulations and the federal acquisition regulation . however , the contract is not specific concerning the types of costs — such as the type of production support and other incidental direct costs — and the supporting documentation needed to ensure that afeo only pays for costs that are allowable and proper . afeo officials stated that they follow additional policies related to the allowable contract reimbursements for tour - related expenses , such as “thank you” dinners , but these policies are not documented in writing . centrally billed account . afeo stated that it uses the account primarily to pay for commercial airfares for uso personnel and entertainers covered under invitational travel orders . federal travel regulations contain stringent circumstances under which first - class and business - class travel can be authorized . however , according to afeo and uso officials , neither has more detailed , written , and program specific guidance to determine when and how uso will pay for first - or business - class travel . other direct charges . afeo provides additional support to uso by directly charging the cost of travel - related expenses , such as visas and passports , to its purchase card account , and by allowing its o&m funds account cite to be charged for air mobility command airlift services . however , afeo has no specific program guidance regarding how uso should be billed for unauthorized travelers on air mobility command flights . furthermore , dod instruction 1330.13 , last updated september 8 , 1985 , establishes policy and assigns responsibility for carrying out the armed forces professional entertainment program for entertaining troops overseas . this instruction states that the secretary of the army has responsibility for administering the program ; however , the air force assumed responsibility in fiscal year 1997 . an afeo official acknowledged that this instruction is out of date . also , this policy lacks clear statements regarding expenses that should be paid by afeo and uso , respectively . the lack of sufficient management oversight of funds provided to uso was also a key internal control problem . for example , afeo officials generally did not closely review or question expenses uso submitted for reimbursement . additionally , afeo's review and reconciliation process for its centrally billed account and billings from the air mobility command was not sufficient to identify airlift expenses that should be charged to uso . furthermore , during our audit of contract files at the air force contracting office responsible for administering the contracts between afeo and uso , we found no evidence of contract reviews . an air force contracting official stated its office sometimes questioned the need for some expenses for celebrity tours when modifications to the contracts were requested .