consistency . officials at education's ocio said it is important to ensure that policies are applied consistently , which is the goal of that office's speaking with one voice initiative . the biweekly management meetings to discuss and clarify the implementation of department policies ( eg , telework , resources , and employee bonuses ) were instituted after conversations with employees revealed that policies were inconsistently applied . as a result of the initiative , education's ocio officials said employees know that senior leaders are paying attention to how policies affect employees and are accountable for ensuring appropriate implementation . line of sight . ftc officials emphasized the importance of creating a line of sight between the agency's mission and the work of each employee . as we have previously reported , successful organizations create a “line of sight” showing how team , unit , and individual performance can contribute to overall organizational results . ftc officials said that the agency lists every employee that contributed to a case in the pleadings , from the attorneys and paralegals to the information technology specialists who provided computer support . importantly , ftc officials said they recognize how mission support functions , such as excellent human resources customer service contribute to the agency mission . employee outreach . according to officials at all three case study agencies , they all reach out to employees and their labor union representatives , if applicable , to obtain insight into their fevs scores or to inform other improvement efforts . our 2003 report found that employee involvement strengthens the improvement process by including frontline perspectives and experiences . by participating in improvement task teams , employees have additional opportunities to share their experiences and shape policies and procedures as they are being developed and implemented . for example , in 2012 , while ncua's eei score was above the government - wide level , fevs questions about awards , performance appraisals , and merit - based promotions were its lowest scoring categories . ncua officials said they contracted with an external facilitator to conduct workshops and webinar - based feedback sessions with employees to gain insight into their fevs results and identify root causes influencing the survey scores . these officials said that using external facilitators offered employees confidentiality and created an environment that encouraged open conversations . based on these feedback sessions , ncua created an internal employee - driven committee to inform revisions to the awards , performance appraisals , and merit - based promotion process , and developed recommendations for ncua's management to implement these changes . most of the committee's recommendations were implemented . according to officials at our case study agencies in our 2015 report on employee engagement , while the eei provides a useful barometer for engagement , other indicators can provide officials with further insight into reasons for engagement levels and areas for improvement . other data such as turnover rates and equal employment opportunity ( eeo ) complaints — which are likely already collected by federal agencies — can provide additional insight and strategies for improving employee engagement . notably , mspb found that there is a statistically significant correlation between higher levels of employee engagement and fewer eeo complaints .