the program applies to all navy activities . navy activities report quality deficiency data both internally and to a broader program , known as the product data reporting and evaluation program , where it is managed as one of several databases . this broader program is a navy - wide automated system for collecting data on the quality of material and products furnished by contractors . the quality deficiency report is also one of several records used in the navy's red / yellow / green program , another product data reporting and evaluation program application used to reduce the risk of receiving nonconforming products and late shipments . the assistant secretary of the navy for research , development , and acquisition has program authority and sets policy , and the naval sea systems command administers the product quality deficiency reporting program . high - risk series: an update ( gao - 01-263 , jan. 2001 ) . defense inventory: improved management framework needed to guide navy best practice initiatives ( gao / nsiad - 00-1 , oct. 21 , 1999 ) . navy program executive officers , program managers , and commanders of the naval systems commands are to process quality deficiency reports for their systems and equipment in accordance with instructions and to ensure people are properly trained in reporting deficiencies . quality deficiency reporting data are generally sent to a screening point , such as the navy's inventory control point , for review and forwarding to an appropriate item manager or action point to determine the causes and who is responsible for the deficiencies . once a determination is made and final disposition occurs , the quality deficiency reporting database is to be updated to reflect the results . the navy's product quality deficiency reporting program has been largely ineffective in gathering the data needed for analyses so that navy managers can accurately report on and correct deficiencies in the quality of spare parts being provided to end users , including maintenance personnel in field activities . this program uses quality deficiency reports as one of the key inputs to the evaluation , but only when such reports show that a specific contractor was found to be responsible for the deficiencies in parts . however , since the quality deficiency data we examined were so often incomplete , many of the reports lacked the needed information . according to navy and defense logistics agency quality assurance officials , the lack of complete and reliable quality deficiency data limits their usefulness in identifying suppliers of deficient parts . in addition to the problems of incomplete and underreported data , concerns about using the data to determine the extent of spare parts quality deficiencies are twofold . first , to be meaningful , the number of quality deficiencies identified should be compared with the total number of parts used , but the data to compute such a deficiency rate are often not available . second , even if a deficiency rate could be determined , criteria for determining what constitutes a reasonable deficiency rate for a particular part have not been established for the quality deficiency reporting program as it has been , for example , for the red / yellow / green program .