4 and fig . when we estimated the percentage of workers in each earnings group that participated in dc plans , we found that low and moderate earners were less likely to participate than higher earners . of all workers who earned less than $40,000 per year , 28 percent participated in dc plans ; of those who earned between $40,000 and $75,000 per year , 55 percent participated in dc plans . ( see fig . likewise , workers with low or moderate household incomes were less likely to participate than those with higher household incomes . when we estimated the percentages of men and women workers that participated in dc plans , we found that a higher percentage of male ( 39 percent ) than female workers ( 32 percent ) participated in dc plans . about 8 percent of all dc participants were likely to benefit directly if all three dc plan contribution limits discussed in this report increased at the same time . the 3.1 million dc participants who were likely to benefit directly from these limit increases generally had higher earnings than the 35.7 million who were not likely to benefit directly . when we examined the percentages of workers in various earnings categories that were likely to benefit directly from these limit increases , we found that higher earners were more likely than low and moderate earners to benefit directly . when we compared the gender of likely direct beneficiaries with that of dc participants not likely to benefit directly , we found that men made up a higher percentage of likely direct beneficiaries than of dc participants not likely to benefit directly . when we examined the percentages of male and female dc participants that were likely to benefit directly , we found that a higher percentage of men than women were likely to benefit directly . when we analyzed the effects of increases in each of the three contribution limits sequentially , we found that increasing the percentage limit on combined employer and employee contributions first accounts for half of the 3.1 million likely direct beneficiaries of an increase in all three contribution limits . in addition to likely direct beneficiaries , some low and moderate earners might benefit indirectly from increases in dc plan contribution limits if they resulted in extra pension coverage or contributions for those workers , but the number of workers who might benefit in this way is unknown . few dc participants were likely to benefit directly from increasing all three dc plan limits we analyzed . we define likely direct beneficiaries as employed dc participants whose employer and / or employee contributions were equal to or above the statutory limits we analyzed . about 8 percent of all dc participants , or 3.1 million people , were likely to have benefited directly if all the contribution limits analyzed in this report had been increased . the results of our analysis of the scf are consistent with plan - specific data we analyzed .