pursuant to 10 u.s.c . § 191 , whenever the secretary of defense determines that it would be more effective , economical , or efficient to provide for the performance of a supply or service common to multiple military departments by a single agency , then the secretary can create a dafa to provide that supply or service . further , at the time of our review , section 192 ( c ) of title 10 , united states code , required , among other things , that the secretary of defense periodically ensure that the provision of services and supplies by the dafas , rather than by the military departments , is more effective , economical , and efficient . as such , we assessed dod's provision of human resources by dafas against gao's duplication evaluation guide to assess dod's provision of human resources . we interviewed officials from dod's cmo office , the 3 dafas that provide human resources services for the department ( dfas , dla , and whs ) , and the lead and members of dod's human resources management reform team , and we reviewed documents such as dod's human capital operating plan and documents provided by the dafas that detailed their human resources business functions . for our third objective , we selected efficiency initiatives that affect dafas , and that we have previously reported on since 2011 . we reviewed a selection of reform initiatives because dod does not have a comprehensive listing of the reform initiatives it has undertaken . for the purposes of this review , we define “efficiency” as maintaining federal government services or outcomes using fewer resources ( such as time and money ) or improving or increasing the quality or quantity of services or outcomes while maintaining ( or reducing ) resources . we obtained documentation and spoke with officials from cmo and the dafas selected for the second objective of this report regarding dod's monitoring , assessing , and tracking of the selected reform initiatives . we obtained information and documentation from cmo officials regarding dod's ongoing reform efforts , including plans for monitoring and assessing these efforts . we compared this information and documentation against standards for internal control in the federal government , which states that management should establish a baseline from which to measure progress , use ongoing monitoring , and evaluate results . we conducted this performance audit from august 2017 to september 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , margaret best ( assistant director ) , miranda cohen , alexandra gonzalez , amanda manning , richard powelson , suzanne perkins , andrew stavisky , amie lesser , sarah veale , and cheryl weissman made key contributions to this report . see appendix i for additional details . dod's 19 defense agencies and 8 dod field activities are defense organizations separate from the military departments .