capital and liquidity . regulators often reviewed the applicant's capital and liquidity when evaluating whether an institution's weaknesses might affect its viability . in particular , regulators and treasury considered the sufficiency of capital to absorb losses from bad assets and the ability to raise private capital . as instructed by treasury guidance , regulators evaluated an institution's capital levels prior to the addition of any cpp investment . although an institution might have high levels of nonperforming loans or other problem assets , regulators' concerns about viability might be eased if it also had a substantial amount of capital available to offset related losses . likewise , capital from private sources could shore up an institution's capital buffers and provide a signal to the market that it could access similar sources if necessary . when evaluating the sufficiency of a marginal applicant's capital , regulators also assessed the amount of capital relative to the firm's risk profile , the quality of the capital , and the firm's dependence on volatile funding sources . institutions with a riskier business model that included , for instance , extending high - risk loans or investing in high - risk assets generally would require higher amounts of capital as reserves against losses . conversely , an institution with a less risky strategy or asset base might need somewhat less capital to be considered viable . regulators reviewed the quality of a firm's capital because some forms of capital , such as common shareholder's equity , can absorb losses more easily than other types , such as subordinated debt or preferred shares , which may have restrictions or limits on their ability to take losses . finally , regulators considered the nature of a firm's funding sources . they viewed firms that financed their lending and other operations with stable funding sources , such as core deposit accounts or long - term debt , as less risky than firms that obtained financing through brokered deposits or wholesale funding , which could be more costly or might need to be replaced more frequently . performance trends . regulators also examined recent trends in performance when evaluating marginal applicants . for example , regulators considered strong or improving trends in asset quality , earnings , and capital levels , among others , as potentially favorable indicators of viability . these trends included reductions in nonperforming and classified assets , consistent positive earnings , reductions in commercial real estate concentrations , and higher net interest margins and return on assets . in some cases , regulators identified improvements in banks' performance through preliminary examination ratings . officials from one bank regulator stated that the agency refrained from making recommendations until it had recent and complete examination data . for example , if an examination was scheduled for an applicant that had raised regulatory concerns or questions , the agency would wait for the updated results before completing its review and making a recommendation to treasury . regulators and treasury raised specific questions about the viability of a small number of institutions that ultimately were approved and received their cpp investments between december 19 , 2008 , and march 27 , 2009 .