fig . 2 shows the effect of standby agreements on the total capital required to be held against the underlying loans in the entire fcs . our concern is that standby and similar agreements reduce the sum of capital required to be held by the farm credit system and farmer mac . generally , institutions can help mitigate the risks associated with lower capital by maintaining a relatively large number of participating lenders and a geographically diverse portfolio . however , farmer mac's business activities are concentrated among a small number of business partners and its portfolio is concentrated largely in the western united states . before discussing governance issues at farmer mac , i want to describe how farmer mac's board of directors is structured in federal law . farmer mac's 15-member board of directors includes 5 members elected by class a stockholders , which include banks , insurance companies , and other financial institutions that do business with farmer mac ; 5 members elected by class b stockholders , which are fcs institutions that do business with farmer mac ; and 5 members appointed by the president of the united states . farmer mac also issues nonvoting class c stock to the general public . class a and class b shareholders are concerned with the use of farmer mac services , while class c shareholders are generally investors concerned with maximizing their profits . according to statements made at the time farmer mac's enabling legislation was being considered , this structure was intended to protect the interests of both fcs and commercial lenders by providing for equal representation by fcs , commercial lenders , and the public sector . under this structure , farmer mac resembles a cooperative . at the same time , however , it is a publicly traded company , because its class a and c stock are traded on the nyse . but unlike most other publicly traded corporations , farmer mac is controlled by institutions with which it has a business relationship . for this reason , the board may face difficulties representing the interests of all shareholders . good corporate governance requires that the incentives and loyalties of the board of directors of publicly traded companies reflect the fact that the directors are to serve the interests of all the shareholders . however , we found that the statutory structure of farmer mac's board and the voting structure of its common stock hamper farmer mac's ability to have such a focus . farmer mac is subject to nyse listing standards on corporate governance , as well as statutory and regulatory requirements such as the sarbanes - oxley act of 2002 . collectively , these standards and provisions require that a majority of the board be independent and that key committees ( audit , nominating or corporate governance , and compensation ) consist entirely of independent directors . during our review , the listing standards were being revised and criteria for independence had not been finalized . based on the proposed standards , our assessment was that business relationships between farmer mac and the directors of its board may have prevented these individuals from meeting the standards of independence under nyse rules .