other policies . states have established several other types of policies to encourage the deployment of residential solar systems , as we found in our review of stakeholder reports and the database of state incentives for renewables and efficiency . these policies are described in table 1 . federal policymakers have used grants , and state policymakers have used requirements and regulatory decisions , to encourage residential deployment of advanced meters . at the federal level , doe reported that it provided more than $3.4 billion in grants through its smart grid investment grant program from 2009 through 2015 for upgrades to the electricity grid , including the deployment of advanced meters . in addition , doe provided about $600 million through its smart grid demonstration program for demonstration projects that involved innovative applications of existing and emerging grid technologies and concepts , which supported some additional advanced meter deployments . at the state level , policymakers in some states have enacted policies that require regulated grid operators to deploy advanced meters at residences and other customer locations or to file deployment plans with regulators , according to an eia analysis . for example , the california public utilities commission established a requirement that the three grid operators it regulates install advanced meters at customers' residences ; the commission also authorized the operators to recover associated deployment costs through increased retail electricity prices . in addition , doe officials told us that regulators in some states have approved proposals from the grid operators they regulate to install advanced meters and recover the costs of installation from customers . however , some state regulators do not have jurisdiction over all grid operators in their state , such as those that are municipally owned ; as a result , state regulatory policies may not affect the deployment of advanced meters by all grid operators in a state . federal and state policymakers have used financial incentives , and state policymakers have used deployment targets , to encourage residential deployment of electricity storage and management technologies . the federal government has provided incentives to promote these technologies , though federal support for these technologies has been more limited than federal support for advanced meters and solar systems . for example , doe funding through both the smart grid investment grant program and smart grid demonstration program provided some support for the installation of smart devices , including thermostats that can receive price and other data from electricity suppliers . furthermore , customers who install residential storage systems potentially are eligible for the investment tax credit when they use the storage system to store energy from their solar system ; however , there is no federal tax incentive for stand - alone storage systems . additionally , customers who purchase a qualifying electric vehicle potentially can receive a federal tax credit of $2,500 plus an additional credit depending on the size of the vehicle's battery . electric vehicles are primarily used for transportation , but potentially can also be used as an electricity storage and management technology . at the state level , we identified examples of state policies that have encouraged the deployment of electricity storage and management technologies , based on interviews with stakeholders and our review of state documentation .