gao - 10-833 . washington , d.c.: july 26 , 2010 . dod officials then award a contract . performance and delivery phase: during this phase , the selected contractor begins producing the system and may assert additional restrictions to technical - data rights in certain circumstances . for example , the contractor may assert new restrictions if the department modifies its system requirements or if the contractor inadvertently omitted a restriction during the contracting phase . dod officials may also challenge these additional asserted restrictions . contractors mark all technical data they deliver to the government with a level of rights ( eg , government purpose or limited rights ) . in addition , program officials review these markings to ensure that the contractor has identified them in a manner that is consistent with dod policies and the agreement in the contract . post - performance and sustainment phase: in this phase , the contractor has delivered a system to dod . dod officials may realize during post - performance and sustainment whether they have acquired the necessary technical data and technical - data rights during the sustainment phase . when sustaining systems , dod personnel may use technical data for critical functions including maintaining and repairing systems . any new technical data and technical - data rights that would be needed for any support contracts during sustainment phase would need to be acquired . program officials also may challenge the level of rights that the contractor asserted for any delivered technical data that is used to produce the system for up to 3 years after final payment under the contract or three years after delivery of the data , whichever is later . program officials may also exercise options to obtain additional rights and data that the department did not acquire during the performance and delivery phase if dod and the contractor had included a provision in the contract called a “priced - contract option. for nearly a decade , we and the military - service audit agencies have conducted reviews that included information on dod's acquisition of technical data and technical - data rights for systems in the acquisition process . the strategy for the navy multiband terminal stated that the program manager had “assessed the long - term technical - data needs” of the system and “established acquisition strategies that provide for technical data” and “associated license rights needed to sustain [the systems] over their life cycle and allow for competitive procurement of future terminals.” the three strategies that did not address the requirement did not identify any required data . merits of a priced - contract option: four of the 12 acquisition strategies discussed the merits of a priced contract option — an option to obtain additional data and rights that the program did not acquire during the contracting phase , for example: the small diameter bomb ii strategy stated that the contract “will contain a priced contract option…for a one - time delivery of a technical - data package” that would consist of data “that describes the design , support , test , and maintenance” of the system , and the models , simulation and analysis used to predict its performance .