medicare is administered by cms . as a part of its health care improvement program , since 1999 , cms and a set of contractors , called peer review organizations , have been involved in monitoring and improving the quality of care , including increasing mammography screening rates among women medicare beneficiaries . the nation's overall capacity to meet the growing demand for mammography services is generally adequate . because no systematic data were available on waiting times and travel distances for mammography services , we relied on observations of state and local officials about the situations at each location . for each selected location , both rural and metropolitan , we interviewed officials familiar with the availability of mammography services in these areas to obtain their views on whether women in their areas were experiencing problems with long waiting times for appointments and / or long travel distance to obtain services . these officials generally included state radiation control personnel contracted by fda to conduct annual onsite inspections of mammography facilities ; state and local public health officials involved in cdc's breast and cervical cancer early detection program , which contracts with mammography facilities in each state to provide screening and diagnostic mammograms to underserved women ; and in some locations , officials of medicare peer review organizations contracted by cms to monitor and improve the quality of care , including increasing statewide mammography screening rates for medicare beneficiaries . the most recent data available in the system were for 2000 . however , during the course of our work , cms implemented a statutory change to the method for determining the medicare reimbursement rate for screening mammography . the new method includes geographic adjustments for cost differences among areas and resulted in significant rate increases for high cost areas . in general , the increase in mammography equipment and personnel has been sufficient to meet the steady increase in demand for mammography services . however , while the general buildup of personnel has been in line with the growth in the use of services , the last few years show a substantial decline in the number of new entrants to the fields , which could result in a reversal in this trend . if this reversal occurs , more personnel shortage problems could arise in the future . some instances of long waiting times for services are occurring . consolidation of facilities and increases in demand can create a strain on service availability in specific communities . however , appointment delays are primarily for screening mammograms rather than for follow - up diagnostic mammograms . these conditions , which can be temporary , may be exacerbated by local physicians' referral patterns , patients' insurance coverage , or local shortages in available personnel . we provided fda with a draft of the report for review and comment . fda responded that it found the report to be accurate and it had no other general comments . in addition , fda provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . appendix ii contains fda's written response . as arranged with your offices , unless you release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days after its issue date .