these companies do not price their technical data items separately . dod program offices , however , negotiate a price for maintenance - and - repair technical data separately from the price of the military hardware systems . according to service competition - advocate officials , program managers faced with limited acquisition dollars often make trade - off decisions to buy increased weapon system capability in lieu of technical data . we reported in 2002 that dod program offices have often failed to put adequate emphasis on obtaining needed technical data during the acquisition process . we recommended that dod emphasize the importance of obtaining technical data and consider including a priced option for the purchase of technical data when considering proposals for new weapon systems or modifications to existing systems . dod concurred with our recommendation , noting that there was a requirement in dod 5000.2r for program offices to provide long - term access to data required for the competitive sourcing of systems support throughout the life cycle . additionally , by implementing total life - cycle systems management , dod would strengthen its emphasis on acquiring technical data when negotiating support agreements with logistics providers . nonetheless , the dod has further diminished the emphasis it places on the need to acquire rights to technical data . for example , in may 2003 , dod replaced its acquisition regulation with a streamlined instruction , which eliminated the prior regulation's requirement for the program manager to provide for long - term access to data required for the competitive sourcing of weapon system support throughout the life cycle of the system . this language is now provided as guidance in the interim defense acquisition guidebook , but it is not mandatory that this guidance be followed . according to dod and service logistics officials , program managers should develop strategies that provide the government with sufficient and affordable technical data rights to enable them to put the work out for competition or develop alternate public or private sources for weapon system support if performance - based logistics arrangements fail or become too expensive . logistics officials recognize that program managers who implement performance - based logistics contracts on new weapon systems may wish to delay taking delivery of technical data early in the life of the system , because unlike the stable designs of commercial equipment purchased in the private sector , the data for cutting edge technology lacks maturity and is frequently changed . alternatively , program managers sometimes pay the original equipment manufacturers both to maintain the technical and weapon system configuration data and to provide the program managers with sufficient access to enable them to manage and oversee the performance - based logistics contract . however , logistics officials agree that the product support strategy should clearly provide for the future delivery of the technical data when required to support competition or alternative source development . service logistics and competition - advocate officials said that it is critical that this strategy be developed during the weapon system acquisition phase , when the program office has its greatest leverage in negotiating the price of the technical data and the conditions under which the manufacturer must deliver the data .