we disagree . our report contains numerous instances where the navy did not comply with either dod acquisition policies and guidelines or industry best practices , in the areas of ( 1 ) economic justification ; ( 2 ) architectural alignment ; ( 3 ) project management , including progress measurement and reporting , funding disclosure , and oversight activities ; and ( 4 ) system development , including requirements management and testing . moreover , the navy has not provided any evidence to demonstrate that our report is incorrect with respect to the level of program discipline and conformance with applicable policy and guidance in the areas that we reviewed . we disagree . knowing that ntcss is the right solution to meet the navy's strategic business and technological needs would require that a frame of reference articulating these needs be available as a point of comparison . such a frame of reference is an enterprise architecture . we do not agree with these comments . our experience with federal agencies has shown that investing in an information technology solution without defining the solution in the context of an architecture often results in systems that are duplicative , not well integrated , and unnecessarily costly to maintain and interface . in addition , in february 2005 , key program stakeholders and representatives from user organizations questioned whether ntcss as defined was the right solution to cost effectively meet users' needs . at that time , program officials stated their intent to develop a new economic analysis to gather the information needed to determine whether to continue investing in ntcss . in november 2005 , program officials told us that they no longer planned to develop this economic analysis . without a well - defined architecture and a reliable economic analysis , the navy cannot be sure that ntcss is the right solution . further , open priority 3 trouble reports have increased during this time to about 250 and , given that priority 3s require work - arounds , they decrease system capability and performance . neither the number of priority 2 trouble reports , which continue to be in the hundreds , nor the upward trend in priority 3 trouble reports are indicative of a maturing , high - quality system . ( see fig . with respect to the ooma application in particular , the trend in the volume of significant trouble reports shows that this application is particularly problematic . we disagree . with respect to the statement that ntcss is a “very mature program,” ntcss has been under development for about 10 years at a cost of about $1.1 billion , and the navy plans to spend an additional $348 million between fiscal years 2006 and 2009 . further , as appendix ii of our report shows , there are hundreds of open trouble reports and change proposals that need to be addressed before the system can deliver promised or expected capabilities . in addition , should the ooma application pass operational testing and be fielded , there are over 200 sites where the necessary hardware must be installed and related training must occur .