training . since 2003 , dhs and tsa have required all employees — including air marshals — to complete training intended to , among other things , prevent discrimination . these include mandatory annual dhs training , tsa new - hire training , and some optional tsa training . for example since 2003 , tsa has required new employees to complete a course called introduction to civil rights which provides an overview of civil rights , eeo laws , and tsa's related complaint process . in addition , as of december 2006 , dhs has required all employees to complete annual no fear act training to inform employees of their rights and responsibilities with regard to discrimination in the workplace . fams management officials told us that educating the workforce about discrimination is important because education promotes and opens communication avenues within fams that were previously underutilized . tsa has also provided training beyond these required courses . for example , crd officials told us that at the start of each fiscal year they work with fams management to identify fams field offices where concerns about discriminatory behavior have been raised . crd officials stated that they have then provided in - person tailored trainings based on the field offices' needs . additionally , in august 2019 , tsa's anti - harassment program provided fams leadership with an overview of the program — including defining harassment and manager and employee responsibilities . according to crd and fams officials , they are in the process of developing additional courses that could be helpful to preventing discrimination , including civility courses , coaching through conflict , and crucial conversations training . venues . fams has venues for air marshals to raise issues , such as concerns about discrimination . specifically , in 2002 fams created “field office focus groups ; ” in 2006 fams established an ombudsman position ; and in 2011 fams created eeo points of contact in fams field offices . fams field office focus groups . during the early ramp - up of fams after september 11 , 2001 , fams established an internal initiative called “field office focus groups” to provide a venue for employees to raise issues , such as concerns about discrimination , to field office management through group discussions . we reviewed field office focus group meeting minutes from all 20 field offices from october 2016 through december 2018 . during these meetings , discrimination - related issues were discussed in two field offices . for example , in one focus group air marshals inquired about their recourse when they believe management has retaliated against them . fams ombudsman . fams established a fams - specific ombudsman position in 2006 . the fams ombudsman is responsible for answering inquiries about agency policies and helping employees identify options to resolve workplace concerns , such as concerns about discrimination . the fams ombudsman we met with told us they have fielded inquiries about discrimination but they do not keep records on the number of inquiries . the ombudsman estimated that between may 2018 , when assuming the ombudsman position , and july 2019 the office received , on average , eight calls per month from air marshals on various topics , some of which involved inquiries about discrimination .