comprehensive . the cost estimate should include both government and contractor costs of the program over its full life - cycle , from inception of the program through design , development , deployment , and operation and maintenance to retirement of the program . it should also completely define the program , reflect the current schedule , and be technically reasonable . comprehensive cost estimates should be structured in sufficient detail to ensure that cost elements are neither omitted nor double counted . specifically , the cost estimate should be based on a product - oriented work breakdown structure ( wbs ) that allows a program to track cost and schedule by defined deliverables , such as hardware or software components . finally , where information is limited and judgments are made , the cost estimate should document all cost - influencing assumptions . well - documented . a good cost estimate — while taking the form of a single number — is supported by detailed documentation that describes how it was derived and how the expected funding will be spent in order to achieve a given objective . therefore , the documentation should capture in writing such things as the source data used , the calculations performed and their results , and the estimating methodology used to derive each wbs element's cost . moreover , this information should be captured in such a way that the data used to derive the estimate can be traced back to , and verified against , their sources so that the estimate can be easily replicated and updated . the documentation should also discuss the technical baseline description and how the data were normalized . finally , the documentation should include evidence that the cost estimate was reviewed and accepted by management . accurate . the cost estimate should provide for results that are unbiased , and it should not be overly conservative or optimistic . an estimate is accurate when it is based on an assessment of most likely costs ; adjusted properly for inflation ; and contains few , if any , minor mistakes . in addition , a cost estimate should be updated regularly to reflect significant changes in the program — such as when schedules or other assumptions change — and actual costs , so that it is always reflecting current status . during the update process , variances between planned and actual costs should be documented , explained , and reviewed . among other things , the estimate should be grounded in a historical record of cost estimating and actual experiences on other comparable programs . credible . the cost estimate should discuss any limitations of the analysis because of uncertainty or biases surrounding data or assumptions . major assumptions should be varied , and other outcomes recomputed to determine how sensitive they are to changes in the assumptions . risk and uncertainty analysis should be performed to determine the level of risk associated with the estimate . further , the estimate's cost drivers should be cross - checked , and an independent cost estimate conducted by a group outside the acquiring organization should be developed to determine whether other estimating methods produce similar results .