“ shall not . transfer or sell any uranium ( including natural uranium concentrates , natural uranium hexafluoride , or enriched uranium in any form ) to any person except as consistent with this section.” ( emphasis added. ) the remainder of section 3112 then prescribes the conditions under which doe may sell or transfer particular types of uranium , namely , so - called russian - origin uranium ( subsection ( b ) ) ; natural and enriched uranium transferred to usec ( subsection ( c ) ) ; natural and low - enriched uranium sold from doe's inventory ( subsection ( d ) ) ; and enriched uranium transferred to federal agencies , state and local agencies , nonprofit , charitable or educational institutions , and others ( subsection ( e ) ) . no provision explicitly addresses depleted uranium . read naturally and in accordance with its plain language , section 3112 prohibits doe from selling or transferring its depleted uranium . the tails consist of uranium - 235 and uranium - 238 , whether they are deemed a waste or a valuable commodity , and a doe office of environmental management official confirmed to us that operationally , the department treats depleted , natural , and enriched uranium all as “uranium.” thus , depleted uranium would be covered by section 3112 as a type of “any uranium.” this plain meaning is reinforced by the fact that section 3112 ( a ) lists nonexclusive examples of uranium — ”any uranium ( including natural uranium . or enriched uranium in any form ) ” — making clear that additional types of uranium are covered by section 3112 . a 2005 doe internal legal memorandum ( 2005 doe memorandum ) reaches the same conclusion . thus , because doe may sell or transfer uranium only as consistent with the terms of sections 3112 ( b ) - 3112 ( e ) , and because none of those provisions specifies conditions under which depleted uranium may be sold , the plain words of the statute prohibit it . the statutory structure and legislative history support this conclusion . it is clear that when congress passed the usec privatization act in 1996 , it was familiar with depleted uranium as a category of uranium requiring management . because depleted uranium was only considered as a valueless waste at that time , congress only explicitly referred to one management option in the statute: disposal . as noted , in section 3113 , congress required doe to take responsibility for disposal of other entities' depleted uranium , should it ever be determined to be a “low - level radioactive waste.” as nrc noted recently in making such a determination , however , when depleted uranium is treated as a “resource,” rather than a waste , section 3113 does not apply . see nrc , in re louisiana energy services , l.p. ( national enrichment facility ) , no . cli - 05-05 ( jan. 18 , 2005 ) , at 1 , 3 , 15 , 17 . in that event — where depleted uranium is a resource to be sold or transferred — section 3112 , by its terms , would apply .