compensation flexibilities . agencies also have authority to provide additional compensation to employees . these include giving recruitment , relocation , and retention incentives to employees ; raising the pay rate of critical positions in an agency ( requires opm approval after consultation with omb ) ; providing certain eligible physicians allowances of up to $30,000 per year . this flexibility requires omb approval ; and using special rates , premium pay , and other compensation flexibilities to recruit and retain specified health care employees , under a delegation agreement with opm . one of the agencies we reviewed — the social security administration ( ssa ) — is particularly at risk of losing a substantial portion of its workforce at a time when it will experience unprecedented growth in demand for its services . ssa faces looming shortages particularly in some mission critical positions , despite enhancing its human capital planning efforts . the agency is experiencing service delays , even at current staffing levels . for example , ssa had over 750,000 disability claims awaiting a decision at the hearing level at the end of january 2008 , leading to an average waiting time in fiscal year 2008 of almost 500 days . these backlogs could increase in the future , given ssa's demographic profile . indeed , according to ssa's data , about 40 percent of its current workforce will be eligible to retire by 2012 , and by 2017 that proportion will grow to more than half . the prospects for hiring new employees to replace retirees over this timeframe remains unclear . according to ssa officials , while the fiscal year 2008 budget provided sufficient funding to allow ssa to replace all of the employees that leave — and to add additional employees in some areas — budgetary constraints have prevented the agency from hiring enough new workers in the past and future hiring will depend upon the resources available . even when ssa can hire , the agency faces stiff competition from the private sector , especially for jobs in the accounting , legal , and information technology fields . the potential impact of retirements varies across the agency and will affect occupations ssa deems critical . by 2012 , the proportion of those eligible to retire will generally range from 25 percent to 59 percent across such occupations . flexible schedules and workplaces . flexible schedules and workplaces are often extremely important to older workers . for example , some research indicates older workers want to set their own hours and to be able to take time off to care for relatives when needed . in addition , older workers nearing retirement may prefer a part - time schedule , for example , as a means to retire gradually . federal agencies have work schedule flexibilities that they can provide to their workers without prior approval from opm . these include part - time schedules — allow employees to work on a part - time basis ; however , part - time work late in a career may result in a lower retirement annuity and may affect other benefits .