( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dol , irs , pbgc , sec , treasury , and the united states trustee program within the department of justice for review and comment . we reviewed a random selection of 151 cases ( 30 chapter 7 and 121 chapter 11 ) from a total of 732 relevant bankruptcy cases . distributions from all executive retirement plans are made from company assets . , set aside assets for the exclusive benefit of participants that are separate from company assets and beyond the reach of creditors ) executive retirement plans while maintaining the benefits of tax - deferral for executives . however , companies are able to “informally fund” executive retirement plans by transferring amounts to a trust that remains part of the company's general assets — often referred to as a “rabbi trust” — to help keep its promise to pay benefits . because executive retirement plans are unfunded , executives' benefits in these plans can be subject to credit risk of non - payment , such as in the event of a company bankruptcy , according to irs officials . the irc provides rules regarding deferring compensation in executive retirement plans , including restrictions on the timing of distributions , restrictions on payment acceleration , and restrictions on the timing of deferral elections . at the time of deferral , the amount of compensation deferred under the plan is generally excluded from executives' income for tax purposes and not tax deductible for the company ( see fig . during the deferral period , because any assets associated with the executive retirement plan remain company assets ( and subject to creditor claims ) , the company is subject to applicable taxes on any investment earnings attributable to the assets . treasury officials also told us that executive retirement plans could have federal revenue effects to the extent corporate and individual tax rates ( or taxes paid ) diverge from each other . among the 38 chapter 11 corporate bankruptcy cases we reviewed , 30 cases showed that participants in executive retirement plans expected to receive general unsecured creditor status when settling their plan benefit claims . as a general unsecured creditor , executives in these plans are part of what is typically the last creditor class to be paid in bankruptcy , and only if funds remain after claims from all other creditors with payment priority have been paid in full ( see fig . our review of bankruptcy cases showed that executives' expected losses and recoveries varied among the 30 chapter 11 cases we reviewed where all or some plan participants were expected to receive general unsecured creditor status for their plan benefit claims ( see fig . in 21 of the 30 cases , plan participants were expected to sustain losses of more than 75 percent of their plan benefit claims , and in 17 of these 21 cases , participants were estimated to lose 90 percent or more . however , the remaining nine cases showed that participants were expected to recover more than half of their plan benefit claims with six of those cases expecting a full recovery and one case expecting a 99 percent recovery .