comparable . estimates should be comparable among parties and use accepted methodologies and formats , including allocating emissions to the six economic sectors defined by ipcc — energy , industrial processes , solvent and other product use , agriculture , land - use change and forestry , and waste . complete . inventories should cover all sources and sinks and all gases included in the guidelines . accurate . estimates should not systematically over - or underestimate true emissions as far as can be judged and should reduce uncertainties as far as practical . annex i nations are to submit inventories annually consisting of two components — inventory data in a common reporting format and a national inventory report — both of which are publicly available on a web site maintained by the secretariat . the common reporting format calls for emissions estimates and the underlying activity data and emissions factors for each of six sectors — energy , industrial processes , solvent and other product use , agriculture , land - use change and forestry , and waste . it also calls for data on the major sources that contribute to emissions in each sector . the inventory data are to reflect a nation's most recent reporting year as well as all previous years back to the base year , generally 1990 . the 2010 reporting format called for nearly 150,000 items of inventory data and other information from 1990 through 2008 . the common format and underlying detail facilitate comparisons across nations and make it easier to review the data by , for example , enabling automated checks to ensure emissions were properly calculated and to flag inconsistencies in data reported over time . the national inventory report should explain the development of the estimates and data in the common reporting format and should enable reviewers to understand and evaluate the inventory . the report should include , among other things , descriptions of the methods used to calculate emissions estimates , the rationale for selecting the methods used , and information about the complexity of methods and the resulting precision of the estimates ; information on quality assurance procedures used ; discussion of any recalculations affecting previously submitted inventory data ; and information on improvements planned for future inventories . the secretariat coordinates an inventory review process that , among other things , assesses the consistency of inventories from annex i nations with reporting guidelines . the purposes of this process are to ensure that parties are provided with ( 1 ) objective , consistent , transparent , thorough , and comprehensive assessments of the inventories ; ( 2 ) adequate and reliable information on inventories from annex i parties ; ( 3 ) assurance that inventories are consistent with ipcc reporting guidelines ; and ( 4 ) assistance to improve the quality of inventories . in supporting the inventory review process , the secretariat provides scientific and technical guidance on inventory issues and coordinates implementation of convention guidelines . inventory reviews are supervised by the head of the reporting , data , and analysis program within the secretariat .