solicitation . ensures that a request for proposal that delineates a project's requirements is prepared and , consistent with relevant solicitation laws and regulations , that a contractor is selected that can most cost - effectively satisfy these requirements . requirements development and management . establishes and maintains a common and unambiguous definition of software requirements among the acquisition team , the system users , and the development contractor . project management . provides for management of the activities within the project office and supporting contractors to ensure a timely , efficient , and cost - effective acquisition . contract tracking and oversight . ensures that the development contractor performs according to the terms of the contract ; needed contract changes are identified , negotiated , and incorporated into the contract ; and contractor performance issues are identified early , when they are easier to address . evaluation . determines whether the acquired products and services satisfy contract requirements before acceptance . within these key processes , sei identifies practices that are needed to effectively execute each process . among others , these practices include ( 1 ) having a written policy , ( 2 ) assigning responsibility for the acquisition , ( 3 ) developing and adhering to a plan , ( 4 ) performing management review activities , and ( 5 ) measuring the status of key activities and using these measurements to make decisions . ins plans generally satisfy sei's acquisition processes and practices . for example , ins's governing acquisition policy and supporting procedures for acquiring and implementing the entry exit system are provided by ins's systems development life cycle , its information technology investment management process , and the federal acquisition regulation , which our analysis shows are generally consistent with sei's acquisition model . ( see app . i for a description of our analysis. ) further , responsibility for acquiring and implementing the entry exit system was assigned to ins ( and now to dhs's bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ) . ins has developed an acquisition plan that outlines its approach and strategy for acquiring the entry exit system . additionally , ins has issued a request for information to solicit input from development contractors on the capabilities of their respective commercial products and services to assist in developing system requirements , and it has developed procedures and criteria for evaluating contractor proposals and selecting a contractor to develop the entry exit system . further , through its information technology investment management process , ins plans to measure the status and progress of acquisition activities and use this information for investment decision - making . according to the entry exit program manager , ins has made a commitment to following rigorous and disciplined processes and practices in acquiring the entry exit system because this is what its governing policy and procedures require . if implemented effectively , such processes and practices can minimize the acquisition and deployment risks associated with the entry exit system . on december 19 , 2002 , we received a copy of the initial expenditure plan that ins submitted to the congress , and on january 17 , 2003 , ins provided us with most of the supporting acquisition management documentation we requested .