fcc did not provide comments . ustr and the department of state provided technical comments that were incorporated into the report . ntia also provided technical comments that were incorporated into the report as appropriate and also sent formal comments in a letter , which appears in appendix ii . in its formal comments , ntia stated that they generally agree with the findings of our report and remain interested in developments regarding intelsat's further plans to pursue a private equity buyout . we also invited representatives from five companies to review and comment on a draft of this report . these companies included: intelsat , ltd. ; lockheed martin corporation ; panamsat corporation ; ses americom inc. ; and new skies satellites n.v. new skies and panamsat did not provide comments on the draft report . both lockheed martin and intelsat provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . ses americom provided both technical comments — which we addressed as appropriate — and substantive comments that expressed concerns about our characterization of some of the issues discussed in this report . the comments from ses americom and our response are contained in appendix i . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 15 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will provide copies to interested congressional committees ; the chairman , fcc ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . we did not verify the reliability of these complaint data because these issues were not material to the primary focus of this report . we conducted our review from february through june 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the congress passed the communications satellite act of 1962 to promote the creation of a global satellite communications system . as a result of this legislation , the united states joined with 84 other nations in establishing the international telecommunications satellite organization — more commonly known as intelsat — roughly 10 years later . each member nation designated a single telecommunications company to represent its country in the management and financing of intelsat . we selected scholars and attorneys based on their recently published articles or speeches on competition in the satellite services market . we also interviewed officials from fcc ; the united states trade representative ( ustr ) ; the department of state ; the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) ; and the international telecommunications satellite organization , an intergovernmental entity formed when intelsat privatized that works to ensure that satellite service is available to countries that might not otherwise have access to such services . we also reviewed key documents , including relevant provisions of the communications satellite and orbit acts , and other relevant documents obtained from fcc , ustr , and ntia about the orbit act and related concerns about market access in non - u.s. markets .