they may be made available for a number of reasons . we will be reporting in more detail on these issues at the end of this month and look forward to exploring additional options to better protect ssns with you as we complete our work . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact barbara d. bovbjerg , director , or kay e. brown , assistant director , education , workforce , and income security at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include lindsay bach , jeff bernstein , richard burkard , jacqueline harpp , daniel hoy , raun lazier , vernette shaw , jacquelyn stewart , and anne welch . this is particularly true at the state and county level . generally , state law governs whether and under what circumstances these records are made available to the public , and they vary from state to state . these include the presumption that citizens need government information to assist in oversight and ensure that government is accountable to the people . certain records maintained by federal , state , and county courts are also routinely made available to the public . in principle , these records are open to aid in preserving the integrity of the judicial process and to enhance the public trust and confidence in the judicial process . at the federal level , access to court documents generally has its grounding in common law and constitutional principles . in some cases , public access is also required by statute , as is the case for papers filed in a bankruptcy proceeding . as with federal courts , requirements regarding access to state and local court records may have a state common law or constitutional basis or may be based on state laws . when federal , state , and county government agencies administer programs that deliver services and benefits to the public , they rely extensively on the ssns of those receiving the benefits and services . ssns provide a quick and efficient means of managing records and are used to conduct research and program evaluation . identity theft is a crime that can affect all americans . it occurs when an individual steals another individual's personal identifying information and uses it fraudulently . for example , ssns and other personal information are used to fraudulently obtain credit cards , open utility accounts , access existing financial accounts , commit bank fraud , file false tax returns , and falsely obtain employment and government benefits . ssns play an important role in identity theft because they are used as breeder information to create additional false identification documents , such as drivers licenses . recent statistics collected by federal and consumer reporting agencies indicate that the incidence of identity theft appears to be growing . the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the agency responsible for tracking identity theft , reports that complaint calls from possible victims of identity theft grew from about 445 calls per week in november 1999 , when it began collecting this information , to about 3,000 calls per week by december 2001 . however , ftc noted that this increase in calls might also , in part , reflect enhanced consumer awareness .