nrc agreed with the report recommendation . the agency stated it would conduct and document the analysis recommended by gao in the context of follow - on actions for related ongoing agency initiatives after sufficient information has been gathered from those activities to better inform the analysis . during the course of our review , we interviewed nrc officials from the office of general counsel , office of new reactors , office of nuclear reactor regulation ( including the japan lessons learned project directorate ) , office of nuclear regulatory research , and risk management task force in headquarters , as well as nrc officials in region ii and region iv and the resident inspectors at the five nuclear power plants we visited . we also interviewed officials and reviewed documents from the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , the u.s. army corps of engineers , and the u.s. geological survey on the current state of knowledge on natural hazards , how that knowledge has changed over time , and the related uncertainty . further , we interviewed representatives from american nuclear insurers , the nuclear energy institute , and the union of concerned scientists to discuss their views on nrc processes for assessing natural hazards and the threats those hazards pose to nuclear power reactors . we conducted this performance audit from may 2011 to april 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a few of these experts noted the stringency of nrc's review of licensee assessments , and a few others said that the agency has done an effective job defining a comprehensive set of natural hazards that licensees are responsible for assessing . second , several experts identified as a strength what they said was nrc's conservative approach to licensee assessments and reactor designs for natural hazards , including nrc's emphasis on ( 1 ) defense - in - depth principles , ( 2 ) engineering safety margins , and ( 3 ) reactor designs based on the worst credible natural hazards a site is expected to face . some of these experts said that , because nrc's approach to assessing natural hazards is conservative , they believe that u.s. nuclear power reactors are well - designed and well - protected from natural hazards . third , a few experts pointed to the expertise of nrc's staff in assessing natural hazards as another strength of the agency's processes . these experts said that nrc staff are diligent in trying to understand natural hazards and are proactive in identifying new information for assessing natural hazards . several experts indicated that nrc is effective at identifying and considering new natural hazard data , although one of those experts also noted that it can take the agency time to incorporate new data into agency regulations . fourth , a few experts identified as a strength what they said was nrc's global leadership in developing the latest tools and methods for assessing the threats posed by natural hazards to nuclear power reactors .