( see app . ii for additional information on the knowledge - based acquisition framework for complex developmental systems. ) having a knowledge - based framework to guide acquisitions of complex developmental systems is especially critical given that noaa is in the early acquisition stages of developing a geostationary environmental satellite at a projected investment cost of about $6.2 billion . according to a commerce official , in the past noaa relied on agencies outside of commerce to acquire such systems , but experienced cost and schedule problems . to maintain management control over contractor performance , noaa chose to manage the acquisition of its new satellite — the geostationary operational environmental satellite ( goes - r ) , which the agency plans to launch in 2012 . amplifying the need for clear guidance , noaa officials told us the agency is “feeling its way” through the goes - r acquisition by relying on existing commerce and noaa policies , but also learning from lessons drawn from previous satellite acquisitions at other agencies . according to senior officials directly involved , noaa was forced to prepare for the most recent key decision point in 2005 — authorizing program definition and risk reduction activities in the goes - r acquisition — with vague guidance from commerce over what specific criteria and metrics were required for the program to pass through the key decision point . in order to be ready for the next key decision point , noaa officials said that clearer guidance from commerce is needed on the information required . the next key decision point is scheduled for fiscal year 2007 and will commit the agency to development and production of the goes - r series . commerce acquisition management officials told us they are briefing noaa officials and developing a plan for necessary documentation on the requirements for the project's next key decision point . it remains to be seen whether these steps will provide sufficient clarity not only for what noaa is expected to do to prepare for the remaining key decision points but also sufficient knowledge to make a well - informed decision on proceeding with the goes - r acquisition . noaa is facing a human capital challenge because of its aging contracting workforce , and senior acquisition managers are concerned about the loss of a high percentage of their contracting staff to retirement and other attrition . however , noaa has yet to focus on succession planning and management for its contracting workforce , even though the agency has approval to use flexible direct hire authority in anticipation of an impending wave of retirements . noaa relies on contract specialists and procurement analysts to carry out its acquisition function . however , noaa's acquisition director is worried about the near - term retirements of experienced contracting employees . our analysis of office of personnel management's ( opm ) personnel data for noaa confirms there is cause for this sense of urgency , given that almost 52 percent of the agency's contract specialists and procurement analysts are more than 49 years old and that 66 percent had at least 20 years of service ( see fig .