this requirement has not been changed . program and osd officials are monitoring this issue closely and plan to actively manage it during engineering and manufacturing development . ground combat vehicle: the ground combat vehicle program exhibited some of the same problems experienced by previous dod programs prior to milestone b — demanding and inflexible requirements . the se office and the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics are helping the program set achievable requirements . following its materiel development decision in february 2010 , the program issued a request for proposals that contained nearly 1,000 requirements and a challenging 7-year schedule for the delivery of the first production vehicle . at the request of the under secretary for acquisition , technology and logistics , the army established an independent review team to assess the risks associated with the program's schedule . the team , which included an se official , raised concerns about the program's high number of mandatory requirements and the risks associated with the 7-year schedule . to mitigate program risks , the army reduced the number of performance requirements by about 25 percent and prioritized the others , giving competing contractors flexibility in addressing some performance requirements . the army issued a revised request for proposal in november 2010 . in august 2011 , the under secretary of acquisition , technology and logistics approved the program's entry into technology development , but expressed concern about the cost and schedule risks associated with delivering a production vehicle in 7 years . because of these concerns , the under secretary directed the army to consider other alternatives , such as existing vehicles , that could meet warfighter needs . the analysis is currently planned to be completed in march 2013 to inform the milestone b decision . by establishing a new cost assessment and program evaluation office and requiring this office to scrutinize program cost and schedule estimates beginning at milestone a , cape officials believe that the reform act has helped infuse more realism in cost estimates and promote earlier discussions about affordability . cape officials also believe that because their independent cost and schedule estimates have become more visible within dod and congress , the military services are developing more realistic estimates . we saw evidence of these benefits in the programs we reviewed , including the ohio class replacement , littoral combat ship seaframe , and f - 35 joint strike fighter programs . ohio class replacement: the cape office was involved in the decision - making process to ensure program affordability . the office prepared an independent cost estimate and reviewed the program's affordability goals prior to milestone a . the service and independent estimates were within 2 percent of each other . however , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics directed the navy to do a rigorous cost comparison of a 16 missile tube design versus a 20 missile tube design . the navy determined that a 16 missile tube configuration would meet warfighter requirements and users' needs while reducing program costs by about $200 million per submarine , or approximately $3 billion for the total program . it would also simplify the ships' design and integration effort .