usenet . usenet newsgroups also provide access to pornography , with several of the image - oriented newsgroups being focused on child erotica and child pornography . these newsgroups are frequently used by commercial pornographers who post “free” images to advertise adult and child pornography available for a fee from their web sites . peer - to - peer networks . although peer - to - peer file - sharing programs are largely known for the extensive sharing of copyrighted digital music , they are emerging as a conduit for the sharing of pornographic images and videos , including child pornography . in a recent study by congressional staff , a single search for the term “porn” using a file - sharing program yielded over 25,000 files . in another study , focused on the availability of pornographic video files on peer - to - peer sharing networks , a sample of 507 pornographic video files retrieved with a file - sharing program included about 3.7 percent child pornography videos . table 2 shows the key national organizations and agencies that are currently involved in efforts to combat child pornography on peer - to - peer networks . classification of images downloaded through peer - to - peer file - sharing program http: / / www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 03- 537t to view the full testimony , click on the link above . for more information , contact linda koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or koontzl@gao.gov . mr. chairman and members of the committee: thank you for inviting us to discuss the results of our work on the availability of child pornography on peer - to - peer networks , which we provided to you in a report being released today . in recent years , child pornography has become increasingly available as it has migrated from magazines , photographs , and videos to the world wide web . as you know , a great strength of the internet is that it includes a wide range of search and retrieval technologies that make finding information fast and easy . however , this capability also makes it easy to access , disseminate , and trade pornographic images and videos , including child pornography . as a result , child pornography has become accessible through web sites , chat rooms , newsgroups , and the increasingly popular peer - to - peer technology , a form of networking that allows direct communication between computer users so that they can access and share each other's files ( including images , video , and software ) . as requested , in my remarks today , i summarize the results of our review , whose objectives were to determine the ease of access to child pornography on peer - to - peer networks ; the risk of inadvertent exposure of juvenile users of peer - to - peer networks to pornography , including child pornography ; and the extent of federal law enforcement resources available for combating child pornography on peer - to - peer networks . we also include an attachment that briefly discusses how peer - to - peer file sharing works .