the decline in mail volumes is continuing . the gap between revenues and expenses is growing . what would be the impact of this proposal on collective bargaining ? impact on other federal employees – how would the benefits , contribution rates , and costs of other federal employees enrolled in fehb be impacted by this proposal ? also , how would non - usps federal employees who are currently enrolled in postal union sponsored fehb plans be impacted ? fiduciary responsibility – how does usps plan to acquire the experience needed to sponsor health benefit programs for over 1 million participants ? who would decide what the required funding level and investment strategy should be ? also , if usps defaults on benefit payments , what would be the federal government's obligation ? oversight – how would disagreements between the proposed plan management body and usps and / or employees be resolved , e.g . scope of coverage , procedures , etc. approximately 84 percent of eligible usps employees are enrolled in fers , and about 16 percent are enrolled in csrs or the dual csrs / social security program ; these programs are administered by the office of personnel management ( opm ) . at the end of fiscal year 2009 , opm estimated that usps had an unfunded csrs liability of $7.3 billion and a fers surplus of $6.9 billion . usps has asked congress to enact legislation that would allow it to access the fers surplus . to conserve cash immediately , however , in june 2011 , usps discontinued making its employer contribution payments for the defined benefit portion of fers . the current $6.9 billion fers surplus is approximately equal to 2 years of usps's fers contributions that it has stopped making . thus , if usps continues not to make its fers payments , its fers surplus will be reduced by a commensurate amount . usps estimated this would reduce its costs by about $800 million in the current fiscal year but would not impact current or future postal retirees . both usps and the opm agreed to seek a resolution of the legal issues surrounding usps's decision to discontinue its fers payments by requesting a legal opinion from the office of legal counsel at the department of justice . usps has proposed legislation that would make new employees eligible only for the thrift savings plan ( possibly modified ) and social security . new employees would not be eligible for the fers defined benefit annuity or csrs . usps's proposal included a brief description of why usps is requesting this change as well as what postal officials perceived as inconsistencies between the current pension system and the “pay comparability” factor and what they have characterized as “over - payment” concerns . there is disagreement regarding whether usps has “overpaid” csrs between $50 billion and $75 billion . the usps oig and postal regulatory commission have asserted that the current method of allocating pension costs for pay increases after 1971 results in the inequitable allocation of pension obligations to usps , and the usps oig proposed an alternative allocation methodology .