other criminal organizations . in addition to drug trafficking , criminal organizations have used tbml schemes to launder proceeds from a range of other crimes , including illegal mining , human trafficking , and the sale of counterfeit goods . for example , criminal organizations in colombia have used tbml to disguise the origins of illegally mined gold , in exchange for funds , according to u.s. embassy bogotá and colombian government officials we interviewed . corrupt government officials . in certain countries , senior government officials and government entities have used tbml schemes to disguise profits derived from corrupt practices , according to u.s. government reporting . for example , fincen has reported that senior government officials in venezuela have used tbml as part of schemes to steal money from the venezuelan government's food distribution program . terrorist organizations . terrorist organizations , including hezbollah and the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( known by its spanish acronym farc ) , have also used tbml schemes to launder funds . for example , a number of u.s. officials and knowledgeable sources have noted that hezbollah operates a number of tbml schemes in the tri - border area in south america , where argentina , brazil , and paraguay meet , which help to fund the terrorist organization's activities around the world . criminal and terrorist organizations use a range of tbml schemes with varying levels of complexity . in many instances , these organizations combine tbml techniques with other forms of money laundering , such as bulk cash smuggling and the laundering of funds through the banking system . the u.s. government , foreign governments , and international bodies have identified a number of different examples of the types of tbml schemes that occur . for example: in one case described in treasury's 2018 national money laundering risk assessment and ice press releases , hsi led an investigation , known as operation fashion police , which targeted businesses in the los angeles fashion district that were suspected of being involved in black market peso exchange schemes to launder the proceeds of illegal drug sales on the behalf of international drug cartels . as a result of the investigation , two owners of a textile company pled guilty to using the business to receive bulk cash that they knew or believed to be the proceeds of narcotics trafficking and part of a black market peso exchange scheme . the two individuals received approximately $370,000 in cash delivered on four separate occasions as payment for goods shipped to mexico , guatemala , and other countries in latin america . operation fashion police , along with several related investigations , also resulted in the seizure of tens of millions of dollars in bulk cash stashed at warehouses in the los angeles area . in one case identified by treasury , doj indicted seven co - conspirators for participating in an international tbml scheme . the individuals are alleged to have used family - owned import - export businesses in long island and miami and to launder millions of dollars in illegal drug proceeds .