pma that we initially determined to be missing . lost , or stolen , reducing the number reported to 1,205 . staff members who made key contributions to this report include: phillip mcintyre , assistant director ; william e. brown ; sharon byrd ; liliam coronado ; joshua edelman ; francine delvecchio ; francis dymond ; wendy johnson ; galena phillips ; lisa reijula ; and seong bin park . interagency agreements and contract administration 1 . to improve fbi's controls over its review and approval process for cost - reimbursement type contract invoices , the director of fbi should instruct the chief financial officer to establish policies and procedures so that future interagency agreements establish clear and well - defined roles and responsibilities for all parties included in the contract administration process , including those involved in the invoice review process , such as contracting officers , technical point of contacts , contracting officer's technical representatives , and contractor personnel with oversight and administrative roles . in july 2008 , fbi's senior procurement executive issued procurement guidance document 08-10 to all bureau procurement chiefs that incorporated a memorandum from the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) , office of management and budget ( omb ) , which discussed new guidance on interagency agreements . the new ofpp guidance , issued in june 2008 , requires the requesting agency and the servicing agency to assign specific roles for each agency and is to be fully implemented for all interagency agreements executed after november 3 , 2008 . the guidance discusses , among other things , the need for defining roles such as the cotr and establishing specific responsibilities for those roles . it further elaborates on responsibilities for identifying an appropriate invoice review official prior to submittal of the first invoice and inspecting and rejecting contract work as necessary . to improve fbi's controls over its review and approval process for cost - reimbursement type contract invoices , the director of fbi should instruct the chief financial officer to establish policies and procedures so that labor rates , ceiling prices , treatment of overtime hours , and other key terms for cost determination are clearly specified and documented for all contracts , task orders , and related agreements . in december 2008 , fbi's policy training unit created an intranet site , the contract specialist corner , to provide contract specialists / contract officers with procurement information and guidance . the site includes links to procurement guidance and directives issued by doj , the fbi's policy training unit , and federal acquisition regulation ( far ) circulars issued by the far council , as well links to standard procurement forms used in the procurement process . the site also provides access to contract execution checklists for different contract types , as well as standard far clauses applicable to various types of acquisitions including clauses related to labor rates , ceiling prices , treatment of overtime hours , and other key contract terms . in addition , in 2009 , the policy training unit created a separate intranet site for contracting officer technical representatives ( cotr ) as well as one for field offices to provide on - line access to procurement guidance and documentation .