that deadline was not realized . according to ocmo officials , the teams are identifying new milestones for implementing initiatives , some of which will contribute to a move toward enterprise services . in addition , the business reform teams vary in the number of initiatives they are pursuing . as of september 2018 , ocmo reported that the teams were pursuing a total of 135 initiatives and that the number of initiatives per team ranged from 2 to 38 . for example , the community services management team was developing 2 initiatives — 1 to examine the feasibility of merging dod's three military exchange services and the defense commissary agency into a single resale enterprise , and the other to streamline the inventory of dod lodging . in contrast , the supply chain and logistics team was developing 21 short - and long - term initiatives , such as reducing the footprint of underutilized warehouses and developing better data interoperability throughout the supply chain and logistics enterprise . further , the teams' progress in advancing their initiatives to the implementation and monitoring phase has varied . the reform management group oversees the business reform teams . the deputy secretary of defense chairs the reform management group , and the cmo facilitates regular meetings of the group . the reform management group authorizes the business reform teams to proceed with their initiatives through five gates — 0 through 4 . these gates trace initiatives from conception to implementation and monitoring . before proceeding from one gate to the next , the teams must submit certain deliverables to the reform management group for review and approval . for example , before an initiative can proceed to gate 1 , ocmo requires the teams to submit a charter for the initiative , which can identify , among other things , the problem or opportunity statement , the project scope , expected outcomes and risk analysis , and preliminary performance measures . figure 1 provides an overview of the five gates and the status of initiatives by gate , as of september 2018 . as shown in figure 1 , while some teams have successfully advanced several initiatives to gate 4 , others have not yet progressed initiatives past gate 2 . specifically , as of september 2018 , dod reported that 104 of the teams' 135 initiatives had not yet reached gate 3 , the implementation phase . according to the teams we interviewed , several factors may affect the progress of an initiative , such as its complexity or a team's approach to developing initiatives . for example , the community services management team leader stated that the team is primarily focused on the consolidation of the defense commissaries and exchanges , an initiative that is relatively large in scope and complexity . according to the team leader , this initiative involves a number of internal stakeholders , including all of the military services , as well as outreach to external stakeholders , such as veterans' organizations . in addition , the leader stated that the team would need legislative changes to fully implement the initiative . as a result of the large scope and complexity , the leader expects the initiative to take longer to implement than others .