each regulatory design has its advantages and disadvantages . for example , a regulation that provides flexibility on how to comply may leave regulated entities with less certainty on whether they are in compliance . agencies also decide how they will promote compliance with their regulations and deter noncompliance . within available resources , agencies must tailor these efforts to encourage voluntary compliance and to inform regulated entities of regulatory requirements . while regulations can generate substantial benefits to society , they also have costs , and thus decisions agencies make about their regulatory designs and the way that they enforce those regulations are important . the office of management and budget ( omb ) estimated annual benefits from major federal regulations issued in fiscal years 2005 through 2015 to be from $208 billion to $672 billion , and estimated annual costs from $57 billion to $85 billion . you asked us to review how agencies make key decisions related to regulatory design , compliance and enforcement , and updating of regulations . this report describes how selected agencies report ( 1 ) making decisions on regulatory designs among available options , ( 2 ) making decisions to designate resources among available compliance and enforcement activities , and ( 3 ) evaluating those decisions , and also identifies ( 4 ) key considerations for decision makers related to regulatory design and enforcement . to describe agency experiences and decisions regarding regulatory design and compliance and how they evaluate those decisions , we reviewed regulatory processes at six departments — the united states departments of agriculture ( usda ) , commerce ( commerce ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , labor ( labor ) , and transportation ( dot ) , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) — and 13 subcomponents within those departments . to illustrate a wide range of regulatory designs and resulting compliance activities , we selected the six executive branch departments ( excluding the department of defense ) that promulgated the most significant regulations between september 1 , 2011 , and august 31 , 2016 . we used reginfo.gov data to identify the number of significant regulations . we assessed the reliability of those data by reviewing relevant documentation , interviewing knowledgeable agency officials , and electronically and manually testing the data for missing values , outliers , and invalid values , and we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purpose of identifying selected departments . these experiences illustrate how the selected agencies currently make these decisions , the outcomes of those decision - making processes , and their evaluation practices . to identify key considerations for decision makers related to regulatory design and enforcement , we reviewed existing criteria documents , including ( 1 ) elements of the regulatory flexibility act ; ( 2 ) applicable executive orders and guidance such as executive order 12866 and omb circulars a - 4 , a - 11 , and a - 123 ; and ( 3 ) resources for federal managers , and leading practices we had previously reported on for enterprise risk management . executive order 13777 , issued in february 2017 , requires agencies to designate an agency official as its regulatory reform officer .