( see app . iii for information on the financial regulators' implementation of additional safeguards. ) cftc's four - level rating system ( i.e. , unsuccessful , successful , highly successful , and exemplary ) defined the successful level of performance for areas that cftc had identified as critical to employees' job performance , and included some information on how to distinguish variations from the successful level of performance . however , an employee representative at cftc maintained that the rating level descriptions did not sufficiently communicate to employees the skills and behaviors employees needed to demonstrate in order to move , for example , from the “successful” to the “highly successful” level . employee representatives stated that even though there was helpful guidance on distinguishing between levels of performance in a cftc manual , these descriptions were hard to understand and most employees did not refer to the cftc manual for guidance . an agency official told us that the revised performance management system that went into effect in october 2006 is a five - level system , and includes descriptions of all five performance levels rather than only the successful rating level described in the system it replaced . similarly , ofheo defined how employees would be rated on its five - level rating scale for each of the performance elements included in their performance plans . link pay to individual and organizational performance . make meaningful distinctions in performance . involve employees and stakeholders to gain ownership of performance management systems . in this report , we present important aspects of the agencies' implementation of the practices of linking pay to individual and organizational performance , which includes providing adequate safeguards to help ensure fairness and guard against abuse , and making meaningful distinctions in performance . we discuss the agencies' implementation of the four other practices included in the list in appendix iii . to address our first objective , we analyzed the selected agencies' performance management and pay systems' guidance , policies , and procedures and other related documents ; interviewed key agency officials and representatives of unions or other employee groups ; examined a small , select set of employees' individual performance plans to illustrate annual performance expectations for employees ; and analyzed agencies' performance management data , such as the distribution of performance ratings and performance - based pay increases . the individual performance plans , selected in conjunction with agency officials to reflect a mix of key locations , occupations , and grade levels at each agency , as well as the performance management data from each agency that we examined , pertained to each agency's last completed performance appraisal cycle when we began this review . to address our second objective , we analyzed relevant statutes and legislative histories for the selected agencies ; reviewed the most recent pay and benefits surveys from these agencies ; obtained agency pay and benefits data ; and discussed agencies' informal interactions to assess pay comparability with agency officials . we conducted various inspections and electronic testing of agency data obtained for the first objective for reasonableness and the presence of any obvious or potential errors in accuracy and completeness .