eliminate scanning and filing by telephone . the estimates in figure 2 assume that irs will meet its goal of having 80 percent of all individual income tax returns filed electronically by 2007 . however , our assessment of irs' 2001 tax filing season in response to another request from this subcommittee showed that ( 1 ) about 31 percent of individual income tax returns were filed electronically in 2001 ( through october 26 , 2001 ) and ( 2 ) fewer individuals filed electronically in 2001 than irs had projected ( 40 million filed vs. 42 million projected ) . with 2001 as a starting point and assuming that the total number of individual income tax returns filed and the number of such returns filed electronically each continue to grow at the same annual rate as achieved between 2000 and 2001 ( 1.85 percent and 13.7 percent , respectively ) , we projected that only about 60 percent of individual income tax returns would be filed electronically in 2007 . using the estimates in the consultant's march 2000 report for a 65-percent level of individual electronic filing , the cost reductions would range from $74 million to $170 million annually in 2007 , or about 30 percent less than at the 80- percent electronic filing level for individuals . the consultant's report focused on reductions that could be realized by making specific changes related to processing returns and not on potential increases in the type and amount of data on paper returns that irs would need to process due to tax law changes or enhanced compliance efforts.consequently , any reductions in overall processing costs would depend on the level of any such increases . in that regard , irs made at least one significant change in submission processing's workload in 2001 that increased costs . irs' 2001 budget included 378 additional full - time equivalent staff years in submission processing for transcribing schedule k - 1s ( beneficiary's , partner's , or shareholder's share of income , deductions , credits , etc. ) irs plans to compare the transcribed k - 1 information to that reported on the tax returns filed by beneficiaries , partners , and shareholders to determine if income was accurately reported . at cincinnati , we also interviewed the lead tax examiner in the electronic filing unit to obtain details about the unit's role in electronic return processing . we selected cincinnati from among the five centers that had an electronic filing unit because submission processing's monitoring section was located there and officials would be able to provide information related to processing both paper and electronic returns . the director of submission processing told us that the cost reductions in the consultant's study may also be overstated because the study did not consider the resources needed to process returns during the peak filing period . the consulting firm official responsible for developing the data in the study said that the maximum cost reductions included in the study would not be affected by peak filing period resource needs , because the reductions were based on the assumption that 80 percent of individual taxpayers would file electronically .