has fhwa implemented the recommendation ? gao's recommendation develop a systematic approach for obtaining input from external stakeholders in determining the research program's agendas . develop a systematic process for evaluating significant ongoing and completed research that includes peer review or other best practices in use at federal research agencies . develop specific plans for implementing these recommendations , including time frames and estimates of their costs . mr. chairman and members of the committee: we appreciate the opportunity to testify today on the federal highway administration's ( fhwa ) surface transportation research and technology program . change , improvement , and innovation based on highway research have long been important to the highway system . while this research is a shared responsibility among fhwa , state departments of transportation , and private organizations , we focused on fhwa's important leadership role as the primary federal agency involved in highway research . throughout the past decade , fhwa has received hundreds of millions of dollars for its surface transportation research and technology program , including nearly half of the department of transportation's ( dot ) approximate $1 billion budget for research , development , and technology in fiscal year 2002 . given the important expectations of highway research and the significant level of resources dedicated to it , it is important for the congress and the american people to know that the agency is conducting research that is relevant and useful to stakeholders and that is of high quality . in may 2002 we issued a report on these issues and made recommendations to fhwa , which the agency agreed with , aimed at improving its processes for setting research agendas and evaluating its research efforts . as it considers reauthorizing fhwa's research and technology program , congress will be making decisions about the structure of the program . accordingly , my testimony today will discuss ( 1 ) best practices for developing research agendas and evaluating research outcomes for federal research programs ; ( 2 ) the extent to which fhwa's processes for developing research agendas align with the best practices for similar federal research programs ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which fhwa's processes for evaluating research outcomes align with these best practices . my statement is based in part on our may 2002 report , which focused primarily on those activities funded by the surface transportation research and technology deployment funding categories identified in the transportation equity act for the 21st century . in developing that report , we held discussions with fhwa officials and reviewed relevant program documents , legislation , and publications on best practices in federal research from the transportation research board , the committee on science , engineering , and public policy and others . in preparing for this hearing , we also updated fhwa's activities in response to our findings and recommendations . fhwa is the dot agency responsible for federal highway programs — including distributing billions of dollars in federal highway funds to the states — and developing federal policy regarding the nation's highways . the agency provides technical assistance to improve the quality of the transportation network , conducts transportation research , and disseminates research results throughout the country .