gao - 11-278 . washington , d.c.: february 2011 . cms has not implemented these four recommendations . the agency indicated it had taken other actions ; however , we believe these actions will not have the same effect . cms's oversight of part d plan sponsors' programs to deter fraud and abuse has been limited . however , cms has taken some actions to increase it . for example , cms officials indicated that they had conducted expanded desk audits and were implementing an oversight strategy . cms's oversight of the quality of nursing home care has increased significantly in recent years , but weaknesses in surveillance remain that could understate care quality problems . under contract with cms , states conduct surveys at nursing homes to help ensure compliance with federal quality standards , but a substantial percentage of state nursing home surveyors and state agency directors identified weaknesses in cms's survey methodology and guidance . in addition to these methodology and guidance weaknesses , workforce shortages and insufficient training , inconsistencies in the focus and frequency of the supervisory review of deficiencies , and external pressure from the nursing home industry may lead to understatement of serious care problems . cms established the special facility focus ( sff ) program in 1998 to help address poor nursing home performance . the sff program is limited to 136 homes because of resource constraints , but according to our estimate , almost 4 percent ( 580 ) of the roughly 16,000 nursing homes in the united states could be considered the most poorly performing . cms's current approach for funding state surveys of facilities participating in medicare is ineffective , yet these surveys are meant to ensure that these facilities provide safe , high - quality care . we found serious weaknesses in cms's ability to ( 1 ) equitably allocate more than $250 million in federal medicare funding to states according to their workloads , ( 2 ) determine the extent to which funding or other factors affected states' ability to accomplish their workloads , and ( 3 ) guarantee appropriate state contributions . these weaknesses make assessing the adequacy of funding difficult . however , cms has implemented many recommendations that we have made to improve oversight of nursing home care . of the 96 recommendations made by gao from july 1998 through march 2010 , cms has fully implemented 45 , partially implemented 4 , is taking steps to implement 29 , and did not implement 18 . examples of key recommendations implemented by cms include ( 1 ) a new survey methodology to improve the quality and consistency of state nursing home surveys and ( 2 ) new complaint and enforcement databases to better monitor state survey activities and hold nursing homes accountable for poor care . what remains to be done when legislative and administrative actions result in significant progress toward resolving a high - risk problem , we remove the high - risk designation from the program .