gao - 14-446 . adaptation is defined as adjustments to natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climate change . even with the creation of strategic policy documents and high - level agency guidance . the federal government invests tens of billions of dollars annually in infrastructure projects prioritized and supervised by state and local governments . in total , the united states has about 4 million miles of roads and 30,000 wastewater treatment and collection facilities . according to a 2010 congressional budget office report , total public spending on transportation and water infrastructure exceeds $300 billion annually , with roughly 25 percent of this amount coming from the federal government however , the and the rest coming from state and local governments . federal government plays a limited role in project - level planning for transportation and wastewater infrastructure , and state and local efforts to consider climate change in infrastructure planning have occurred primarily on a limited , ad hoc basis . the federal government has a key interest in helping state and local decision makers increase their resilience to climate change and extreme weather events because uninsured losses may increase the federal government's fiscal exposure through federal disaster assistance programs . congressional budget office , public spending on transportation and water infrastructure , pub . 4088 ( washington , d.c.: november 2010 ) . the national gross domestic product by about $7.8 billion.shows louisiana state highway 1 leading to port fourchon . we found in april 2013 , that infrastructure decision makers have not systematically incorporated potential climate change impacts in planning for roads , bridges , and wastewater management systems because , among other factors , they face challenges identifying and obtaining available climate change information best suited for their projects.when good scientific information is available , it may not be in the actionable , practical form needed for decision makers to use in planning and designing infrastructure . such decision makers work with traditional even engineering processes , which often require very specific and discrete information . moreover , local decision makers — who , in this case , specialize in infrastructure planning , not climate science — need assistance from experts who can help them translate available climate change information into something that is locally relevant . in our site visits to several locations where decision makers overcame these challenges — including louisiana state highway 1 — state and local officials emphasized the role that the federal government could play in helping to increase local resilience . any effective adaptation strategy must recognize that state and local governments are on the front lines in both responding to immediate weather - related disasters and in preparing for the potential longer - term impacts associated with climate change . we reported in october 2009 , that insufficient site - specific data — such as local temperature and precipitation projections — complicate state and local decisions to justify the current costs of adaptation efforts for potentially less certain future benefits .