( see fig . 2 for a comparison of the projected and actual timelines of key implementation activities. ) we interviewed the cms and rac officials regarding cms oversight of the rac . in addition , we compared cms's oversight activities to criteria on performance assessment , such as those outlined in federal internal control standards , applicable far provisions , and our prior work . to determine the results of the rac's audit work to date and what , if any , challenges cms and the rac have faced in identifying potential improper payments , we reviewed the contract documents and other cms documents related to the rac work cms requested , and the processes the rac was required to follow to conduct its audit work . we analyzed data we received from the rac on proposed audit work submitted to cms for approval , cms's decision notices on proposed work , and , for approved work , data on the amounts of improper payments identified and the amounts recouped . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes by confirming and clarifying information provided by the rac with cms officials . we also reviewed records of communications between the rac and cms and interviewed rac and cms officials to determine what , if any , challenges the rac and cms have faced in identifying potential overpayments and underpayments . in addition , we reviewed cms's strategic plan and the rac's statement of objectives and compared rac program results and activities to these goals and objectives . we conducted this performance audit from september 2014 to august 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . after cms created the statement of objectives , it solicited contractors to serve as the part d rac using the general services administration's federal supply schedule . although using the federal supply schedule limited the number of potential contractors that could respond to cms's solicitation and from which cms could choose , cms officials said the agency chose this solicitation method because it was a streamlined approach to generate interest from contractors already approved to work for the federal government . according to cms officials , cms received two proposals from potential contractors , and only one of them was found to be technically acceptable . cms officials said that they reviewed the potential contractors' performance work statement and assessed their experience with medicare part d and knowledge of medicare part d statutes and regulations , along with other qualifications . cms selected the only contractor whose proposal , including its performance work statement , the agency considered technically acceptable . while requirements for a project can change at any point , officials must aggressively manage changes in requirements to avoid a negative effect on project results . cms's center for program integrity oversees part d program integrity . within the center for program integrity , the division of plan oversight and accountability is responsible for administering the part d rac program .