b . developing a better means of collaborating with state regulators to leverage resources already applied to enforcement efforts and to capitalize on state regulators' unique knowledge . as part of this effort , ferc may want to consider identifying a liaison , or liaisons , for state regulators to contact and to serve as a focal point ( s ) . develop an audit reporting approach to clearly identify the objectives , scope and methodology , and the specific findings of the audit , irrespective of whether ferc takes an enforcement action , in order to improve public confidence in ferc's enforcement functions and the usefulness of audit reports on affiliate transactions for ferc , state regulators , affected utilities , and others . after developing a more formal risk - based approach , reassess whether it has sufficient audit resources to perform these audits . if ferc believes that it does not have sufficient resources to conduct adequate auditing of the companies that it oversees within its existing staff and budget , ferc should provide this information to congress and request additional resources . we provided a draft of our report to ferc for review and comment . we received written comments from ferc's chairman and that letter and our detailed response is presented in appendix ii . in his comments , the chairman strongly disagreed with the report finding that ferc does not have a strong basis for ensuring that utilities do not engage in harmful cross - subsidization and noted that he believed the report contained inaccuracies and misunderstandings . we disagree with the chairman's characterization of our report and note that the letter's assertions about some aspects of ferc's operations are , in fact , quite different than the views of numerous commission staff and experts with whom we met over the course of the past year as well as ferc's own policy statement on enforcement . in addition , we believe that the repeal of puhca 1935 represents an important change in the context of ferc's regulation of the industry and , in light of this change , ferc should err on the side of a “vigilance first” approach to preventing potential cross - subsidization by enhancing its current approach to audit planning and reevaluating audit resources . overall , we believe our report presents a fair and balanced presentation of the facts and issues associated with ferc's oversight and , as a result , encourage the chairman to fully consider our recommendations . ferc also provided technical comments , which we incorporated , as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 14 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the chairman of the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 , or gaffiganm@gao.gov .