section 2222 . our assessment of dod's plan to improve its supply chain management is based on work we have performed , prior recommendations , and the criteria cited in our november 2000 report on determining performance and accountability challenges and high risks . we use these criteria to assess an agency's progress toward resolving a high - risk problem and determine whether to remove the high - risk designation . there are five essential questions to be addressed: 1 . the plan also identified baseline and annual performance targets for these metrics to use in measuring progress . but it did not have any cost baselines or cost performance targets . furthermore , dod has not yet identified specific outcome metrics for many of the initiatives . for example , dod's plan shows that it expects to have radio frequency identification technology implemented at 100 percent of its u.s. and overseas distribution centers by january 2007 , but noted that it has not yet identified additional metrics that could be used to show the impact of implementation on expected outcomes , such as receiving and shipping timelines , asset visibility , or supply consumption data . in total , dod's plan identifies a need to develop such supply performance metrics for 6 initiatives , and 9 of the 10 initiatives lack cost metrics . until dod develops and tracks the additional costs and supply impact metrics it has promised , it will be difficult for the department to convincingly demonstrate its progress in improving supply chain management and providing timely logistics support to the warfighter . as part of our periodic reassessment of high - risk areas across the federal government , we will be assessing dod's progress in resolving supply chain management and its other high - risk areas . our next high - risk update is due in january 2007 . dod's second step is to rely on independent groups , such as contractors and the department of defense office of inspector general , to validate the data , and gao to monitor the department's progress in improving supply chain management as part of its planned audits . such validation processes are important because , as we have frequently reported , dod's systems do not have accurate and reliable data , and without valid data , it will be difficult to accurately track progress . however , until dod specifies all of the metrics and systems it plans to use to measure progress it cannot ensure comprehensive monitoring within the department or that independent groups will know what data and systems should be validated to confirm dod's reported progress . does dod have the ability to demonstrate progress in implementing corrective measures ? dod has the ability to demonstrate some progress in implementing the initiatives . however , it has not identified all of the performance metrics necessary to demonstrate how all of the initiatives are affecting supply to the warfighter . dod's plan identified some viable overall supply chain management performance metrics , including the level of backorders , the amount of customer wait time , and the percentage of orders on time . we plan to follow up on dod's supply chain management improvement efforts in three ways .