capacity . agency has the capacity ( i.e. , people and resources ) to resolve the risk ( s ) . action plan . a corrective action plan exists that defines the root cause , identifies solutions , and provides for substantially completing corrective measures , including steps necessary to implement solutions we recommended . monitoring . a program has been instituted to monitor and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of corrective measures . demonstrated progress . ability to demonstrate progress in implementing corrective measures and in resolving the high - risk area . these five criteria form a road map for efforts to improve and ultimately address high - risk issues . addressing some of the criteria leads to progress , while satisfying all of the criteria is central to removal from the list . figure 1 shows the five criteria for removal as a designated high - risk area and examples of actions taken by agencies in response . in designating va as a high - risk area , we categorized our concerns about va's ability to ensure the timeliness , cost - effectiveness , quality , and safety of veterans' health care , into five broad areas: ( 1 ) ambiguous policies and inconsistent processes , ( 2 ) inadequate oversight and accountability , ( 3 ) information technology challenges , ( 4 ) inadequate training for va staff , and ( 5 ) unclear resource needs and allocation priorities . we have made numerous recommendations that aim to address weaknesses in va's management and oversight of its health care system . although va has taken actions to address some of them , more than 100 recommendations have yet to be fully resolved , including recommendations related to the following five broad areas of concern: ambiguous policies and inconsistent processes . ambiguous va policies lead to inconsistency in the way va facilities carry out processes at the local level . in numerous reports , we have found that this ambiguity and inconsistency may pose risks for veterans' access to va health care , or for the quality and safety of va health care they receive . for example , in december 2012 , we found that unclear policies led staff at va facilities to inaccurately record the required dates for appointments and to inconsistently track new patients waiting for outpatient medical appointments at va facilities . these practices may have delayed the scheduling of veterans' outpatient medical appointments and may have increased veterans' wait times for accessing care at va facilities . in some cases , we found that staff members were manipulating medical appointment dates to conform to va's timeliness guidelines , which likely contributed further to the inaccuracy of va's wait - times data for outpatient medical appointments . without accurate data , va lacks assurance that veterans are receiving timely access to needed health care . in our november 2014 report , we found that va policies lacked clear direction for how staff at va facilities should document information about veteran suicides as part of va's behavioral health autopsy program ( bhap ) .