collection . this program collects delinquent taxes and secures delinquent tax returns through the appropriate use of enforcement tools such as liens , levies , seizures of assets , installment agreements , offers in compromise , substitute for returns , and 26 u.s.c . ยง 6020 ( b ) , which allows the irs to prepare returns if a taxpayer fails to file a return . automated underreporter . this program matches taxpayer information returns against data reported on individual tax returns and verifies the information to identify any discrepancies . according to irs officials , irs calculates the actual roi for these programs because total enforcement revenue collected is allocated to these three categories . irs reports the actual roi in the congressional justification , based on our previous recommendation and congressional budget decision makers' interest in this information . however , irs does not use this actual roi information for resource allocation decisions because the data do not reflect marginal roi , nor do they include the indirect effects of irs enforcement activities on voluntary compliance . moreover , because of the time required to work enforcement cases to completion , the costs associated with assessing and collecting additional revenues may be spread over more than one fiscal year and are not necessarily aligned with revenue collections that may occur in subsequent years . these limitations are critical concerns , which is why we recommended in 2012 that irs develop estimates of marginal direct revenue and marginal direct costs within each enforcement program . we further recommended that irs explore the potential of estimating the marginal influence of enforcement activity on voluntary compliance . however , given that these data gaps could take considerable time to fill , we also demonstrated how irs planners could in the meantime review actual ( average ) roi across different enforcement programs and across different groups of cases within these programs to better inform resource allocation decisions . as we noted , the planners could consider this information in combination with their professional judgment relating to other relevant but currently unquantifiable factors . in fact , while limited in scope , we demonstrated how a hypothetical shift in resources could potentially increase direct revenue by $1 billion annually , without significant negative effects on voluntary compliance . the development of data relating to marginal roi would also enable irs to improve its projections of roi for enforcement initiatives , particularly those that expand coverage for specific taxpayer categories . irs currently knows little about the extent to which marginal yields differ from average yields within specific return categories ; consequently , it does not know the extent to which its roi projections , which are based on average yields , may be overstated . by collecting the data needed to compute actual roi for expanded coverage enforcement initiatives , irs would be able to determine whether marginal returns are significantly lower than average returns ; thereby , irs would have better information for deciding whether the expanded coverage should be maintained , cut back , or expanded further in future years . actual productivity information and better roi projections can also help budget decision makers in determining funding levels for irs .