dhs did not implement the activity . dhs did not develop strategies and plans to address either competency or staffing gaps . opm did not develop competency requirements . however , the agency developed staffing requirements for its it staff , including projections over several years . specifically , it developed staffing requirements for its mission critical occupations , which include it management . to fully implement the assess competency and staffing needs regularly activity , an agency should periodically assess competency needs for all or most of its it workforce . in addition , the agency should periodically assess staffing needs for all or most of its it workforce . most of the agencies periodically assessed staffing needs , but did not assess competency needs . specifically , three agencies had fully implemented the activity ( defense , va , and ssa ) ; 20 agencies had partially implemented the activity by periodically assessing it staffing needs ; however , these agencies did not periodically assess competency needs ( agriculture , commerce , education , energy , hhs , dhs , hud , interior , justice , labor , state , transportation , treasury , gsa , nasa , nsf , nrc , opm , sba , and usaid ) ; and one agency did not implement the activity ( epa ) . va fully implemented the activity . va assessed competency needs annually as a part of its professional development planning process . we continue to believe that all of the recommendations are warranted . as previously noted , gao issued an it workforce planning framework that includes eight key activities , based on federal laws , guidance , and best practices . implementing these activities is critical to adequately assessing and addressing gaps in it knowledge , skills , and abilities that are needed to execute a range of management functions that support agencies' missions and goals . the eight key workforce planning activities are identified in table 1 . none of the 24 agencies that we reviewed had fully implemented all eight it workforce planning activities . in this regard , nearly all of the agencies had partially implemented , substantially implemented , or fully implemented three of the workforce planning activities ( develop competency and staffing requirements , assess competency and staffing needs regularly , and assess gaps in competencies and staffing ) . however , most agencies had minimally implemented or did not implement the five other workforce planning activities ( including efforts to establish a workforce planning process and address staffing gaps ) . figure 1 shows the agencies' overall implementation of each of the eight key it workforce planning activities , as of may 2019 . further , some agencies had made more progress than others . specifically , while five agencies ( defense , department of state ( state ) , va , small business administration ( sba ) , and ssa ) fully implemented or substantially implemented three or more activities , 11 agencies did not fully implement any of the activities , and 15 agencies did not implement three or more activities . figure 2 identifies the extent to which each of the 24 agencies had implemented the eight workforce planning activities .