we disagree . the act required nnsa to provide a report to congressional defense committees “assessing the role of the nuclear security complex sites in supporting a safe , secure , and reliable nuclear deterrent ; reductions in the nuclear stockpile ; and the nuclear nonproliferation efforts of the united states.” as we noted in our report , nnsa described the activities of the nuclear security enterprise in its report to congress , but it did not provide an assessment . a description is not an assessment . in its comments , nnsa stated that the 2008 complex transformation supplemental programmatic environmental impact statement that underlies its report to congress , is still operative , and there have been no substantive transformations of the nuclear security enterprise since . as we note in our report , however , nnsa did not cite this assessment in its report to congressional defense committees . moreover , the 2008 complex transformation supplemental programmatic environmental impact statement is more than 5 years old , which raises questions about its continued relevance . notably , key elements of that document , such as the construction of the chemistry and metallurgy research replacement nuclear facility and the uranium processing facility , have not been constructed and nnsa is reconsidering its approach on how to address these critical needs . nnsa also states in its comments that we appear to have interpreted the act as requiring nnsa to causally and quantitatively link its cost efficiency initiatives to specific cost savings when the congressional language does not make any reference to linking the two . we disagree because the act does link efficiencies and cost savings . specifically , the act states that the nnsa report must identify “opportunities for efficiencies within the nuclear security complex and an assessment of how those efficiencies could contribute to cost savings and strengthening safety and security.” as we stated in our report , nnsa's report to congressional defense committees identifies opportunities for efficiencies . it does not , however , assess how identified efficiencies could contribute to cost savings and strengthen safety and security , as required by the act . for example , in its report nnsa cites efficiencies achieved in recent years related to experiments and simulations conducted in support of nuclear weapons research and development but does not include information about how these efficiencies might lead to cost savings . finally , nnsa did not concur with gao's recommendation that future reporting on efficiencies and cost savings should include a methodology for estimating the savings derived from potential efficiencies and track savings resulting from new efficiency efforts . nnsa stated that it would not have reliable information to accurately develop cost estimates directly linked to the efficiencies and that the congressional language does not make any reference to linking the two . nnsa states that it believes doing so would be speculative and result in unreliable information . we disagree . we have previously reported in evaluations of other agencies' cost savings efforts that a sound methodology for estimating savings helps ensure that proposed savings can be achieved . though such an effort may present analytical and other challenges , it is nonetheless important to do so .