house report no . 114-632 , accompanying a bill for the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act , 2017 , includes a provision for us to review the number of lead service lines . our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) what is known about the number of existing lead service lines nationally , and among states and water systems ; and ( 2 ) states' responses to epa's february 2016 request to work with water systems to publicize inventories of lead service lines and any steps epa has taken to follow up on these responses . this report addresses lead in drinking water , not other sources of lead such as paint , paint chips , dust , toys , or food . to examine what is known about the number of existing lead service lines nationally , and among states and water systems , we reviewed existing studies and other documents regarding the extent of and experience with such lines . we found three written studies with estimates of lead service lines — one using national data and two that were state - specific . we took a number of steps , including conducting interviews with each study's authors , to examine the reliability of the data used in the studies . for the one study we reviewed that used national data , the data were of undetermined reliability because the sample of water systems included in the study was not generalizable to all water systems and the authors could not verify the accuracy of the information provided by water systems . appendix i provides more information on our reasons for designating the data as undetermined reliability . for the two state - specific studies , we determined that the data represented reasonable efforts to estimate the number of lead service lines , although the states also could not verify the accuracy of the information provided by water systems . therefore , we also found these estimates to be of undetermined reliability . appendix i provides more information on our reasons for designating the data as undetermined reliability . we did not find any studies with information comparing the quality of estimates among water systems . however , we interviewed representatives of the greater cincinnati water works water system about their estimate and found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purpose of describing their reported best available estimate . we also interviewed epa staff about their knowledge of estimates provided by states and water systems ; and subsequently interviewed officials in some of these states , namely massachusetts , ohio , and washington . we also interviewed representatives of water organizations to identify potential studies and other sources of information about the number of lead service lines . we selected these organizations based on their knowledge of conducting inventories of lead service lines as a part of the process for replacing such lines . to examine states' responses to epa's request and any steps epa has taken to follow up on these responses , we reviewed the websites of the 100 largest water systems ( by population served ) to identify which water systems have made the information available to the public .