timing is critical . while the lack of controls can be risky in projects' early stages , it is essential that such controls be in place when projects enter detailed system design , development , and implementation . to mitigate this added risk , irs needs to fully implement the remaining management controls that we have recommended . as noted , irs has made progress in revamping its performance management system . however , several aspects of the system put irs's ability to effectively measure , assess , and improve organizational and employee performance at risk . first , irs needs to ensure that it has comparable performance measures and sufficient data to assess performance . as part of its agencywide efforts to develop balanced performance measures , irs continues to revise some measures and develop new ones to judge its performance . although we recognize the need to improve measures , changes interrupt the possibility to establish trends and compare performance between periods . in past years , our assessment of irs's filing season performance included comparisons of various performance measures against irs's goals and prior years' performance . we have been unable to make such a comparison for some measures because irs ( 1 ) revised some measures that it had been using to assess performance and established some new measures and ( 2 ) had not established targets for new or revised measures . for example , during the 2001 filing season , irs made numerous changes , such as renaming measures and revising formulas , to its measures for processing paper returns , refunds , and remittances . specifically , of 12 measures , 5 were new , 3 were revised , and 1 did not have a set target . similarly , of the 15 telephone measures in place , 7 were either new or revised and 4 did not have targets set . measures of telephone accuracy are examples of how new and revised measures make it difficult to assess irs's performance in providing quality telephone assistance over time . also , figure 4 of the appendix shows that because of changes made to its telephone measures , irs does not have sufficient time - series data for each of its four measures of telephone accuracy to make a thorough assessment of how well irs is meeting its goal of providing “world class” telephone service . as a result , managers , congress and other stakeholders may have difficulty using information from new or revised measures . although some irs managers may be aware of these changes to measures , we found little or no documentation that disclosed the changes for outside stakeholders . all in all , irs officials agreed with our assessment that it is difficult to put the reported results into context because of the absence of performance goals and trend data . however , while the officials understood the importance of such information , they also said they rely heavily on other information , such as workload indicators and other management information , that they have used for years to identify and correct problems that could affect activities and help judge irs's overall success .