table 1 lists the ssas and their sectors . protecting the security of our critical infrastructure is a top priority for the nation . for example , in 2013 , the president issued presidential policy directive / ppd - 21: critical infrastructure security and resilience to increase the overall security and resilience of u.s. critical infrastructure . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . other individuals making key contributions to this work include ben atwater , assistant director ; andrew curry , analyst - in - charge ; and peter haderlein . this appendix provides information on the 16 critical infrastructure ( ci ) sectors and the federal agencies responsible for sector security . the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) outlines the roles and responsibilities of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and its partners — including other federal agencies . within the nipp framework , dhs is responsible for leading and coordinating the overall national effort to enhance security via 16 critical infrastructure sectors . consistent with the nipp , presidential decision directive / ppd - 21 assigned responsibility for the critical infrastructure sectors to sector - specific agencies ( ssas ) . in our may 2012 report , we found that , among other things , dhs shared the results of security surveys and vulnerability assessments with asset owners or operators . however , we also found that the usefulness of security survey and vulnerability assessment results could be enhanced by the timely delivery of these products to the owners and operators . we reported that the inability to deliver these products in a timely manner could undermine the relationship dhs was attempting to develop with these industry partners . specifically , we reported that , based on dhs data from fiscal year 2011 , dhs was late meeting the 30-day time frame for delivering the results of its security surveys required by dhs guidance 60 percent of the time . dhs officials acknowledged the late delivery of survey and assessment results and said they were working to improve processes and protocols . however , dhs had not established a plan with time frames and milestones for managing this effort . we recommended , and dhs concurred , that it develop time frames and specific milestones for managing its efforts to ensure the timely delivery of the results of security surveys and vulnerability assessments to asset owners and operators . in response to our recommendation , dhs established timeframes and milestones to ensure the timely delivery of assessment results of the surveys and assessments to ci owners and operators . in addition , in february 2013 , dhs transitioned to a web - based delivery system , which , according to dhs , has since resulted in a significant drop in overdue deliveries . sharing certain information with critical infrastructure partners at the regional level . as figure 1 illustrates , depending on a given asset or facility's operations , infrastructure , and location , an owner or operator could be asked or required to participate in multiple separate vulnerability assessments . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .