discretionary recoupment . tria permits discretionary recoupment when the federal share of losses exceeds the mandatory recoupment amount . under the discretionary recoupment provision , treasury may consider a number of factors , such as economic conditions in the commercial marketplace , in determining the amount to recoup . to help in its decision - making , treasury may issue a data call for insurer deductible and insured loss information . treasury also sets the surcharge for discretionary recoupment , but the increase to tria - eligible premiums must not exceed 3 percent per calendar year . tria does not specify a collection time frame for discretionary recoupment . since the 2015 reauthorization , insurers have been required to submit information to treasury about their coverage of terrorism risk , including the lines of insurance with exposure to such risk , the premiums earned on such coverage , and the participation rate for such coverage . treasury's 2017 – 2019 data calls included loss scenarios in which insurers estimate and report expected losses given a defined terrorist attack at a specified location , date , and time . treasury's defined loss scenarios were located in new york city in 2016 , chicago in 2017 , and san francisco in 2018 . treasury's reporting requirements for insurers vary , based on the following categories: small insurers . insurance companies that had both policyholder surplus and prior year tria - eligible direct - earned premium of less than five times the program trigger . for example , tria's program trigger in 2020 is $200 million . thus , treasury would categorize insurers with less than $1 billion in 2019 direct - earned premiums and less than $1 billion in policyholder surplus as small . treasury does not require small insurers to report on a number of items , including the loss scenarios . nonsmall insurers . insurance companies with either policyholder surplus or prior year tria - eligible direct - earned premium greater than the small insurer thresholds . captive insurers . special - purpose insurance companies set up by commercial businesses to self - insure risks arising from the owners' business activities . alien surplus lines insurers . insurance companies headquartered in a foreign country that have been qualified to do business in the united states through an naic - administered process , which assesses the financial stability and trustworthiness of the insurer . each reauthorization of tria through 2015 reduced the magnitude of the government's explicit fiscal exposure . since 2003 , changes to tria provisions have increased insurers' share of losses and thus decreased explicit federal fiscal exposure in the event of certified acts of terrorism ( see fig . for example , the program trigger rose over time , from $5 million in 2003 to $200 million in 2020 . these changes reduced explicit fiscal exposure because they increased the amount of insured losses required before the government would share in the losses . the insurer deductible increased from 7 percent in 2003 to 20 percent for 2020 , also reducing the federal share of payments . the 2015 reauthorization required incremental reductions in the federal share of losses over 5 years .