pub . business arrangements or structures that would not be feasible or appropriate under a procurement contract . other transaction agreements for research do not require the involvement of a nontraditional contractor . one science and technology directorate program funded other transaction agreements to promote homeland security by advancing the development and testing of rapid biological detectors . this “detect - to - protect” system would monitor a facility and detect the presence of biological agents in time to provide sufficient warning to facility occupants to limit their exposure ( see left image in fig . a different science and technology directorate program used an other transaction agreement to develop and test a new high - voltage transformer that helps provide power during the recovery time following blackouts or outages resulting from severe natural disasters or terrorist attacks ( see right image in fig . the period of performance for other transaction agreements varies and may last longer than a traditional far contract . other transaction agreements are generally structured in successive phases , so each project may have several phases . at the end of a phase , the awardees submit a statement of work and technical and cost proposals for the next phase . continuation between phases may be based on an independent technical evaluation and is not guaranteed . unlike far contracts , which are generally limited to a length of 5 years , an other transaction agreement may continue as long as funding is available and work is required under a phase . as a result , other transaction agreements can vary in length , from 3 months to over 7 years , as shown in figure 2 . further , the funding for other transaction agreements may grow over time . for example , in one other transaction agreement , the science and technology directorate obligated $200,000 in the first phase with an 8- month period of performance . this agreement has been in existence for almost 7 years with at least $5.3 million obligated on it . another two agreements were funded for $2 million at the time of award , but at completion , each other transaction agreement had obligations of approximately $100 million . the use of other transaction authority by the science and technology directorate has declined since its peak in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 . from fiscal year 2004 through fiscal year 2011 , the science and technology directorate entered into 58 other transaction agreements , totaling $583 million in obligations . fourteen agreements remained active in fiscal year 2011 and the directorate has not entered into a new other transaction agreement since fiscal year 2010 . the science and technology directorate's use of other transaction authority has declined since 2005 when it entered into 28 new agreements . total obligations also have declined since peaking at $151 million in 2006 ( see fig . dhs officials offered reasons for the decline in use of other transaction authority . dhs acquisition officials told us that recently they have noted a decrease in the number of nontraditional contractors submitting proposals to use other transaction agreements while the use of far contracts has increased .