ii ) . ii. ) according to hud headquarters officials , the field offices that administer the section 232 program are required to follow all program statutes and regulations , but the decentralization of the program allows field offices some flexibility in their specific practices . for example , individual field offices can designate how to staff the underwriting and monitoring of section 232 loans , depending on such factors as loan volume relative to other multifamily programs , to fully utilize resources . hud headquarters provides guidance on program policies and requirements ; when necessary , reviews applications for certain types of loans , such as those submitted by nonprofit entities ; and provides technical assistance or additional guidance and support if contacted by field offices . hud headquarters staff also conduct quality management reviews , which are management reviews of field offices administering hud programs and services . for these reviews , evaluators visit offices and coordinate subsequent reports . the process also involves reporting the status of follow - up corrective actions . this estimate reflects hud's assessment of various risks , based in part on the performance of loans already insured . while not focused on the section 232 program , this process helps to oversee the program by reviewing the management of the field offices that administer it . we found that the five field offices that we visited varied in their understanding and awareness of policies related to the section 232 program . for example , staff in two field offices said that their standard regulatory agreement ( that serves as the basic insurance contract and spells out the respective obligations of fha , the lender , and the borrower ) did not include language that would require operators of insured facilities to submit financial statements on new loans . according to officials at hud headquarters , field offices should be using language requiring these financial statements . hud and most lender officials we interviewed told us that operator financial statements provide information on the legal entity operating the facility in cases where the borrower and the operator of the residential care facility are different entities . the model also has broken out claim and prepayment data into new construction and refinance loans since these loans are expected to perform differently . these officials also stated that , in such situations , borrower financial statements may not disclose expenses , income , and other financial information , and may only show the transactions between the borrower and operator , thus making operator financial statements a necessity . also , hud's inspector general identified hud's lack of a requirement for operators to submit financial statements electronically to be part of an internal control weakness for the section 232 program . hud has numerous underwriting and monitoring guidelines and policies to manage the risks of section 232 loans . however , to the extent that field office staff do not accurately implement current underwriting and monitoring guidelines and policies , they potentially allow loans with unwarranted risks to enter the portfolio and may miss opportunities to identify problems with already - insured loans early enough to help prevent claims .