iii. ) monitoring and evaluation perform two separate but related functions . monitoring is the collection of data to determine whether programs are being implemented as intended and the tracking of progress using preselected indicators throughout the life of the program . evaluation consists of periodic or ad hoc studies to assess how and whether programs achieved their expected goals . it can also consider what outcomes can be attributed to the program , as well as program cost - effectiveness . evaluations can rely on a range of quantitative and qualitative measures as well as preselected indicators , comprehensive research designs , and the use of appropriate statistical analysis of the data . figure 2 outlines a framework based on our review of food for peace nonemergency programs , as well as aea and wfp guidance that illustrates how monitoring and evaluation could be integrated with program management of nonemergency food aid . determine if necessary inp uts ( equipment , supplies , and personnel ) are in place . – ensure that food is properly stored . – check to see if health clinics are sufficiently stocked for intended beneficiaries . determine if programs are achieving their expected outputs by tracking performance indicators . ensure that target number of beneficiaries are receiving food and attending clinics . focus on the extent to which program objectives were achieved and what outcomes can be directly attributed to programs . mother and child health and nutrition programs may consider how the ration is affecting the health and nutritional status of beneficiaries . programs may focus on how the activity is addressing temporary food insecurity and developing a sustainable community asset . ffp relies on a range of staff to perform its monitoring and evaluation — including ffp officers in the field , implementing partners , contractors , and fanta - 2 staff . according to ffp , field staff visit project sites to ensure that programs are being implemented as expected . they also approve and oversee the implementing partners' selection of performance indicators and data collection . in addition to regularly collecting performance data , the implementing partners perform baseline studies and midterm evaluations for their multiyear programs and hire external evaluators to conduct the final evaluations for the multiyear programs . in addition , ffp relies on appropriately credentialed consultants and researchers for some cross - cutting evaluations , which , for example , consider the agency's exit strategies for nonemergency food aid programs in bolivia , honduras , and kenya . conducting evaluations can present many challenges , such as obtaining reliable data and employing qualified evaluators . these challenges can be compounded in developing countries , where local conditions may be difficult and local capacity is often limited . for example , a recent review of evaluations conducted by an international ngo cited numerous challenges in - country including climate , poor economic status , civil unrest , migration of beneficiaries , cultural biases , poor recordkeeping , and turnover in government and ngo staff . table 1 summarizes the various types of monitoring and evaluation activities that ffp performs . the table also indicates which staff have primary responsibility for the activities , briefly describes the activities , and provides examples of them .