certifications and reporting . six agencies require more certifications or reporting from awardees than is required in the policy directives . specifically , officials from these agencies told us they require additional certifications beyond the three mandated life cycle certifications: ( 1 ) at the time of final payment or disbursement of phase i funding , ( 2 ) before more than half of phase ii funding has been paid or disbursed , and ( 3 ) before final payment or disbursement of phase ii funding . for example , dot and some commerce officials told us that they require awardees to submit life cycle certifications with every invoice . army , epa , and nasa officials told us that they require monthly or quarterly reporting by awardees . further , both army and nsf officials told us that they require the additional reporting in order for awardees to receive their sbir or sttr funds . representatives from each of the 11 sbir and sttr small businesses that we interviewed said that they had not experienced any challenges in complying with the programs' fraud , waste , and abuse prevention requirements . of the 10 fraud , waste , and abuse prevention requirements that the agencies must implement , small businesses are directly affected by only 2 requirements: providing life cycle certifications and , if required by their awarding agency , participating in fraud , waste , and abuse training . representatives from each of the 11 small businesses we interviewed told us they did not find these fraud , waste , and abuse prevention requirements to be burdensome , and representatives from 9 of the small businesses told us that the level of the sbir and sttr fraud , waste , and abuse prevention requirements are about the right amount . representatives from nearly all of the small businesses we interviewed said they had seen the effects of the agencies' implementation of some of the requirements . for example , representatives from 10 of the small businesses reported that at least 1 agency from which they had received an award had provided information to them on how to report fraud , waste , and abuse to the agency's oig , either on the agency's sbir or sttr website or in the solicitation that they used to apply for funding . further , representatives from all 11 small businesses that we interviewed said that they had not observed any fraud , waste , or abuse in the sbir or sttr programs by another small business . sba has taken few actions to oversee agencies' implementation of the policy directives' minimum requirements to address fraud , waste , and abuse in the sbir and sttr programs . in 2012 , sba convened a group of sbir and sttr program managers and oig officials to develop and issue the fraud , waste , and abuse prevention requirements . additionally , according to sba officials , sba checked the agencies' sbir and sttr program websites to confirm that each agency provided information on its website and in each solicitation on how to report fraud , waste , and abuse , as required by one of the fraud , waste , and abuse prevention requirements .