contracts . the primary beneficiary of a contract is the federal government . contracts are used for the purchase of goods and services for the direct benefit of the government or for the sale of government property such as timber . a contract is a mutually binding legal relationship obligating the seller to furnish supplies or services and the buyer to pay for them . agency guidance directs that contracts rather than agreements be used for projects that are highly complex or financially risky . agreements . agreements are typically used to transfer a thing of value to a state or local government , or other recipient , to carry out a public purpose . according to the agencies , agreements are often used for projects that are for the mutual interest and benefit of the government and a cooperating organization — often a nonprofit organization or a state or local government . under such agreements , both the government and the cooperating organization share the costs of the project , with the cooperator contributing funding , personnel , or equipment . a variety of agreements , including those entered into under the wyden amendment , may be used to implement stewardship contracting projects . under the wyden amendment , the forest service and blm may enter into cooperative agreements with landowners for the protection , restoration , and enhancement of fish and wildlife habitat and other resources on public or private land , as long as the agreement benefits the fish , wildlife , and other resources on national forest and blm lands within the watershed . ordinarily , cutting any standing tree before an agency employee has marked or otherwise designated it for cutting is prohibited . multiyear contracting allows the agency to enter into stewardship contracts of up to 10 years in length . ( standard service contracts are limited to 5 years , although timber sale contracts of up to 10 years were already authorized for the forest service. ) retention of receipts allows the agency to retain receipts generated from the sale of commercial products sold through stewardship contracts , rather than returning the funds to the department of the treasury's general fund . the receipts are available for expenditure , without further appropriation , on other stewardship contracting projects . exception to advertising exempts the agency from the requirement under the national forest management act that all sales of timber having an appraised value of $10,000 or more be advertised . supervision of marking and harvesting of timber sales exempts the agency from the requirement that only federal agency employees supervise the harvesting of trees on agency - managed lands . this authority has allowed the agencies to use certain state agencies to assist in stewardship contracting . best - value contracting requires the agency to consider other factors — such as past performance or work quality — in addition to price when making stewardship contract award decisions . the 1999 law authorized 28 stewardship contracts by the forest service ; the authority of the forest service to enter into these contracts was to end on september 30 , 2002 .