ii. ) cms officials told us that they generally had allocated mip funds to the five activities based predominantly on historical funding , but sometimes considered high - level priorities . however , this approach does not take into account data or information on the effectiveness of one activity over the other in ensuring the integrity of medicare or allow cms to determine if activities are yielding benefits that are commensurate with the amounts spent . for example , while cms has noted that benefit integrity and provider education activities have intangible value , the agency has not routinely collected information to evaluate their comparative effectiveness . furthermore , cms has not fully assessed whether mip funds are appropriately allocated within the audit , medical review , benefit integrity , and provider education activities . for example , audit's role has changed as medicare's payment methods have changed in the last decade , but it continues to have the largest share of mip funding . according to agency officials , cms allocates funds for the five activities based primarily on an analysis of previous years' spending and may also consider other information when developing the mip budget , such as current expenditures by individual contractors . cms officials told us that they may also consider the agency's high - level priorities . for example , in fiscal year 2004 , cms began to increase funds to expand the scope of its annual study to estimate medicare improper payment rates , and in fiscal year 2002 , it increased its mip allocation for provider education . cms does not have a means to compare quantitative data or qualitative information on the relative effectiveness of mip activities that it could use in allocating funds . instead , it calculates the quantitative benefits for two , and assesses the qualitative benefits — which are not objectively measured — for the other three . in fiscal year 2005 , for its medical review and secondary payer activities , cms tracked dollars saved in relation to dollars spent — a quantitative measure that the agency calls a return on investment ( roi ) . having an roi figure is useful because it measures the effectiveness of an individual activity so that its value can be compared with that of another activity . as of fiscal year 2005 , secondary payer had an roi of $37 for every dollar spent on the activity , and medical review had an roi of $21 for every dollar spent . cms tracked the roi for audit , but by fiscal year 2002 , audit's reported contribution to roi fell to almost zero . ( see fig . 5 and app . ii , table 5 , for additional roi details. ) cms officials also noted that they consider benefit integrity to have a sentinel effect in discouraging entities that may be considering defrauding the medicare program , but this effect is impossible to measure . cms indicated that trying to measure the results of the contractors' benefit integrity activities could create incentives that undermine the value of their work . for example , counting the number of cases referred to law enforcement for further investigation could lead the contractors to refer more cases that were less fully developed .