it reform . in december 2010 , the federal cio issued a 25 point implementation plan to reform federal information technology management . this 18-month plan specified five major goals: strengthening program management , streamlining governance and improving accountability , increasing engagement with industry , aligning the acquisition and budget processes with the technology cycle , and applying “light technology” and shared solutions . as part of this plan , omb outlined actions to , among other things , strengthen agencies' investment review boards and consolidate federal data centers . the plan stated that omb will work with congress to consolidate commodity it spending ( eg , e - mail , data centers , content management systems , and web infrastructure ) under agency cios . further , the plan called for the role of federal agency cios to focus more on it portfolio management . in addition to these efforts to improve government spending on it , avoiding unnecessary duplicative investments is critically important . in february 2002 , omb established the fea initiative . according to omb , the fea is intended to facilitate governmentwide improvement through cross - agency analysis and identification of duplicative investments , gaps , and opportunities for collaboration , interoperability , and integration within and across agency programs . since the fiscal year 2004 budget cycle , omb has required agencies to categorize their it investments in their annual exhibit 53s according to primary function and sub - function . in their fiscal year 2011 submissions , agencies reported the greatest number of it investments in information and technology management ( 1,536 investments ) , followed by supply chain management ( 777 investments ) , and human resource management ( 622 investments ) . similarly , planned expenditures on investments were greatest in information and technology management , at about $35.5 billion . figure 2 depicts , by primary function , the total number of investments within the 27 federal agencies that report to the it dashboard . additionally , agencies were required to choose a sub - function for each investment related to the primary function . during the past several years , we have issued multiple reports and testimonies and made numerous recommendations to omb and federal agencies to identify and reduce duplication within the federal government's portfolio of it investments . in march 2011 , we reported an overview of federal programs and functional areas where unnecessary duplication , overlap , or fragmentation existed . agencies , offices , or initiatives had similar or overlapping objectives or provided similar services to the same populations , or where government missions were fragmented across multiple agencies or programs . the report touched on hundreds of federal programs , including it programs , affecting virtually all major federal departments and agencies . gao - 11-318sp . consolidation initiative to guide federal agencies in consolidating data centers . specifically , omb and agencies plan to close more than 950 of the over 2,100 federal data centers by 2015 . as of november 2011 , agencies reported that a total of 149 data centers have been closed across the federal government . for example , 16 dod data centers , 3 doe centers , and 7 dhs centers have been closed .