fixing social security is about more than finances . it is also about maintaining an adequate safety net for american workers against loss of income from retirement , disability , or death . as i have said in congressional testimonies over the past several years , the social security system faces serious solvency and sustainability challenges in the longer term . while the social security program does not face an immediate crisis , it does have a $3.7 trillion gap between promised and funded benefits in current dollar terms over the next 75 years . this gap is growing as time passes and , given this and other major fiscal challenges , including expected growth in federal health spending , it would be prudent to act sooner rather than later to reform the social security program . failure to take steps to address our large and structural long - range fiscal imbalance , which is driven in large part by projected increases in medicare , medicaid , and social security spending , will ultimately have significant adverse consequences for our future economy and the quality of life of our children , grandchildren , and future generations of americans . this requires looking at proposed reforms from at least two benchmarks — one that raises revenue to fund currently scheduled benefits ( promised benefits ) and one that adjusts benefits to a level supported by current tax financing ( funded benefits ) . comparing the benefit impact of reform proposals solely to currently scheduled social security benefits is inappropriate since all current scheduled benefits are not funded over the longer term . continued public acceptance of and confidence in the social security program require that any reforms and their implications for benefits be well understood . this means that the american people must understand why change is necessary , what the reforms are , why they are needed , how they are to be implemented and administered , and how they will affect their own retirement income . all reform proposals will require some additional outreach to the public so that future beneficiaries can adjust their retirement planning accordingly . the more transparent the implementation and administration of reform , and the more carefully such reform is phased in , the more likely it will be understood and accepted by the american people . the weight that different policymakers place on different criteria will vary , depending on how they value different attributes . for example , if offering individual choice and control is less important than maintaining replacement rates for low - income workers , then a reform proposal emphasizing adequacy considerations might be preferred . as they fashion a comprehensive proposal , however , policymakers will ultimately have to balance the relative importance they place on each of these criteria . as we have noted in the past , a comprehensive evaluation is needed that considers a range of effects together . focusing on comprehensive packages of reforms will enable us to foster credibility and acceptance . this will help us avoid getting mired in the details and losing sight of important interactive effects . it will help build the bridges necessary to achieve consensus .