see appendix i for the opinion . in summary , the factors we identified , to date , that led the corporation to suspend enrollments include inappropriate practices for obligating funds , little or no communication among key corporation executives , and too much flexibility given to grantees — they were allowed to adjust authorized positions and were not required to provide timely information about the number of participants . while the corporation has established new policies that may improve the overall management of americorps if the policies are fully implemented , the corporation has not made policy changes to correct a key factor — how it obligates funds . the corporation for national and community service was created to help meet community needs in education , the environment , and public safety and to expand educational opportunity by rewarding individuals who participate in national service . the corporation is part of usa freedom corps , a white house initiative to foster a culture of citizenship , service , and responsibility and help all americans answer the president's call to service . the corporation receives appropriations to fund program operations and the national service trust . the corporation makes grants from its program appropriations to help grant recipients carry out national service programs . americorps is one of three national service programs the corporation oversees . most of the grant funding from the corporation for americorps programs goes to state service commissions , which award subgrants to nonprofit groups and agencies that enroll the americorps' participants . participants in the americorps program can receive a stipend as well as health benefits and childcare coverage . for example , about one - half of americorps' participants received an annual living allowance of $9,300 and health benefits . those participants who successfully complete a required term of service earn an education award that can be used to pay for undergraduate school , or graduate school , or to pay back qualified student loans . in exchange for a term of service , full - time americorps participants earned an education award of $4,725 in program year 2002 . participants have up to 7 years from the date of completion of service to use the education award . americorps also enrolls participants on a part - time basis and as “education awards only” participants . part - time participants who serve 900 or fewer hours annually earn education awards proportional to those earned by full - time participants . under the “education awards only” program , americorps does not pay the participant a living allowance or other benefits , but provides grant funding for administrative purposes only , about $400 per full - time participant annually . however , each participant receives an education award equivalent to that earned by a paid americorps participant . the number of americorps participants increased by nearly 20,000 from 1998 to 2001 . the program year 2002 data indicate the number of positions awarded will decrease by about 8,000 . ( see figure 1. ) in november 2002 , the corporation suspended enrollments in americorps because total enrollments were potentially higher than the corporation had expected .