collaboration . for example , he only attends conferences for title i and other education programs every few years . similarly , while state ehcy program coordinators we spoke with generally felt that there is significant collaboration with other entities , several also told us that staff capacity was a significant barrier to further collaboration . state coordinators are generally responsible for managing the ehcy grant process , monitoring and overseeing implementation of the ehcy program at the school district level , and providing technical assistance and training to school district personnel , including homeless liaisons ; sometimes in several hundred school districts . many state coordinators have responsibilities in addition to those for the ehcy program . according to education's survey data from school year 2010-11 , 23 of the 50 state ehcy program coordinators reported working 30 hours or more per week on ehcy program responsibilities . the same survey found that more than half of the states ( 27 ) had one or fewer full - time employees working in the state ehcy program office ( see fig . for example , one state coordinator we spoke with was also the coordinator for another education program , which she said takes up about 40 percent of her time . according to state ehcy program coordinators , resource constraints have prevented additional collaboration efforts . for example , three state coordinators told us they must choose which partners to collaborate with at the expense of others . in one of these states , this has meant limited collaboration with rhy programs . in gao's previous work , we have emphasized the importance of agencies identifying and leveraging sufficient funding to accomplish their objectives and to initiate or sustain their collaborative efforts and we suggested approaches to help them do so . federal and state officials also said that differing definitions of who is considered “homeless” under various federal programs was another barrier to collaboration . because the population eligible for services under each program differs , the populations contained in data collected by one agency will be different than in data collected by other agencies , making data sharing more difficult . the federal ehcy program manager told us that the lack of a consistent definition across programs administered by education and hud has created a challenge to increasing data sharing at the local level between school districts and because a relatively small number of continuums of care ( coc ) .students considered homeless under education's definition may be eligible for services funded by cocs , these entities sometimes feel that the additional work necessary to share the data is not worthwhile , according to the ehcy program manager . nationally , most homeless students are “doubled up.” officials from one state told us that because this is the case in their state , though school districts want to provide wrap - around services that meet the wide variety of homeless youths' needs , these students may be ineligible for services through hud programs.however , one school district in one of the states we reviewed has entered into an agreement with the local coc that allows school district personnel to access and enter data into the coc's homeless management information system .