there were other training issues as well . according to the bureau's draft cqr program assessment , the final version of which is pending , some training materials were developed at the last minute and were never finalized , and training began before needed software was in place at all the research divisions . ( see app . ii for a more detailed discussion of this incident. ) the population count of morehead , kentucky , increased by more than 1,600 when cqr found that a large number of students from morehead state university's dormitories were erroneously excluded from the city's population . during the 2000 census , the bureau had incorrectly identified the dormitories as being outside city limits and in an unincorporated area of rowan county . the population count of cameron , missouri , was off by nearly 1,500 people when the bureau found that the prison population of the state's crossroads correctional center was inadvertently omitted from the town's headcount ( see fig . the correction to the town's population accounted for the entire 1,472 person increase in missouri's total population under the cqr program . the population of the city of waseca , minnesota , increased by more than 1,100 . the 2000 census had mistakenly included the prison population for the waseca federal correctional institute in two surrounding townships in waseca county . the cqr program resulted in the population being shifted to the city . the population of colorado increased by more than 750 in large part because a processing error in counting housing units in grand junction initially excluded almost 700 people from the city's population total . the population of denver and arapahoe counties in colorado shifted by more than 900 because the bureau had incorrectly assigned the location of two apartment complexes . as a result of cqr , the apartment complexes were incorrectly identified and counted as being in denver but under cqr were later found to be in adjoining arapahoe county . the bureau's 12 regional offices did not always adhere to the same set of procedures when developing internal cases , and this , in turn , produced uneven results . importantly , the procedures used to execute public programs need to be well documented , transparent , and consistently applied in order to ensure fairness , accountability , defensible decisions , and reliable outcomes . to do otherwise could raise equity questions . one variation in the way internal cases were handled was evident at the bureau's los angeles regional office , which appeared to be the only region to do comprehensive methodical research to actively identify possible count errors beyond those that were submitted by governmental entities . according to the office's senior geographer , the geography staff developed a structured approach to systematically examine census data from all the prisons and colleges within the office's jurisdiction , because the data on both types of group quarters were known to be problematic . he added that the more problems they found , the more they were motivated to keep digging .