r this drug . therefore , values veyed re orted uti ation of a sca in 2 6. by the fda on june 07 . the efore , none of the plan onsors w 2006 . in addition to the contact named above , major contributors to this report in addition to the contact named above , major contributors to this report were will simerl , assistant director ; karen howard ; alexis macdonald ; were will simerl , assistant director ; karen howard ; alexis macdonald ; cleo samuel ; and michael zose . martha kelly and suzanne worth provided cleo samuel ; and michael zose . martha kelly and suzanne worth provided technical support in design , methodology , and data analysis ; george technical support in design , methodology , and data analysis ; george bogart provided legal support ; and krister friday assisted in the message bogart provided legal support ; and krister friday assisted in the message and report development . and report development . ( see fig . this initial coverage period is followed by a coverage gap — the so - called doughnut hole — in which beneficiaries pay 100 percent of their drug costs . in 2009 , the coverage gap lasted until total drug costs reached $6,153.75 , with beneficiary out - of - pocket costs accounting for $4,350 of that total . this point is referred to as the catastrophic coverage threshold and is in addition to any monthly premiums required by beneficiaries' part d plans . cms did not agree with the $295 deductible we included in figure 5 of our draft report to illustrate certain cost - sharing scenarios . in its comments , cms pointed out that a $295 deductible does not apply in scenarios in which plans charge 33 percent coinsurance , because cms has a requirement that plans cannot charge such a deductible when using 33 percent coinsurance for specialty tier drugs . although cms does have such a requirement , we included the $295 deductible in our scenario because plans may also place specialty tier – eligible drugs on nonspecialty tiers that include both a $295 deductible and a coinsurance rate above 25 percent ( eg , 33 percent or 42 percent ) . our analysis identified a number of plans requiring such cost - sharing combinations for the 20 specialty tier – eligible drugs in our sample . we included the $295 deductible for illustrative purposes to clearly demonstrate how differences in the coinsurance percentage or copayment amount would affect beneficiary out - of - pocket costs . however , using different deductible amount — for example , $0 — for one or more scenarios would not change our overall finding: different cost - sharing structures can be expected to result in out - of - pocket costs that vary initially but become similar once beneficiaries reach the catastrophic coverage threshold . in its written comments , cms suggested that we report changes in negotiated drug prices over time in the context of changes to the drug's average wholesale price ( awp ) .