performance . to determine performance among agoa and other preference programs we used a 2014 usitc report on agoa that includes a comprehensive economic literature review on selected countries' trade preference programs . the study identified 48 economic studies of preference programs , published from 2001 to 2013 ; of that number , 11 compared the performance of programs , and 7 of the 11 compared the performance of the united states' and the eu's programs — in part because the united states and the eu are two of the few preference providers that provide data on actual imports under their preference programs . to examine agoa countries' participation in trade negotiations , we used wto data to determine the bilateral and multilateral trade agreements to which agoa countries are party . to identify insights from agoa country trade negotiations , we chose to focus on agoa countries' economic partnership agreements with the eu because ( 1 ) congressional requesters specifically asked about the impact of these agreements , ( 2 ) negotiations for the regional agreements were all concluded recently — in 2014 , ( 3 ) the eu is the largest recipient of ssa exports , and ( 4 ) the agreements replace a unilateral trade preference arrangement with a reciprocal trade arrangement . we reported insights based on our literature review on the negotiations leading up to ( and the terms of ) the agreements as well as interviews with trade experts from agoa countries , u.s. government agencies , other key trade partners with agoa countries , multilateral trade organizations ( including the wto ) , and think tanks . to determine impediments to ssa countries' participation in trade negotiations , we reviewed the usitc report on agoa and other relevant literature . we also developed a semi - structured interview tool . we selected a sample of officials and experts who would participate in semi - structured interviews on the basis of ( 1 ) gao selective sampling based on literature review , ( 2 ) recommendations from u.s. government officials knowledgeable about other countries' trade negotiations with africa , and , where applicable , ( 3 ) availability during our fieldwork in geneva and brussels . we implemented the semi - structured instrument in interviews with trade experts from agoa countries , u.s. government agencies , other key trade partners with agoa countries , multilateral trade organizations ( including the wto ) , and think tanks . from the literature and semi - structured interviews , we also examined efforts to address impediments to ssa countries' participation in trade negotiations and the impact of those efforts . our observations about upcoming trade negotiations involving agoa countries are based on wto documents and official government documents . table 3 provides a comparison of key characteristics of selected countries' trade preference programs with sub - saharan african ( ssa ) countries . the countries or groups of countries included in the table are the major destinations for ssa exports . sub - saharan african countries are eligible for preferences under multiple countries' preference programs ( see table 4 ) .