we disagree . we recommended that omb require agencies to hold cardholders financially responsible for improper and wasteful purchases , and omb agreed to implement our recommendations ; we believe that this would contribute to holding cardholders accountable to management for their actions . further , our past reports on purchase card management have always focused on managerial oversight . however , it is not feasible within the scope of a governmentwide audit to test managerial oversight at every government agency . consequently , we focused on providing gsa , the manager of the governmentwide purchase card program , with recommendations that could contribute to improving management oversight at the agencies . finally , gsa disagreed with our characterization that travelers who did not reduce the per diem claimed on their travel voucher when dinners were provided may be engaging in potentially fraudulent activities . because we are unable to establish that these travelers acted with the requisite knowledge and willfulness necessary to establish either a false statement under 18 u.s.c . ยง1001 or a false claim , we have characterized such activities as potentially fraudulent . gsa's and omb's comments are reprinted in appendixes iii and iv . as agreed with your offices , unless you announce the contents of this report earlier , we will not distribute it until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the director of omb and the administrator of gsa . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . purchase cards: control weaknesses leave dhs highly vulnerable to fraudulent , improper , and abusive activity . gao - 06-1117 . washington , d.c.: september 28 , 2006 . purchase cards: control weaknesses leave dhs highly vulnerable to fraudulent , improper , and abusive activity . gao - 06-957t . washington , d.c.: july 19 , 2006 . lawrence berkeley national laboratory: further improvements needed to strengthen controls over the purchase card program . gao - 04-987r . washington , d.c.: august 6 , 2004 . lawrence livermore national laboratory: further improvements needed to strengthen controls over the purchase card program . gao - 04-986r . washington , d.c.: august 6 , 2004 . pacific northwest national laboratory: enhancements needed to strengthen controls over the purchase card program . gao - 04-988r . washington , d.c.: august 6 , 2004 . sandia national laboratories: further improvements needed to strengthen controls over the purchase card program . gao - 04-989r . washington , d.c.: august 6 , 2004 . vha purchase cards: internal controls over the purchase card program need improvement . gao - 04-737 . washington , d.c.: june 7 , 2004 . purchase cards: increased management oversight and control could save hundreds of millions of dollars . gao - 04-717t .