gao , u.s . i for more information on the usps proposed health plan. ) we have reported that usps would likely realize large financial gains from its proposed health care plan . according to usps's estimates , usps would reduce its health benefits expenses and eliminate its unfunded retiree health benefit liability , primarily by increasing the use of medicare by postal retirees once they are eligible for medicare generally beginning at age 65 . postal service: proposed health plan could improve financial condition , but impact on medicare and other issues should be weighed before approval , gao - 13-658 ( washington , d.c.: july 18 , 2013 ) ; u.s . postal service: status , financial outlook , and alternative approaches to fund retiree health benefits , gao - 13-112 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 4 , 2012 ) ; u.s . we appreciate the opportunity to be here today to discuss u.s . postal service ( usps ) benefit issues in the context of proposed postal reform legislation . usps continues to be in a serious financial crisis , with little liquidity in the short term and a challenging financial outlook in the long term as profitable first - class mail volume continues to decline . members of this committee have recently introduced comprehensive postal legislation that would , among other things , restructure the financing of postal retiree health benefits , including required payments to prefund these benefits ; authorize usps to collectively bargain with its unions to introduce a new health plan for postal employees ; and restructure the funding of postal pensions , including addressing a potential surplus in funding postal pensions under the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) . in addition , usps and others have offered proposals in these areas . this testimony will focus on issues related to ( 1 ) funding usps retiree health benefits ; ( 2 ) usps's proposal for its own health plan outside of the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) and ( 3 ) funding postal pensions including addressing a potential surplus in funding postal pensions under fers . postal service: allocation of responsibility for pension benefits between the postal service and the federal government , gao - 12-146 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 13 , 2011 ) ; u.s . postal service: strategies and options to facilitate progress toward financial viability , gao - 10-455 ( washington , d.c.: apr . that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . each of the reports cited in this testimony provides detailed information on our scope and methodology . as table 1 shows , at the end of fiscal year 2012 , usps had $96.1 billion in unfunded benefits and other liabilities: $63.5 billion in unfunded liabilities for retiree health and pension benefits , as well as $15.0 billion in outstanding debt — the statutory limit — and $17.6 billion in workers' compensation liabilities . these liabilities have become a large and growing financial burden , increasing from 83 percent of usps revenues in fiscal year 2007 to 147 percent of revenues in fiscal year 2012 . usps's dire financial condition makes paying for these liabilities highly challenging .