these comments are reprinted in appendix ii . nasa also provided technical comments , which were incorporated as appropriate . in its response , nasa stated that “many of the specific concerns referenced in the report are no longer concerns , and new ones have appeared and caution should be used in referencing the report on the specific technical issues , but the overall conclusions are valid.” we agree with nasa that the situation with these programs is dynamic and that risks and challenges change over time . however , in commenting on the report , nasa did not provide us with evidence that they have overcome specific technical issues that we highlight . further , in at least the instance of the european service module , the situation has deteriorated for the program since we sent the draft copy of the report to nasa for comment . at the time we sent the report for comment , the delivery date for the service module was april 2017 , and officials anticipated it could slip to august 2017 or later . the delivery date is now september 2017 with a risk of an additional 2-month delay . we continue to believe that nasa is facing several technical issues across all three programs that will contribute to a delay for exploration mission - 1 . we are sending copies of this report to nasa's acting administrator and to appropriate congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . to assess the extent to which the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) orion multi - purpose crew vehicle ( orion ) , space launch system ( sls ) , and exploration ground systems ( egs ) programs have risks that affect their progress towards meeting their exploration mission 1 ( em - 1 ) cost and schedule commitments , we compared current program status information against program cost and schedule baselines . to assess the risks for the orion , sls , and egs programs and the extent to which those risks may impact cost and schedule commitments , we obtained and reviewed quarterly reports and the programs' risk registers , which list the top program risks and their potential cost and schedule impacts , including mitigation efforts to - date . we interviewed program and contractor officials on technical risks , potential impacts , and risk mitigation efforts underway and planned . to evaluate the program's performance in preparing for em - 1 , we reviewed program plans and schedules and compared them to actual program performance data found in quarterly program status reviews and program update briefings to assess whether program components and software were progressing as expected . we also compared current program data against program budget information to assess funding needs and cost growth .