table 2 . wia's mandatory one - stop partner programs and related federal agencies employment service ( wagner - peyser ) veterans ‘employment and training programs senior community service employment program employment and training for migrant and seasonal farm workers employment and training for native americans vocational education ( perkins act ) department of health and human services department of housing and urban development ( hud ) under wia , employers are expected to play a key role in establishing regional workforce development policies , deciding how services should be provided in the one - stop , and overseeing one - stop operations . employers , who are encouraged to use the one - stop system to fill their job vacancies , are also seen as key one - stop customers under wia . wia performance data are useful for providing a long - term national picture of program outcomes ; however , these data are less useful for providing information about current performance , and represent only a small portion of job seekers that received wia services . ui wage recordsthe primary data source for tracking wia performance — provide a fairly consistent national view of wia performance and allow for tracking outcomes over time . at the same time , the ui wage records have some shortcomings — they cannot be used to track job seekers who get jobs in other states unless states share data ; they do not cover certain categories of workers , such as self - employed persons ; and they are not available on a timely basis . states are making progress in overcoming some of these shortcomings by sharing wage data with other states and supplementing information on participants not covered by the wage data . despite this progress , time lags and other factors affect the timing of states' reports on their annual performance to labor and , subsequently , labor's reports to congress . most of the outcomes data reported in a given program year actually reflect participants who left the program during the prior year , limiting usefulness for gauging current program performance . in addition , the states' annual reports reflect only a small portion of job seekers who receive wia services because , under the law and labor's guidance , not all job seekers who utilize one - stop services are required to be included in the performance reports . wia annual performance reportswhich provide a summary of states' performance on the 17 core measuresare useful for providing a national perspective of outcomes achieved over time . the information presented in the annual reports compares states' negotiated performance levels with their actual performance levels . ( see table 3 for an example of national performance levels for wia's job placement ratecalled the entered employment ratein program year 2002. ) these reports provide congress with an annual picture of how well the wia program is meeting its long - range goals to increase the employment , retention , and earnings of participants . the wia performance data are also useful to help labor assess quantitative , outcomes - oriented goals for its strategic plans , annual performance plans , and annual performance reports required by the government performance and results act ( gpra ) .