gao - 09-466t . washington , d.c.: march 26 , 2009 . we believe these are positive steps . as noted in our report , we believe that an opportunity exists for dod to clearly define roles and responsibilities for the sites as well as establish key criteria that will guide the transition and transfer of the elements from mda to the army and air force . since the element - specific annexes are expected to specifically state the criteria that must be met by mda before the elements transfer to the army and the air force and detail specific roles and responsibilities for each organization , it is important for dod to meet its estimated dates to finalize the army annexes and complete the mda - air force overarching memorandum of agreement , and further , to negotiate air force element - specific annexes to ensure that the crucial details that will guide the long - term support of the european sites are clearly defined . until mda and the army and air force reach agreement on how these elements will transfer , dod will continue to face difficulties in determining how the european interceptor site and the european midcourse radar site will be sustained in the near and long term . dod concurred with both of our recommendations to improve military construction cost estimates for ballistic missile defense sites . dod concurred with our recommendation that mda provide congress annually updated military construction cost estimates for the european interceptor site and the european midcourse radar site . dod stated that the bmds life cycle management process and the associated bmds portfolio provide an opportunity for mda , the army , and the air force to integrate military construction cost estimates . dod noted that the bmds military construction projects and associated estimates will continue to be coordinated with the army corps of engineers for certification , independent cost estimating , and reviews for scope completeness and technical sufficiency . furthermore , dod stated that army and air force base support facility requirements will be planned , programmed , budgeted , and executed by the services and will not be included in mda's bmds portfolio . rather , dod stated that the budgets for these sites will be collated and provided by the office of the secretary of defense from the coordinated requirements submitted by mda , the army , and the air force . however , until the bmds life cycle management process and the bmds portfolio are fully implemented , it is unclear whether they will facilitate improved military construction estimates for the european sites . further , dod did not set a date by which it would annually provide congress updated military construction estimates for the sites . our report explains the importance of providing complete bmds military construction cost information to congressional and dod decision makers on a regular basis , which is the impetus for this recommendation . also , dod concurred with our recommendation that for future ballistic missile defense sites , mda follow military construction regulations by utilizing the army corps of engineers to complete required site design and analysis and verify military construction estimates before submitting cost estimates to congress .