ii ) . in its comments , the department neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendations but stated that fda has taken actions to address many of the issues in our report . in its comments , hhs stated that fda's initiative to modernize its it infrastructure comprises multiple phases . the first phase includes the data center modernization effort , which the department stated has provided fda with an advanced computing infrastructure and a production data center with a secure computing environment . according to hhs , this infrastructure modernization and consolidation effort serves as the foundation for all other transition activities , and positions fda to move forward with the second phase: implementing data center operation management and service contract efficiencies while working on modernizing and consolidating software systems with similar business processes and expediting the retirement of legacy systems . our report recognizes the progress that fda has made in modernizing its data center infrastructure , and we agree that this effort is a key component of the agency's overall modernization initiative . however , as we also noted , over the last decade — and concurrent with its data center modernization effort — fda has spent tens of millions of dollars on software systems modernization projects that were intended to provide updated functionality and enable the retirement of legacy systems . in particular , fda spent approximately $160 million from fiscal year 2002 to fiscal year 2011 on marcs , yet it has repeatedly delayed milestones for delivering capabilities and retiring legacy systems . moreover , this spending on system development and modernization has occurred in the absence of fully implemented it management capabilities such as an it strategic plan , a complete enterprise architecture , and a strategic approach to it human capital , as well as an ims for marcs . hhs also identified several recent efforts that it stated will address issues we raised in our report: fda's senior executive team ( which includes the cio ) has committed to governing the agency's it portfolio . as part of these responsibilities , the team has conducted sessions to identify the top 5 to 10 capabilities that are needed for the agency to meet the challenges of operating in a globalized regulatory environment . further , to assist in the management of it investments , fda's office of information management is in the process of establishing a new project management office to provide effective services aligned with the agency's strategic priorities . fda has initiated several large program or project reviews to identify areas for improvement , potential for streamlining , and projects that should be stopped , continued , or started . specifically , fda has evaluated , and halted , the janus project , and is conducting a detailed review of marcs . the agency is also revising its draft it strategic plan and working to define and implement its enterprise architecture . fda is assessing its it workforce in office of information management divisions to identify skill - set gaps , develop staff training plans , and identify resource needs .