this is consistent with prior reviews . we adjusted for three comparisons to account for the three pairwise tests for each item examined . may also be related to the nature of our sample , which was relatively small and was designed only for cross - sectional analysis . figures 11 through 15 show how lobbyists reported ease of understanding the terms associated with ld - 2 reporting requirements from 2010 through 2013 . the office stated it continues to have sufficient personnel resources and authority under the lda to enforce ld - 2 reporting requirements , including imposing civil or criminal penalties for noncompliance of ld - 2 reporting . noncompliance refers to a lobbyist's or lobbying firm's failure to comply with lda requirements . according to the office , it has one contract paralegal specialist assigned full time , as well as five civil attorneys and one criminal attorney assigned part time for lda compliance work . in addition , the office stated that it participates in a government - wide program that provides temporary access to attorneys to assist with lda compliance . the temporarily assigned attorneys work with the contract paralegal specialist to contact referred lobbyists or lobbying firms who do not comply with the lda . according to the office , it has sufficient authority to enforce ld - 203 compliance with the lda for lobbying firms and certain individual lobbyists . however , it has difficulty pursuing hundreds of ld - 203 referrals that arise when a lobbying firm does not maintain or a lobbyist does not leave forwarding contact information upon leaving the firm . the ld - 203 report does not provide contact information . it only provides the name of the lobbyist and lobbying firm . as a result , the office does not have contact information to find the referred lobbyist to bring him or her into compliance . office officials reported that many firms have assisted them by providing contact information for lobbyists , and only a few firms have not been willing to provide contact information for noncompliant lobbyists . additionally , the office stated that because the current structure of the lda requires registered lobbyists to file their ld - 203 reports and does not require lobbying firms to ensure that their registered lobbyists have complied with ld - 203 filing requirements , the office has no authority to hold lobbying firms responsible for a registered lobbyist who fails to comply with ld - 203 requirements . accordingly , when the office does not have contact information to find a lobbyist who left the firm and it cannot hold the lobbying firm responsible for the lobbyist's noncompliance with lobbying disclosure requirements , the office has no recourse to pursue enforcement action . in a prior report , we recommended that the office develop a structured approach for tracking and recording its enforcement actions . the office developed the lda database to track the status of referrals and enforcement actions it takes to bring lobbyists and lobbying firms into compliance with the lda . to enforce compliance , the office has primarily focused on sending letters to lobbyists who have potentially violated the lda by not filing disclosure reports as required .