iv. ) the four states' insurance departments also maintained web sites that allow the public to search for those companies authorized to conduct insurance business within their borders . these states have also taken other actions to increase public awareness . for example , in april 2002 , florida released a public service announcement to television news markets throughout the state to warn about these entities . in addition , in the spring of 2003 , florida placed billboards throughout the state to warn the public through its “verify before you buy” campaign . ( see fig . in addition to increasing public awareness , the four state insurance departments alerted insurance agents about unauthorized entities . to determine the number of entities states identified in each calendar year , we relied on states to determine at what stage of their investigative process they would deem an entity to be unauthorized . therefore , states could have reported both those entities they determined were unauthorized after completing an investigation and against which they took formal action and those entities still being investigated and for which no formal action had been taken . to obtain federal - level data on unauthorized entities , we asked ebsa to provide data from the civil and criminal case investigations it opened from 2000 through 2002 involving these entities . to identify which of its civil and criminal investigations of employer - based health benefits plans fell within the scope of our research , we asked ebsa to use a similar definition of unauthorized entities as included on our state survey . for each of the civil and criminal investigations of these entities ebsa opened during the 3-year period , we asked ebsa to provide the same type of data about unauthorized entities that we requested on the survey we sent to all the states . in addition , we asked ebsa to identify all the states that were affected by each entity it was investigating — information that states could not easily provide . furthermore , where ebsa was conducting both civil and criminal investigations of an entity , we asked it to report that entity only one time . using bulletins , newsletters , and other methods , these states warned agents about these entities , the implications associated with selling their products , and the need to verify the legitimacy of all entities . georgia , for example , sent a warning to insurance agents in may 2002 , which highlighted the characteristics of these entities , reminded agents that they could lose their licenses and be held liable for paying claims when the entities do not pay , and noted that the state insurance department web site contained a list of all licensed entities . naic also developed a model agent alert to help agents identify these entities . a national association representing agents and brokers and many state insurance departments distributed this alert . the web sites for the four states' insurance departments contained information on the enforcement actions they took against agents . the texas insurance department's web site , for example , provided the disciplinary actions that the state took as of august 2003 against individuals who acted as agents for unauthorized insurers .