students with disabilities participate in distance education . twenty - one percent of all students with disabilities , including members of the military and civilians , enrolled in distance education courses or programs . further , 25 percent of students with disabilities affecting their mobility took distance education courses or programs . students with disabilities represented 10 percent of all students taking distance education courses and programs , while students with mobility disabilities represented about 3 percent . the themes were reviewed by a methodologist before all comments were categorized . one analyst coded the information and a second analyst assessed the accuracy of the coding . disagreements between coders were resolved through discussion . we used the information gathered from these schools for illustrative purposes only . because the schools were not selected to be representative of all postsecondary schools , the interview results are not generalizable to other postsecondary schools , including groups of schools in the same sector or program length . to determine the characteristics of students participating in distance education courses and programs , as well as those who do not participate , we analyzed education's 2007-2008 npsas data , the most current available data . these data allowed us to compare distance education students to nondistance education students on the following characteristics: age , gender , marital status , dependent status , and employment status . the data also allowed us to describe the characteristics of students enrolled in distance education , in terms of type of school attended , field of study , race , veteran status , and disability status . we supplemented this analysis with information from our interviews with selected postsecondary schools and student demographic data provided by school officials . to determine how the quality of distance education programs is being assessed , we obtained information from accrediting agency and school officials and reviewed and analyzed federal laws and regulations related to accreditation . we interviewed officials from six accrediting agencies ( three regional , two national , and one specialized ) and reviewed their standards and policies to determine how they are assessing the quality of distance education courses and programs . in addition , we reviewed documents from the council for higher education accreditation ( chea ) website , to gain a broader understanding of accreditation . we also interviewed officials from schools in our sample to describe the specific quality assurance frameworks and the outcomes they use to assess the performance of students engaged in distance education . in addition , we interviewed an official from quality matters and reviewed quality standards documents provided at the interview . to determine the extent to which education is monitoring distance education programs to ensure the protection of federal student aid funds , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations regarding distance education oversight requirements . we interviewed officials from education's federal student aid office and the office of postsecondary education to determine their roles in the monitoring and governance of title iv programs , specifically with respect to distance education . in addition , we interviewed officials from nces to learn about their ipeds data collection efforts and education's office of the inspector general to learn about their distance education monitoring activities and findings .