we disagree . our draft report states the financing approaches used in many of the case studies were structured to include features that do not require up - front budget recognition even though they established long - term commitments of the government . as stated in our report , utbdc implemented subleases of three facilities to ut - battelle , llc , for doe's ultimate use , each with a lease term of up to 25 years . according to a ut - battelle , llc , official , utbdc was created for the purpose of securing private financing . thus , our report does assert that the ornl transaction was undertaken to obtain private financing . we do not see this as inconsistent with doe's comment that the “transaction was undertaken…as a means by which doe could obtain something of value to it — the use of a new building.” 30 . references to doe legal opinions in our draft are based on documentation given to us by the doe chief counsel in oak ridge based on the relevance to the oak ridge national laboratory public / private partnership . all statements in our report are within the context of how the citations were written . we clarified the author of the legal opinion and the subject of the memo . our report does not say that a conflict of interest and potential for fraud or wrongdoing existed in the oak ridge national laboratory partnership . rather , our report states that partnerships require monitoring because of the complicated relationships involved . our report states we used a case study approach and notes that this does not allow us to generalize our findings across the government . to analyze espc costs , we reviewed the delivery orders , given to us by gsa and the navy , for each of our six espc case studies . in the course of our audit work we reviewed the ornl study ( oak ridge national laboratory , evaluation of federal energy savings performance contracting - methodology for comparing processes and costs of espc and appropriations - funded energy projects , march 2003 ) , interviewed the authors of the study , and talked with agency officials about the study's methodology . based on our analyses we found two major flaws in the study: ( 1 ) as agreed with the study authors the sample size was too small and was not applicable to the entire federal sector and ( 2 ) the study compares the costs and savings across various types of espcs installed in several different federal facilities , making it difficult to compare energy savings because the savings would depend upon too many unpredictable factors . also , as discussed on page 30 , we did discuss with gsa and navy officials their historical funding experiences . it is the executive branch's long - standing position that the levels of internal executive branch funding requests are predecisional deliberative documents and therefore unavailable to us . we acknowledge in our report that officials we spoke with said they believed m&v results in higher sustained savings .