selection of projects . in the fourth step , agency officials evaluated project proposals and selected the projects they would fund . officials from the task force agencies we reviewed generally described similar processes for evaluating project proposals . specifically , they said that agency officials with the appropriate expertise reviewed and ranked proposals against information in the request for applications and selected the best scoring projects for funding . the process for identifying each agency's annual glri work and share of glri funding has evolved from one in which project and funding decisions were made on an agency - by - agency basis to one in which subgroups formed of multiple agency officials discuss and decide on what work should be done . according to epa officials , for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , the task force and the five agencies agreed on work that each agency would do on an agency - by - agency basis . officials from the agencies said that they identified work based on existing plans and worked with the task force to determine the work the agencies would do and the funds the agencies should receive . beginning with fiscal year 2012 , the task force began emphasizing interagency discussions as it created three subgroups made up of federal agency members , one subgroup for each of three priority issues . the three priority issues , which aligned with three of the five focus areas in the 2010-2014 action plan , were ( 1 ) cleaning up and delisting areas of concern located entirely or partially in the united states , ( 2 ) preventing and controlling invasive species , and ( 3 ) reducing phosphorus runoff that contributes to harmful algal blooms . for example , the areas of concern subgroup considered how close each area was to being delisted and what cleanup actions were needed for delisting , as identified by the area of concern managers , among other things . overall , the task force set aside a total of $180 million of the available glri funds to address the priority issues for fiscal years 2012 through 2014: $52.2 million in fiscal year 2012 , $63.4 million in fiscal year 2013 , and $64.7 million in fiscal year 2014 . more than 1,500 individuals participated in this effort . in 2009 , the president created the asian carp regional coordinating committee to coordinate efforts to prevent asian carp from spreading and becoming established . even with these actions , the great lakes are environmentally vulnerable . in 2009 , the president proposed $475 million in his fiscal year 2010 budget request for a new interagency initiative to accelerate the restoration of the great lakes . specifically , the president requested that epa and its federal partners coordinate state , tribal , local , and industry actions to protect , maintain , and restore the integrity of the great lakes . most recently , in 2015 , multiple bills to authorize the glri were introduced in the house and senate . some of these bills , if enacted , would authorize $300 million to be appropriated annually to carry out the glri for fiscal years 2016 through 2020 .