gao - 08-1078 . washington , d.c.: september 11 , 2008 . thank you mr. chairman . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact dr. gerald l. dillingham at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include andrew von ah ( assistant director ) , bess eisenstadt , bert japikse , kieran mccarthy , and richard scott . next generation air transportation system: status of systems acquisition and the transition to the next generation air transportation system . responses to questions for the record ; hearing on the future of air traffic control modernization . gao - 07-928r . washington , d.c.: may 30 , 2007 . next generation air transportation system: status of the transition to the future air traffic control system . gao - 07-784t . washington , d.c.: may 9 , 2007 . joint planning and development office: progress and key issues in planning the transition to the next generation air transportation system . gao - 07-693t . washington , d.c.: march 29 , 2007 . federal aviation administration: key issues in ensuring the efficient development and safe operation of the next generation air transportation system . gao - 07-636t . washington , d.c.: march 22 , 2007 . next generation air transportation system: progress and challenges associated with the transformation of the national airspace system . gao - 07-25 . washington , d.c.: november 13 , 2006 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . faa has also initiated projects to demonstrate the benefits of integrating nextgen capabilities . for example , in december 2008 , faa signed a memorandum of agreement with netjets — an ohio - based air service provider with a fleet of 600 aircraft . before midterm nextgen implementation can occur , faa must validate and certify technologies and issue rules for the use of procedures . faa has made some progress in this area , including developing specifications for performance - based navigation procedures at selected airports , but much remains to be done . we and others have previously expressed concerns about the time and human resources required for these efforts and have identified them as a significant risk to the timely and cost - effective implementation of nextgen . in recent interviews , stakeholders have expressed similar concerns about the midterm implementation of existing or off - the - shelf technologies and capabilities . for example , an avionics manufacturer , an aircraft manufacturer , and an airline association we interviewed all cited the time it takes to develop rules for new procedures and the problems that result from deploying equipment before rules are finalized .