we expect to issue these reports this summer . chairman alexander , ranking member murray , and members of the committee , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . for further information about this statement , please contact debra a. draper at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or draperd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . key contributors to this statement were michelle rosenberg , assistant director ; amanda cherrin , sandra george , and david lichtenfeld . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . hrsa is responsible for administering and overseeing the 340b program . as a result of the audits already conducted , hrsa has identified instances of non - compliance with program requirements , including violations related to drug diversion and the potential for duplicate discounts . the agency has developed a process to address non - compliance through corrective action plans . the results of each year's audits are available on hrsa's website , and we currently have work underway reviewing hrsa's efforts to ensure compliance with 340b program requirements at contract pharmacies that includes an examination of hrsa's audits of covered entities . in our 2011 report , we found that hrsa's guidance on three key program requirements lacked the necessary level of specificity to provide clear direction , making it difficult for participants to self - police or monitor others' compliance , and raising concerns that the guidance could be interpreted in ways that were inconsistent with its intent . first , we found that hrsa's nondiscrimination guidance was not sufficiently specific in detailing practices manufacturers should follow to ensure that drugs were equitably distributed to covered entities and non - 340b providers when distribution was restricted . some stakeholders we interviewed for the 2011 report , such as covered entities , raised concerns about the way certain manufacturers interpreted and complied with the guidance in these cases . we recommended that hrsa further clarify its nondiscrimination guidance for cases in which distribution of drugs is restricted and require reviews of manufacturers' plans to restrict distribution of drugs at 340b prices in such cases . in response , hrsa issued a program notice in may 2012 that clarified hrsa's policy for manufacturers that intend to restrict distribution of a drug and provided additional detail on the type of information manufacturers should include in such restricted distribution plans . in addition , we found a lack of specificity in hrsa's guidance on two other issues — the definition of an eligible patient and hospital eligibility for program participation . specifically , we found that hrsa's guidance on the definition of an eligible patient lacked the necessary specificity to clearly define the various situations under which an individual was considered eligible for discounted drugs through the 340b program .