complete . the director of dod's cost assessment and program evaluation office and the congressional budget office — as well as navy cost analysts and a navy - commissioned expert panel — have also projected higher than budgeted procurement costs for cvn 78 , with cost estimates ranging from $13.0 to $14.2 billion . gao , defense acquisitions: realistic business cases needed to execute navy shipbuilding programs , gao - 07-943t ( washington , d.c.: july 24 , 2007 ) . underpinning this plan is that the navy will be able to maintain cost control over its major shipbuilding acquisition programs . yet , the budgets for many ships , including cvn 78 , have already proven inadequate to cover the costs required to complete their constructions . to compensate , the navy must shift funds away from other priorities — including future ship constructions — or request additional funds from congress to pay for this cost growth . analysis of the navy's fiscal year 2014 long - term shipbuilding plan shows that ford - class procurement costs alone are estimated to comprise approximately 14 percent of the navy's total new ship construction budgets between fiscal years 2014 and 2018 . even a small percentage of cost growth on these ships could lead to the need for hundreds of millions of dollars in additional funding . already , the navy is programming $1.3 billion between fiscal years 2014 and 2015 to cover cvn 78 cost growth . to the extent that this cost growth continues for cvn 78 or follow - on ships , it may result in fewer ships acquired than planned in the near term . several factors are likely to hamper the navy's plans to demonstrate cvn 78 capabilities after it accepts delivery of the ship . in particular , significant risk is introduced due to the navy's plan to conduct integration testing of critical technologies concurrently with the ship's iot&e . this strategy will constrain opportunities to implement timely , corrective actions if problems are discovered with key ship systems . if significant discoveries are made during iot&e , initial deployment could be delayed . in addition , joint strike fighter integration with cvn 78 remains in its infancy , with work to date limited to paper - based assessments and a single test with emals . further , key ship systems face reliability shortfalls that the navy does not expect to resolve until many years after cvn 78 commissioning , which will limit the ship's mission effectiveness during initial deployments and likely increase costs to the government . following ship delivery in february 2016 and a brief maintenance period , the navy plans to embark on two separate developmental and operational test phases for cvn 78 intended to demonstrate successful integration of key ship systems and overall effectiveness and suitability of the ship itself . at present , the navy anticipates requiring 10 months to complete the first phase — integration testing — and 32 months to complete the second phase — iot&e . further , in an effort to meet the lead ship's anticipated deployment schedule , the navy plans to execute much of its integration testing concurrent with iot&e .