vi. ) irs agreed with the findings in the report and said that the agency would assist in tax administration related to charities and identified actions underway or planned to address our recommendations . we support irs's timely actions on our recommendations and believe irs's actions are generally responsive to our recommendations . as irs moves forward with its plans , however , we encourage the commissioner of internal revenue to ensure that the actions irs takes will cover all aspects of our recommendations . for instance , although irs's comments indicate that irs will develop goals and measures for its oversight of charities , the comments do not mention identifying the levels of staffing and other resources needed to accomplish such goals . although generally agreeing with our findings and indicating that actions were planned or being taken in relation to our recommendations , irs had certain reservations about the report . first , irs said that our draft report implied that irs was not looking at the extent to which charities are properly reporting expenses . also , according to irs , the agency has established a task force to develop examination projects for reporting accuracy and that examiners have been instructed to review this issue . our draft report did recognize these actions . however , the task force had not yet begun to develop projects at the time we did our work , and examiners look at only a very small portion of charities annually . thus , neither of these actions indicated that irs would be obtaining reliable overall measures of how accurately charities report their expense data . at the conclusion of the keypunching process , the return information is available to be queried by another automated system — the returns information and classification system ( rics ) . irs uses rics to analyze the automated data . rics applies the criteria selected by the planning and program group to identify returns and line items for potential examination . for example , rics could be used to identify returns in which charities are reporting political expenditures , allocating expenses to reflect unrelated business income , reporting compensation and wages , but not filing form 941 , and not filing form 990-t as required . the classification unit is responsible for pulling the returns that meet the criteria , and rics is used to select a random sample of returns . returns identified by rics are considered to be general casework , which includes 12 conditions identified as “likely to have issues” that will lead to a change in the tax computation or even revocation of a charity's tax - exempt status . examination of these returns is intended to be “limited scope” addressing only the issue identified for which the return was selected . however , according to the manager , eo classification , revenue agents review the return to check for consistency with the basic exemption requirement for the charity . another method used by irs to select returns for examination is using a referral , that has the highest priority among returns to be examined . irs receives referrals from parties inside and outside irs , including the general public , corporations , and private and public sector employees .