these collections are solely made through pay.gov . this practice delays deposit of the collections . agencies not scheduled for review until later years also may lack information on how to overcome barriers to the use of electronic collection methods or invest in more cost - effective collection methods . such barriers include agency regulations that define the methods an agency uses to make collections , and payers that are less amenable to electronic collection methods . with better information about the capabilities and benefits of the various collection methods , agencies could in turn communicate that information to their payer groups . according to payer groups we spoke with , their members would be more likely to adopt electronic collection methods if agencies encouraged them . nor does it represent a similarly low percentage of transactions . for example , in fiscal year 2008 , mms's minerals revenue management program collected over $23 billion in federal rents and royalties from the public ; while payments by check represented only 2 percent of the dollars collected , they represented 77 percent of the total number of its transactions . in fiscal year 2009 , of the almost $509 billion in non - irs collections , about $68 billion was collected as cash or checks and processed using either partly electronic or nonelectronic collection methods . as shown in figure 2 , there was a significant shift from nonelectronic to partly electronic methods from 2005 to 2009 . in 2005 , partly electronic collection methods accounted for just under 2 percent of cash and check collections , but by 2009 this share had increased to over 46 percent . given the significant process and cost differences between fully electronic and partly electronic collection methods , we distinguish between them in this analysis . the growth in partly electronic payments largely represents a change in agency processes rather than in payer behavior: the shift is largely the result of a growth in electronic check processing capacity both at agencies and through lockbox banks . in fiscal year 2008 almost $24 billion in collections settled as paper checks at lockbox banks , but in fiscal year 2009 less than $2.4 billion was settled this way . conversely , collections through electronic check processing were about $27 billion in fiscal year 2008 , but were over $31 billion in fiscal year 2009 . fms attributes this growth to a large marketing effort and new electronic check processing locations ( according to fms officials , 209 new locations — 185 agency pcc and 24 lockbox ecp locations — were added in fiscal year 2009 ) . fms plans to discontinue some current electronic collection methods and shift programs that use those methods to pay.gov — a web - based portal that processes collections made through ach transfer and credit card — which will consolidate and simplify the number of collection methods available through fms . fms officials told us that they expect ach pre - authorized debits will be phased out and replaced by pay.gov by the end of calendar year 2009 .