any other agency ( s ) 17 . we refer to such variances as unique requirements . when a federal agency had in its requirements , specific values that are to be defined by individual federal agencies that differed from at least one of the other three federal agencies . we refer to such variances as requirements with conflicting parameters . when a federal agency did not fully address in its requirements the guidelines from nist for associated controls and control enhancements . we refer to such variances as requirements that did not fully address nist guidelines . any other federal agency ( s ) 12 . we also reviewed omb circular a - 130 , managing information as a strategic resource , which identifies requirements for federal agencies to coordinate when establishing cybersecurity requirements for nonfederal entities , such as state agencies . any other federal agency ( s ) 13 . the department added that cms tailored some of the controls to allow flexibilities for states while keeping the overall intent of the nist guidance . any other federal agency ( s ) 14 . the department stated that it collaborated with federal agencies , including fbi's cjis , in developing mars - e and during subsequent updates of that security policy . however , cms did not provide us with documentation as evidence of its collaboration with fbi's cjis on the development of mars - e . in addition , as noted in this report , cms had not collaborated with the other agencies included in our review after the development of the most recent version of mars - e . it is important that federal agencies collaborate to address variances in their cybersecurity requirements ; doing so could help to significantly reduce state agencies' costs in complying with multiple federal agencies' requirements . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix iv . the department also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in written comments , fbi's cjis agreed with our three recommendations to the agency . among other things , the agency stated that it would , to the greatest extent possible , collaborate with omb and solicit input from the other federal agencies identified in this report , as well as from state agency stakeholders , on revisions to its security policy . do you have any additional explanations of your answers or comments on any of the issues in this questionnaire ? ( narrative answers not displayed ) 20. who is the person primarily responsible for completing this questionnaire whom we can contact in case we need to clarify a response ? if the state ciso did not complete this questionnaire , we recommend that the ciso review these answers . the tables below identify the extent to which each of the four selected federal agencies established policies that addressed individual activities supporting two areas of coordination: ( 1 ) coordination with state agencies when assessing states' cybersecurity and ( 2 ) coordination with other federal agencies on the assessment of state agencies' cybersecurity .