postal service . eeo complaints filed at the selected 17 agencies in the aggregate represented 91 percent of eeo complaints filed governmentwide in fiscal year 2005 . we decided against including the department of justice ( justice ) after agency officials said that their practitioners' survey responses first would have to undergo vetting within the agency . under those conditions , we could not allow justice practitioners to participate in the survey . we so advised justice representatives during a telephone conference , during which we also proposed interviewing justice officials later in the engagement about possible changes to the eeo complaint process . based on the reactions of practitioners , we changed the survey content and format during pretesting as necessary . we also conducted usability tests that entailed checking each practitioner's password , user name , and link to ensure their operability before we launched the web survey . to activate the survey , we posted it to the internet . we notified the 63 eeo practitioners of the availability of the questionnaire with an e - mail message that contained a unique user name and password that allowed each respondent to log on and fill out a questionnaire while preventing respondents from gaining access to the surveys of others . using their access information , practitioners could access the survey on the internet at any time and could complete it at their convenience . if practitioners did not respond to the confidential link we provided , we accepted official submissions for responses in another format ( eg , e - mail ) . access to the phase i survey formally began on april 9 , 2007 , after which practitioners had approximately 8 weeks from april 2007 through may 2007 to complete the survey . while the survey was ongoing , we wrote follow - up e - mails and made telephone calls to practitioners who did not initially respond to the survey to ensure that we made every effort to reach them . of the 63 practitioners to whom we made the phase i survey available , 1 practitioner informed us that she did not work in one of our practitioner categories . as she was the only respondent from her agency , we sent the survey to another eeo practitioner at that agency . when we did not receive a response from another practitioner at another agency , we then sent the survey to an official from her agency , because that official's office is in charge of the discrimination complaint counseling and investigation processes and alternative dispute resolution . thus , we selected 65 practitioners to participate in the phase i web - based survey . by june 2007 , of the 65 , 62 , or about 95 percent of the eeo practitioners , had completed the phase i survey . responses to the survey express only the views and attitudes of the practitioners . once the phase i survey was complete , we conducted a content analysis of practitioners' open - ended narrative responses to that survey . we developed a coding system that was based on the type of practitioner , the individual respondent , sequential numbers to identify the response , and the type ( solution or factor ) of response .