( see app . i for a list of the 80 agencies and which ones did and did not publish regulations. ) we contacted 4 of the 16 agencies that had not published regulations , those that appeared to have multiple civil penalties and / or active civil penalty programs — the department of education , the federal energy regulatory commission , the food and drug administration within the department of health and human services , and customs . in separate reports published during this review , we recommended that each of the four agencies publish the required initial penalty adjustment regulations . each of the agencies agreed to do so , and some have since published the required adjustments . officials in these agencies said they did not know why their agencies had not adjusted their penalties earlier . some of the penalty adjustment regulations that were published covered all of the department or agency's civil penalties , but others covered only a particular subunit within the department or agency . for example , the department of agriculture's initial inflation adjustment regulation covered eight different agencies within the department ( eg , the agricultural marketing service , the animal and plant health inspection service , and the food safety and inspection service ) . in contrast , nine agencies within the department of transportation ( eg , faa , uscg , and nhtsa ) each published separate penalty adjustment regulations . only 9 of the 64 agencies making penalty adjustments published their regulations by the statutory deadline of october 23 , 1996 . most of the other 55 agencies published their regulations by the end of 1997 , but 7 agencies did not do so until 1998 or later . for example , the office of the attorney general within the department of justice did not publish its initial inflation adjustment act regulation until august 30 , 1999 . the wage and hour division within the department of labor's employment standards administration did not publish its initial regulation until december 7 , 2001 — more than 5 years after the statutory deadline . all six of the agencies that we focused on in this part of our review had published a first round of penalty adjustment regulations by june 2002 . however , none of the agencies published their regulations by the october 23 , 1996 , statutory deadline . the tables also identify the initial and subsequent penalty adjustment final rules that had been published as of june 30 , 2002 . because there is no current comprehensive database that identifies each agency with civil penalty authority subject to the provisions of the inflation adjustment act , we cannot be sure that we have identified all of the covered agencies or penalties . also , the adjustment regulations listed reflect the results of our search of the federal register from 1996 through june 30 , 2002 . other penalty adjustment regulations may have been published that we did not discover . a complete discussion of our scope and methodology is included later in this report . in brief , we focused part of our work on six agencies that the most recent data available indicated had large penalty assessments .