cia . the cia has reduced its involvement with the ic cae program to better align its needs according to cia officials . in 2009 , cia selected senior officers to serve as advisors to 16 ic cae colleges . the cia advisors were directed to make a minimum of two visits per year and conducted a wide range of activities to include presenting at colleges events , counseling ic cae scholars , and discussing cia and ic career opportunities . however , about a third of the advisors were pulled back because , according to cia officials , the ic cae colleges were not meeting hiring expectations . since 2014 , cia has focused its efforts on only six of the ic cae colleges based on the return on investment from these colleges and alignment with cia hiring needs . in addition , according to cia officials , cia has designated five universities as signature colleges to recruit skilled applicants from a range of cultures and backgrounds . according to cia officials , the signature college program targets large , diverse colleges where the cia has received a significant number of applications . its criteria for selection of signature colleges include high diversity , the size of the college , and potential for developing a deep relationship . two of the five cia signature colleges are also in the ic cae program and are currently receiving or have received grant funding . nsa . according to nsa officials , nsa has been involved in the ic cae program since its inception , and its involvement includes participating in a variety of events such as colloquium , summer seminars , and recruitment events . in addition , nsa has also sponsored two types of centers of academic excellence , one for cyber defense and one for cyber operations . the goal of these programs is to develop technical skills by promoting higher education and research in cyber defense and producing professionals with cyber defense expertise . in addition , the programs also aim to broaden the pool of skilled workers capable of supporting a cyber - secure nation . the programs involve awarding a designation as a center of academic excellence in cyber defense or cyber operations to u.s. universities based on criteria . no funding is provided to the u.s. universities . according to nsa officials , these programs are independent of the ic cae program and have different goals from the ic cae program . officials stated nsa's cae programs are focused specifically on increasing the pipeline of cyber talent . further , some ic elements' recruitment strategies incorporate the ic cae program as part of their strategy , but it is not the only aspect of the elements' approach to recruiting . for example , according to nga's campus recruitment strategy , the agency targets high - quality colleges that provide access to diverse applicants in high - quality , mission - aligned degree programs across a broader geographic reach . the strategy has 31 designated colleges that were selected based on a variety of criteria , including demographic diversity and academic programs that align with the agency's mission areas .