hud had no comments on the report . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of energy , the secretary of housing and urban development , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or gaffiganm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . a more detailed discussion of our methodology is provided in appendix i . we conducted our work from march 2006 through may 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , which included an assessment of data reliability . the anticipated rebuilding and repairing of residential and commercial structures in the gulf coast creates an important opportunity for incorporating energy efficiency improvements that could produce long - term energy cost savings . we estimated that newer building codes and standards could significantly reduce energy expenditures for residential and commercial buildings in louisiana and mississippi , depending on the rebuilding efforts in these states . the sheer magnitude of the reconstruction effort creates a tremendous opportunity for incorporating energy efficiency improvements into rebuilt homes and buildings . many gulf coast neighborhoods and communities need to be rebuilt — some from the ground up — especially since an estimated 122,261 homes in louisiana and mississippi were destroyed or severely damaged . this rebuilding creates an opportunity for these states to make wide - scale improvements to their building stock , especially the older vintage housing in the areas . in addition , state and local governments in louisiana and mississippi are still engaged in short - and long - term planning efforts to recover from the hurricanes . since these planning efforts are evolving , now is an opportune time to consider fully incorporating energy efficiency improvements in the reconstruction efforts . furthermore , louisiana's and mississippi's recent adoption of newer and more energy efficient building codes creates a unique opportunity for rebuilding all of the destroyed and severely damaged homes in a manner that could result in significant energy cost savings for these two states . in partnership with doe's pnnl , we analyzed a range of energy efficiency levels to determine the potential energy cost savings that could be achieved if single - family homes and commercial buildings in louisiana and mississippi were constructed in accordance with various residential building codes and commercial energy standards . for residential buildings , we examined four energy efficiency levels associated with building in accordance with various codes — a “baseline” level , a “code” level , and two “above - code” levels . the baseline level we used represents the estimated energy efficiency associated with construction practices in areas of the gulf coast that do not have building codes or where the codes may not be enforced .