respectively . the company also announced that it was conducting a further assessment of its long - lived assets and that additional adjustments to fiscal 2001 results might be necessary . this review resulted in jds uniphase recording additional charges to reduce goodwill and other long - lived assets of $1.1 billion and $4.2 billion during the quarters ended march 31 , 2001 , and june 30 , 2001 , respectively . the financial statements reflecting these charges , including the restated figures for the quarter ended march 31 , 2001 , were filed with sec on september 19 , 2001 . the restatement increased the company's net loss from the originally reported amount of $1.3 billion to a restated loss of $41.9 billion ( table 14 ) . we found no single authoritative source for historical analyst recommendations and relied on a variety of sources for this data such as yahoo ! finance and cnet investor . analysts use different rating systems and a variety of terms , including strong buy , buy , near - term or long - term accumulate , near - term or long - term over - perform or under - perform , neutral , hold , reduce , sell , and strong sell . critics often point to the large disparity between analysts' buy recommendations and sell recommendations ( the latter made up less than 2 percent in 2000 ) . however , the terms have been criticized as being misleading because “hold” may mean that investors should sell the stock versus holding it . although we do not attempt to determine the definition of each term for each firm , we provide the recommendations because they illustrate the range of rating systems that analysts use . we generally focused on changes in ratings around certain key dates to provide some indication of what signals analysts were sending to the markets . like analysts , credit rating agencies have been questioned about the quality of the information they provide , and this scrutiny heightened after the rapid failure of enron . to determine the information credit rating agencies were providing to the market about the condition of these companies , we collected credit rating information on companies when such information was available . once again we focused on changes in ratings around certain key dates , such as the restatement announcement date , the actual restatement date , and announcements of internal investigations , and bankruptcy filings . to determine the legal and regulatory actions taken , we searched for evidence of any lawsuits and whether sec and or the department of justice had taken any action in connection with the restatement of a company's financial results . we found that many of the cases led to shareholder lawsuits and that sec and in some cases the department of justice had taken action against the company , its officials , and its independent auditor . adelphia communications corporation ( adelphia ) provides entertainment and communication services , including high - speed internet services , cable entertainment , digital cable , long distance telephone services , home security , and messaging .