open . recommendation the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to design procedures that will account for the difference in intragovernmental assets and liabilities throughout the compilation process by means of formal consolidating and elimination accounting entries . per treasury and omb see the status of recommendation no . recommendation the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary to develop and implement a process that adequately identifies and reports items needed to reconcile net operating cost and unified budget surplus ( or deficit ) . treasury should develop policies and procedures to ensure completeness of reporting and document how all the applicable components reported in the other consolidated financial statements ( and related note disclosures included in the cfs ) were properly reflected in the reconciliation statement . per treasury and omb see the status of recommendation no . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary to develop and implement a process that adequately identifies and reports items needed to reconcile net operating cost and unified budget surplus ( or deficit ) . treasury should establish reporting materiality thresholds for determining which agency financial statement activities to collect and report at the government - wide level to assist in ensuring that the reconciliation statement is useful and conveys meaningful information . see the status of recommendation no . per gao closed . over the past few years , treasury has taken certain actions to address recommendations related to the two cfs budget statements . to provide recommendations that are better aligned with the remaining control deficiencies in this area , we have ( 1 ) closed this recommendation and ( 2 ) included in this report under “preparation of the budget statements included in the cfs” new recommendations for corrective action . closed . over the past few years , treasury has taken certain actions to address recommendations related to the two cfs budget statements . to provide recommendations that are better aligned with the remaining control deficiencies in this area , we have ( 1 ) closed this recommendation and ( 2 ) included in this report under “preparation of the budget statements included in the cfs” new recommendations for corrective action . if treasury chooses to continue using information from both federal agencies' financial statements and treasury's central accounting and reporting system ( star ) , treasury should demonstrate how the amounts from star reconcile to federal agencies' financial statements . see the status of recommendation no . closed . over the past few years , treasury has taken certain actions to address recommendations related to the two cfs budget statements . to provide recommendations that are better aligned with the remaining control deficiencies in this area , we have ( 1 ) closed this recommendation and ( 2 ) included in this report under “preparation of the budget statements included in the cfs” new recommendations for corrective action . recommendation if treasury chooses to continue using information from both federal agencies' financial statements and from star , treasury should identify and document the cause of any significant differences , if any are noted .