we agreed . opm also wrote that hr systems at all shared service centers have the functionality to notify supervisors when an employee's probationary period is ending . however , as our report notes , even though opm considers having a tool in place to notify supervisors that a probationary period is ending to be a leading practice , not all agencies have implemented that practice . accordingly , we clarified the recommendation so that it calls on opm to educate agencies on the benefits and availability of automated notifications to alert supervisors . recommendation to help strengthen the ability of agencies to deal with poor performers , and to help ensure opm's tools and guidance for dealing with poor performers are cost - effectively meeting agencies' and supervisors' needs , the director of opm , in conjunction with the chco council and , as appropriate , with key stakeholders such as federal employee labor unions , should use strategic human capital management survey results ( once available ) , federal employee viewpoint survey results , performance appraisal assessment tool responses , and other existing information , as relevant , to inform decisions on content and distribution methods . the importance of effective performance management and addressing poor performance may need to be reinforced with agency supervisors so that they more routinely seek out tools and guidance . status opm partially concurred with our recommendation to use the results of various surveys such as the fevs and other information sources to help determine the extent to which its tools and guidance for dealing with poor performers are cost - effectively meeting agencies' needs . specifically , opm said it would use relevant data from these resources to inform decisions about content and distribution methods for the material opm makes available to agencies . at the same time , opm noted that the information contained in these surveys and other data sources had certain limitations and may not always be relevant . we agreed and clarified the recommendation accordingly . federal telework: program measurement continues to confront data reliability issues ( april 2012 ) to improve opm's annual reporting of telework to congress , the opm director should continue efforts to improve data collection and gather information that allows for the appropriate qualification of year - to - year comparisons and informs users about the effects of data collection changes going forward . as of june 2012 , opm had revised its collection of telework participation data from agencies to include full fy participation data from fy12 . this action should enable opm to report year - to - year comparisons of telework participation in its 2014 status of telework in the federal government report to congress . this report is expected to be issued by opm in late 2014 / early 2015 . reporting an accurate year to year comparison of telework participation would complete the implementation of this recommendation . recommendation include requesting that agencies consistently utilize standard form ( sf ) 182 to document and report training costs associated with the different delivery mechanisms employed . status sound training programs and financial plans for training .