demography , vol . 4 ( november 1999 ) : 521- 534 . reynolds , arthur j. american educational research journal , vol . 2 ( summer 1991 ) : 392-422 . ( 4 ) what key federal programs are schools using to address the needs of mobile students ? to answer these questions , we analyzed two nationally representative datasets from the department of education ( education ) : one , which followed a cohort of students from 1998 to 2007 , contained information on the numbers and characteristics of mobile students and the other contained information on the schools students attended in 2007 . neither of these datasets allowed us to assess effects of the economic downturn on student mobility , which occurred post 2007 . to collect additional information about the mobile student population and reasons for their mobility , including any potential effects of the recent economic downturn , we interviewed school officials and federal and state education officials . we determined that education's data were sufficiently reliable and valid for the purposes of our review . we reviewed external studies that measured the effects of student mobility on both educational and noneducational student outcomes . ( 3 ) what challenges does student mobility present for schools in meeting the educational needs of students who change schools ? we selected studies that were published during or after 1984 and contained original data analysis or meta - analysis . we conducted site visits to a nonprobability sample of eight schools across six school districts in three states ( california , michigan , and texas ) where we interviewed school officials and parents about the challenges of student mobility and how schools address those challenges . we selected states that provided geographic coverage and that had high percentages of economically disadvantaged students and / or high rates of foreclosures to provide insight on how the economic downturn might be affecting students and schools in high poverty areas . we interviewed federal , state , and school officials about federal programs that serve low - income , disadvantaged , and special needs students , including those who change schools , and we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and agency documents . we selected schools with high percentages of mobile students and that differed by school type ( public and charter ) , grade level ( elementary , middle , and high school ) , and location ( urban , suburban , and rural ) . in addition , we interviewed state education officials and local homeless education liaisons about federal efforts to assist mobile students from homeless families . we conducted this performance audit from october 2009 through november 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . nearly all students change school at some point during their school years , most typically when they are promoted to a higher grade at a different school .