bid review . after the bid window closed , palmetto gba began to review the bids . it determined whether each bid package was complete , compliant with bidding requirements , and whether the submitting supplier's financial score satisfied a minimum threshold to qualify to compete on price . the financial score was determined using criteria developed by cms for this purpose including suppliers' credit scores and 10 financial measures — described by cms as standard accounting measures . ( see table 2. ) if the bid package was complete , compliant with bidding requirements , and the submitting supplier had a financial score that was equal to or greater than the minimum threshold , the bid qualified to compete on price . but before comparing prices , palmetto gba also reviewed each qualified bid's capacity projections — the supplier's ability to provide the volume of items claimed in the bid in light of the supplier's historical capacity , expansion plans , and financial score . it adjusted some bids' capacity projections according to certain guidelines . winner selection . palmetto gba used several steps to identify the winning bids based on price . item prices submitted by competing suppliers were compared using a composite pricing methodology . a bid's composite price was calculated as each item's price multiplied by an item weight summed across all items in the product category . table 3 illustrates the calculation for three hypothetical bids' composite prices in a product category containing three items . each weight is based on the item's share of units billed to medicare in 2006 as a percentage of all of the units for the product category billed to medicare nationwide that same year . for each auction — a competition by qualified suppliers to deliver all items within a single product category in a single cba — palmetto gba ordered the bids by composite price from lowest to highest . starting with the bid with the lowest composite price , palmetto gba calculated the cumulative projected capacity of the competing bids . palmetto gba identified the bid where cumulative projected capacity met or exceeded cms's estimated beneficiary demand as the pivotal bid ( see table 4 ) . in table 4 , the pivotal bid was submitted by supplier 9 with a composite price of $7.64 , since cumulative supply ( 1,765 units ) reached cms's estimated demand ( 1,500 units ) at that bid . if projected beneficiary demand could not be met by qualified suppliers , a pivotal bid could not be established and the auction was considered nonviable . otherwise , bids with composite prices equal to or less than the pivotal bid were winners on the basis of price . setting medicare single payment amounts . bids that won on price were used to establish medicare's single payment amounts for each item in the auction . for each item , palmetto gba ordered these winning bids' price offers for each item from lowest to highest . the median price offered for that item would be medicare's payment for that auction item in that cba .