( see app . i for the selection criteria for grantee institutions and principal investigators ) . these transactions , which we corroborated by conducting a selected review of nih annual progress reports and recovery act recipient reports , could translate into additional sales and revenues for the vendors . according to the principal investigators , their transactions included biomedical equipment and supplies , office supplies , computer equipment , and software licenses . for example , one principal investigator reported purchasing highly specialized imaging equipment for $27,000 , as well as other medical , laboratory , and office supplies . purchasing specialized services . over a quarter of our 50 selected principal investigators reported that they used nih's recovery act funding to purchase certain laboratory testing services — such as genetic sequencing — from other research facilities that were better equipped to perform the testing and analyses . for example , one principal investigator reported contracting with a small local research company to perform specialized dna analysis needed to determine the causes of immune deficiency disorders . in addition , a couple of principal investigators reported that they used nih's recovery act funding to contract for consultations services , such as statistical analyses and the design of models needed for their research . some principal investigators also purchased ancillary services that they said were needed to support clinical trials , such as services providing patient transportation , recruitment , and care . scientific training for health care professionals . nine of our 50 selected principal investigators also reported in our data collection instrument that in the course of conducting their recovery act - funded research they were able to provide scientific training to health care professionals . some of these principal investigators cited the importance of exposing current and future physicians to research - based approaches for diagnosing and treating patients . for example , one principal investigator reported that while researching how to select treatments for cancer patients , new oncology researchers — fellows and junior faculty — were trained about the effects of human genetics on care delivery for cancer patients . according to this principal investigator , understanding the effects of genetics on cancer allows physicians to personalize the treatment options they offer to patients . the principal investigator also noted that the next generation of physicians needs to be knowledgeable about genomic approaches to cancer care , while developing the foundation for their research careers . according to another principal investigator , as part of research to determine why certain genes contribute to alzheimer's disease , health care professionals were trained to analyze complex genetic datasets and to develop software packages needed to efficiently perform the analysis . in responses to our data collection instrument , a majority of our 50 selected principal investigators who direct research at the grantee institutions reported on the preliminary results from their research projects supported with recovery act funds . according to the majority of our selected principal investigators these preliminary results could contribute to future scientific developments in preventive medicine , the early detection of diseases , and medical therapies . additionally , one principal investigator reported that some of the results of their research could lead to the development of research capabilities to be used by other researchers .