gao - 03-606t . to view the full testimony , click on the link above . for more information , contact jayetta z. hecker , ( 202 ) 512-2834 , heckerj@gao.gov . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i appreciate the opportunity to submit this statement for the record on the national flood insurance program and challenges to its success . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? floods have been , and continue to be , the most destructive natural hazard in terms of economic loss to the nation . the flood insurance program , which has been administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , has been a key component of the federal government's efforts to minimize the impact of floods and to provide flood - related disaster relief . for example , the program has been credited by the administration with saving a billion dollars annually by improving flood plain management and setting building standards — such as one to elevate properties — that have reduced potential losses . additionally , the approximately $12 billion paid in insurance claims from 1969 through 2002 to policyholders has been funded primarily by policyholders' premiums , thus saving the federal government from paying all damage - related expenses in the aftermath of floods . nevertheless , the flood insurance program faces challenges . in reports published within the last few years , fema's inspector general and we have identified a number of concerns with the program's financial viability and with the extent to which flood insurance policies have been purchased for structures in flood - prone areas . in addition , the administration noted in its fiscal year 2004 budget request that the program is only moderately effective ; it and the congress have proposed measures to improve the program's effectiveness . with the creation of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the inclusion of fema's functions within it , the program — along with its associated problems and improvement measures — has now become the responsibility of the new department . my statement today is based primarily on our past work and on preliminary results from ongoing work that we are conducting for the subcommittee examining flood zone remapping efforts . i will provide a perspective on ( 1 ) the program's presentation of financial information , ( 2 ) the major causes of losses in the program , ( 3 ) the extent of property owner participation in the program , and ( 4 ) recent actions taken or proposed to improve the program . in summary: the flood insurance program's use of cash - based budgeting may present misleading information on the program's financial condition . cash - based budgeting , which focuses on the amount of funds into and out of the program in a fiscal year , can obscure the program's costs because the time between the extension of insurance , the receipt of premiums , the occurrence of insured events , and payment of claims may extend over several fiscal years . further , this form of budgeting may not provide the information necessary to signal emerging problems , such as shortfalls in funds to cover the program's risk exposure .