( fig . 1 provides information on the percentage and reported number of rate filings that were disapproved , withdrawn , or resulted in lower rates than originally proposed by state in 2010. ) some of the state survey respondents reported that at least one rate filing was disapproved , withdrawn , or resulted in rates lower than originally proposed in 2010 even though they did not have explicit authority to approve rate filings in 2010 . for example , officials from the california department of insurance reported that even though the department did not have the authority to approve rate filings and could only disapprove rate filings if they were not compliant with certain state standards , such as compliance with a 70 percent lifetime anticipated loss ratio , the department negotiated with carriers to voluntarily reduce proposed rates in 2010 . survey respondents from california reported that 14 out of 225 rate filings in 2010 were disapproved , withdrawn , or resulted in rates lower than originally proposed . specifically , officials from the california department of insurance told us that they negotiated with carriers to reduce proposed rates by 2 percentage points to 25 percentage points in 2010 . these officials also told us that they negotiated with one carrier not to raise rates in 2010 although the carrier had originally proposed a 10-percent average increase in rates . in another example , although survey respondents from alabama reported that they did not have prior approval authority , they reported that 22 rate filings were disapproved , withdrawn , or resulted in rates lower than originally proposed in 2010 . in addition , four of these respondents reported taking steps to develop standardized procedures for reviewing rate filings . for example , respondents from illinois reported that their insurance department is developing protocols for the collection , analysis , and publication of rate filings .  changing information that carriers are required to submit in rate filings . thirteen survey respondents reported taking steps to change the rate filing information that carriers are required to submit to the state insurance department in order to improve reviews of rate filings . obtain additional legislative authority . more than a third of state survey respondents that reported making changes to rate oversight reported that their states have taken steps — such as introducing or passing legislation — in order to obtain additional legislative authority for overseeing health insurance premium rates . for example , respondents from montana reported that legislation has been introduced that would give the state the authority to require carriers to submit rate filings for review . in another example , illinois officials told us that the state has authority to require some carriers to submit rate filings , but the state does not have the authority to approve these filings before the rates take effect . as our report notes , in addition to grants awarded in 2010 , hhs announced in february 2011 that nearly $200 million in additional grant funds were available to help states establish an effective rate review program .