( recommendation 30 ) . most of the agencies in our review had established coding procedures . specifically , of the 24 cfo act agencies , 23 had established procedures . fourteen of these 23 agencies established their procedures by april 2017 as opm required , while the remaining 9 agencies established their procedures by march 2018 . officials from the 9 agencies that did not complete their procedures by april 2017 gave several reasons for their late development or completion of the procedures . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . related specialty areas are grouped together into categories . in version 1.0 of the national framework , each specialty area was also associated with a distinct set of cybersecurity related tasks and knowledges , skills , and abilities . in november 2016 , nist issued draft special publication 800-181 which revised and replaced earlier versions of the national framework . the draft was co - authored by nist , dod , and dhs and was renamed the nice cybersecurity workforce framework ( nice framework ) . in august 2017 , nist published the final version of the special publication . the nice framework is intended to help the federal government better identify cybersecurity workforce needs by enabling agencies to examine specific cybersecurity work roles , and identify personnel skills gaps , rather than merely examine the number of vacancies by job series . the nice framework added 2 additional specialty areas within the 7 categories . figure 1 identifies the 7 categories and the 33 specialty areas in the nice framework . the nice framework also introduced the concept of work roles as the third component of cybersecurity job functions . work roles provide a more detailed description of the roles and responsibilities of cybersecurity job functions than do the category and specialty area components of the nice framework . the nice framework defines one or more work roles within each specialty area . for example , as depicted in figure 2 , the nice framework defined 11 work roles within the 7 specialty areas in the “securely provision” category . in october 2012 , in coordination with a nice interagency working group , opm published a cybersecurity employment coding structure that aligned with the initial draft version of the national cybersecurity workforce framework . the coding structure assigned a unique 2-digit cybersecurity employment code to each category and specialty area in the nice framework . according to opm , the coding of federal positions with cybersecurity functions was intended to enhance agencies' ability to identify critical cybersecurity workforce needs , recruit and hire employees with needed skills , and provide appropriate training and development opportunities to cybersecurity employees . in july 2013 , opm initiated the special cybersecurity workforce project to support federal efforts to reduce the cybersecurity workforce skills gaps across agencies .