eds . in july 2011 , we found that tsa had established a schedule for the acquisition of eds machines but it did not fully comply with leading practices , and tsa had not developed a plan to upgrade its eds fleet to meet the current explosives detection requirements . these leading practices state that the success of a large - scale system acquisition , such as tsa's eds acquisition , depends in part on having a reliable schedule that identifies when the program's set of work activities and milestone events will occur , amongst other things . however , we reported that the schedule for the eds acquisition is not reliable because it does not reflect all planned program activities and does not include a timeline to deploy edss or plans to procure edss to meet subsequent phases of explosive detection requirements . on the basis of our findings , we concluded that developing a reliable schedule would help tsa better monitor and oversee the progress of the eds acquisition . dhs concurred with our recommendation to develop and maintain a schedule for the entire electronic baggage screening program in accordance with the leading practices we identified for preparing a schedule . in july 2011 , dhs commented that tsa had already begun working with key stakeholders to develop and define requirements for a schedule and to ensure that the schedule aligns with the best practices we outlined . tsa reported in march 2013 that it plans to have an updated integrated master schedule by september 2013 . gao , checked baggage screening: tsa has deployed optimal systems at the majority of tsa - regulated airports , but could strengthen cost estimates , gao - 12-266 ( washington d.c.: apr . can be used to support dhs funding and budget decisions . in april 2013 , tsa reported it plans to have an updated integrated master schedule and revised life cycle cost estimate by september 2013 , which , when completed , will allow it to update its cost estimate for the electronic baggage screening program . in part because of the challenges we have highlighted in dhs's acquisition process , strengthening dhs's management functions remains on our high - risk list . however , dhs has efforts under way to strengthen its oversight of component acquisition processes . we found in september 2012 that while dhs has initiated efforts to address the department's acquisition management challenges , most of the department's major acquisition programs continue to cost more than expected , take longer to deploy than planned , or deliver less capability than promised . we identified 42 programs that experienced cost growth , schedule slips , or both , with 16 of the programs' costs increasing from a total of $19.7 billion in 2008 to $52.2 billion in 2011 — an aggregate increase of 166 percent . moreover , we reported that dhs leadership has authorized and continued to invest in major acquisition programs even though the vast majority of those programs lack foundational documents demonstrating the knowledge needed to help manage risks and measure performance . for example , we found that dhs leadership — through the investment review board or its predecessor body , the arb — has formally reviewed 49 of the 71 major programs .