we have incorporated these comments in the report as appropriate . of particular concern is dependency on a vendor . all 24 agencies specifically noted concern about the possibility of loss of data if a cloud computing provider terminated its services . for example , the provider and the customer may not have agreed on terms to transfer or duplicate the data . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or at wilshuseng@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . the objectives of our review were to ( 1 ) identify the models of cloud computing ; ( 2 ) identify the information security implications of using cloud computing services in the federal government ; and ( 3 ) assess federal guidance and efforts to address information security when using cloud computing . to identify cloud computing models , we reviewed publications , white papers , and other documentation from public and private sector organizations . we then obtained relevant information through interviews with officials from the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) and private sector organizations that offer cloud computing services . we compared cloud computing descriptions and definitions of cloud computing from these sources to identify similarities and differences . to identify the information security implications of using cloud computing services in the federal government , we reviewed documentation from the public and private sectors . our documentation review focused on identifying the positive and negative information security implications ( risks and benefits ) of cloud computing . we supplemented this review by interviewing representatives of public and private sector organizations to prioritize these implications and identify information security challenges associated with federal agencies working with cloud computing service providers . we interviewed representatives of several of the 24 major federal agencies and private sector organizations that provide cloud computing services . in addition , we issued a survey and data request to the 24 federal agencies . we pretested the survey at three agencies to ensure that the questions were relevant and easy to comprehend . for each agency surveyed , we identified the appropriate point of contact , notified each one of our work , and distributed the survey along with a data request to each via e - mail in november 2009 . all 24 agencies responded to our survey and data request from december 2009 to february 2010 ; results are reported as of this date . we contacted agency officials when necessary for additional information or clarification of agency responses . we did not verify the accuracy of the agencies' responses ; however , we reviewed supporting documentation that agencies provided to corroborate information provided in their responses .