resource constraints . faa officials and two of the subcommittee members stated that resources , specifically funding for the programs and staff time to work on the projects , pose a challenge in addressing this recommendation . subcommittee members raised concerns about budget uncertainty affecting the agencies' abilities to support long - term efforts in this area . scalable , affordable , and sustainable fuel supply . faa officials and two subcommittee members also pointed out the challenges related to scalability — that is , being able to produce sufficient quantities of alternative aviation fuel at a reasonable price . faa officials noted that building a sustainable supply chain would be a challenge . however , officials said that the production activities by usda , doe , and dod could help establish the market , and the programs at doe , epa , and usda should help lower costs and make commercialization possible . faa officials added that more time , continued funding , and political support will help them achieve their goals . uncertainties inherent in new fuels technologies . according to faa officials , part of the underlying challenge of developing a sustainable supply chain is the limited financial investment by private industry due , in part , to risk associated with uncertainties . such uncertainties include the ability of alternative fuels to compete with petroleum and the effects of possible future regulatory changes , such as the sustainability of tax credits , grants , or loan guarantees that support the development and commercialization of alternative jet fuel , factors which are not under faa's authority . collaboration with many stakeholders . three subcommittee members identified challenges related to the need to collaborate with many stakeholders on this recommendation . for example , a subcommittee member also noted the need to collaborate with non - aviation stakeholders , such as agriculture - financing representatives , while two other members highlighted that work on this recommendation is a multi - agency process . we recently began work in this area examining the progress made in developing alternative jet fuels in the united states , as well as the key challenges that exist and federal efforts that should be taken to address those challenges . we plan to report the results of our work in 2014 . biofuels: potential effects and challenges of required increases in production and use . gao - 09-446 . washington , d.c.: august 25 , 2009 . aviation and climate change: aircraft emissions expected to grow , but technological and operational improvements and government policies can help control emissions . gao - 09-554 . washington , d.c.: june 8 , 2009 . aviation and the environment: nextgen and research and development are keys to reducing emissions and their impact on health and climate . gao - 08-706t . washington , d.c.: may 6 , 2008 . as previously noted , commercial aviation's contribution to greenhouse gas emissions is reported to be relatively small , but is forecasted to grow , with carbon dioxide ( co the 1997 kyoto protocol , an international agreement to minimize the adverse effects of climate change , stated that greenhouse gases from aviation fuels should be limited or reduced , and that such efforts should be conducted through icao .