contractor challenges . operators and stakeholders also said contractors' training and qualifications are not always transferrable , though perspectives on the severity of the challenge and approaches to address it varied . three operators and one union stated that an evaluation is not always portable to different companies , which one union said can be a barrier for contractors to obtaining work . for example , one operator said it requires contractors to undergo training and evaluations from specific , third - party providers to demonstrate they are qualified to perform 31 specific covered tasks related to corrosion prevention in their operator qualification plan and noted that the operator does not accept contractors with qualifications from other providers . furthermore , three operators we interviewed noted that even if contractors have been previously evaluated by the operator , they may need to be retested for each covered task by the same operator or by a third - party accepted by the operator . the two unions representing contractors we spoke with had different perspectives on the portability of evaluations and related training . one union representing contractors said lack of portability was a challenge for its members , who may have to take duplicative training and might lose income while completing an evaluation before starting a job . another union representing contractors said that while each operator usually prefers its own internal training methods , portability was not a significant issue for its members . operators and other stakeholders we spoke with identified mechanisms under way to address these challenges . six pipeline operators told us they currently rely on third - party companies to facilitate the verification and portability of qualifications in the pipeline industry . for example , one training vendor stated that it maintains an operator qualification program for over 140 pipeline operators across the country . this vendor said it customizes covered tasks' lists based on each client's needs , though some tasks are common , such as those related to coating and cathodic protection . the vendor said operators may hire it to conduct on - site evaluations to qualify personnel and train operator staff to conduct evaluations . stakeholders and operators also identified broader solutions to overcome these challenges across multiple operators . for example , one industry organization representing hazardous liquid pipeline operators said there is currently an industry initiative examining challenges related to the portability of training . in addition to the above challenges operators and stakeholders cited , phmsa has taken steps to update its regulations related to corrosion prevention training . in july 2015 , phmsa proposed changes to its regulations through the rulemaking process to provide additional direction on pipeline training and operator qualification . more specifically , phmsa proposed to clarify topics unaddressed in the initial version of these regulations published in 1999 . first , as noted above , phmsa's regulations identify training as one option to ensure personnel qualification , but operators have discretion to determine the extent of training to provide .