ii. ) for the remaining eight bureaus and offices , oae provided mandatory fisma audits , recovery act audits , and one evaluation , but no performance audit coverage of the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of their specific programs during the 3-year period we reviewed and for extended periods prior to our review . ( see table 5. ) oae provided audits of department - wide activities mandated by specific statutes . specifically , the cfo act requires entities , such as commerce , to have annual financial statements that are audited . these audits provide ( 1 ) an opinion on whether the financial information is fairly presented and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles , ( 2 ) a report on internal control over financial reporting and ( 3 ) a report on compliance with provisions of applicable laws and regulations , contracts , and grant agreements . fisma audits report on the controls over information security throughout the department . also , oae audits funds the department receives through the recovery act because of a higher risk for waste , fraud , and abuse related to these funds . although these audits address certain internal controls and broad department - wide operations , without audits of the programs specific to each bureau and office , their economy , efficiency , and effectiveness are not fully addressed by the oig . the commerce oig has addressed the effectiveness of relatively large programs through performance audits and evaluations . for the 3-year period we reviewed , the commerce oig completed a total of 18 performance audits and 17 evaluations that addressed the programs specific to the department's four bureaus and offices that have relatively large budgets , and department - wide activities managed by the office of the secretary . however , the eight bureaus and offices with relatively smaller budgets received no performance audits to address the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of their specific programs during the 3-year period . while these eight bureaus and offices are small relative to the department's largest bureaus and offices , they represented approximately $2.4 billion or about 11 percent of the department's total budgetary resources for fiscal year 2013 and are included in the oig's listing of the major programs that are to receive oversight . in addition , they make important contributions to maintaining a strong national economy by providing businesses and other organizations with reliable information , helping the united states compete in international trade , and assisting u.s. businesses . for example , the national technical information service , with fiscal year 2013 total budgetary resources of about $85 million , has program responsibilities for collecting and preserving scientific , technical , engineering , and other business - related information from federal and international sources and for disseminating this information to the u.s. business and industrial research communities . also , the minority business development administration , with total budgetary resources in fiscal year 2013 of about $28 million , is responsible for promoting the growth of minority business enterprises and their participation in the global economy through a range of activities .