incorrect contacts were not offered the survey . examples of individuals who were not offered the survey would include individuals who refused to provide personal information to the pcas and individuals who provided personal information but were not authenticated as part of the 37,030 irs referrals . the overall satisfaction rating reported by the consulting company , and quoted by irs , represents the answer to 1 question on a 20-question automated survey . the question was “everything considered , whether you agree or disagree with the final outcome , rate your overall satisfaction with the service you received during this call.” respondents were allowed to rate their satisfaction on a scale of one to five — with one being “very dissatisfied” and five being “very satisfied.” of the survey questions , 15 related to customer satisfaction ; the other questions were to gather more information about the respondents themselves . those respondents who completed the entire survey had their results counted by the consulting company . satisfaction ratings for other survey questions ranged from 81 percent ( ease of understanding letters received from pcas ) to 98 percent ( courtesy of pca representatives ) . officials at irs and the consulting company confirmed that some right party contacts were offered ( and may have taken ) the survey more than once because they had multiple discussions with a pca representative . thus , some of the 1,011 right party contacts who completed the survey may represent duplicate respondents . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . the consulting company that administered the survey provided us with records indicating that of those offered the survey , 1,572 right party contacts agreed to be transferred to the automated survey system from november 27 , 2006 , through february 28 , 2007 . of these , records further indicate that 1,011 individuals completed the survey . a consulting company representative told us that the company was not aware , until several months after the survey was first offered , that the pcas had used differing methodologies for offering the survey and that not all right party contacts were offered it . table 2 provides summary information on the data we gathered from irs , the pcas , and the consulting company . we also made several related observations during the course of our work: pcas were given some information about taxpayers with delinquent debt , including the taxpayers' name , social security numbers , and last known addresses per irs records . according to irs , it did not provide pcas with telephone numbers for the taxpayers as a matter of policy . as a result , in attempting to contact taxpayers by telephone , pca representatives tried to determine the taxpayers' phone numbers through electronic searches , for example , through the lexis - nexis database . pcas told us that they made a total of 252,173 outbound connected telephone calls from september 2006 through february 2007 in an attempt to resolve the 37,030 cases referred by irs . we did not attempt to compare the pca program with other forms of debt collection or evaluate the performance of the program itself .