recx . in 2012 , s&t partnered with industry to develop a prototype transformer that could significantly reduce the time to transport , install , and energize a transformer to aid recovery from power outages associated with transformer failures from several months to less than one week . s&t , along with industry partners , demonstrated the recx prototype for 2.5 years , ending in september 2014 . dhs reported that recx proved to be successful in an operational environment and has the capacity to reduce the impact of power outages . cyber emergency response team . cs&c operates the industrial control systems - cyber emergency response team to assist critical infrastructure owners in the 16 sectors , including the energy sector , to improve overall cybersecurity posture of their control systems.industrial control systems are among the types of critical electrical infrastructure that could be impacted in the event of an emp attack . dhs has taken actions to support the development of two key strategies and plans that could help to address electromagnetic threats . these include areas: 1 ) power outage incident annex , and 2 ) the national space weather strategy . power outage incident annex . in 2014 , fema began developing a power outage incident annex ( incident annex ) to provide incident - specific information , which supplements the national response framework . according to fema officials , the incident annex will describe the process and organizational constructs that the federal government will utilize to respond to and recover from loss of power resulting from deliberate acts of terrorism or natural disasters . among other tasks , the incident annex is designed to identify key federal government capabilities and resources , prioritize core capabilities , and outline response and recovery resource requirements . fema officials reported that the incident annex is scheduled to be completed by october 2015 . national space weather strategy . in collaboration with the white house office of science and technology policy and noaa , dhs has been working since 2014 to help develop a national space weather strategy . as a co - chair of the space weather operations , research and mitigation task force , dhs is in the process of developing a strategy to achieve several goals , including efforts to establish benchmarks for space weather events , improve protection and mitigation efforts , and improve assessment , modeling , and prediction of impacts on critical infrastructure , among other goals . according to officials at s&t , a draft of the national space weather strategy is currently being updated to incorporate stakeholder comments and is scheduled to be completed in september 2015 . dhs has also conducted two training exercises that could help address the potential impact of power outages caused by electromagnetic events , gridex ii and eagle horizon . gridex ii . in november 2013 , dhs , along with the federal bureau of investigation , doe , and other relevant government agencies , participated in an industry - wide exercise assessing the readiness of the electricity industry to respond to a physical or cyber attack on the bulk power system .