decisions . in the absence of guidance from dod that establishes a consistent set of requirements , we found that the air force , army , and the corps have begun to independently develop their own approaches for sequencing , and the navy has not yet determined whether it needs to develop such an approach . specifically , we found the following: the air force has developed detailed , written guidance for incorporating factors other than risk into its site sequencing decisions . the guidance requires the use of a numerical scoring process that incorporates prioritization protocol scores , as well as legal , scheduling , and mission factors , to sequence its sites for cleanup . according to air force officials , the air force is applying this approach to a single pool of both irp and mmrp sites , which they believe allows them to fund cleanups of the highest - priority sites first across both programs . in addition , a senior air force official told us that using the standardized process ensures fairness and transparency in site sequencing . according to a senior army official , the army is currently developing a sequencing policy that it hopes to release by may 2010 , which will apply to sites managed by both the army and the corps . the policy will likely require program managers to document the reasons for their sequencing decisions to facilitate transparency and allow for more effective army oversight . however , the official said that the army does not plan to require a particular approach to sequencing and believes a quantitative approach similar to the air force's approach could be too restrictive and not allow adequate flexibility for decision making . according to a senior navy official , it is too early to determine whether the navy needs to issue additional guidance beyond the framework that establishes the prioritization protocol and sequencing considerations currently provided in the dod regulations . according to the official , although the navy has initially prioritized many sites based on preliminary assessment data , it does not expect to begin fully sequencing sites until 2011 , when it completes site inspections and applies the data gathered to generate relative priority scores . the navy will wait to see if it encounters any difficulties before deciding on whether to develop additional guidance . according to a senior dod official , the department plans to give the military services and the corps the flexibility to make sequencing decisions as they see fit . this official said that the military services and the corps have experience making sequencing decisions for the irp , and dod has not encountered any problems with these decisions . as a result , the official said dod sees no need to provide guidance on how factors other than risk should be considered when making decisions about which sites to sequence first for cleanup . however , in the absence of such guidance , the military services and the corps may not consistently ( 1 ) consider the same range of factors in making their decisions or ( 2 ) give the same relative significance to risk and other factors in making their cleanup sequencing decisions .