we disagree . both the food and drug administration and the internal revenue service , whose ombudsmen report to their respective commissioners , have adopted measures to help ensure that the ombudsmen are isolated from agency decision - making processes likely to be the subject of investigations . consistent with the aba standards , these ombudsmen have both “sufficient stature in the organization to be taken seriously by senior officials” and “placement in an organization at the highest possible level and at least above the heads of units likely to generate the most complaints.” regarding budgetary independence , our report acknowledges that ombudsmen at other federal agencies must live within a budget and are subject to the same spending constraints as other offices within their agencies . in contrast to epa's national ombudsman , however , the other federal ombudsmen have a specifically allocated budget , can set their own priorities , and can decide how their funds will be spent . finally , epa commented that its community involvement and outreach center provides “an avenue for active community involvement and participation in superfund issues” and is specifically charged with responding to community concerns . however , we believe that the center serves a different purpose than an ombudsman . while the center may help alleviate community concerns , its focus is limited to superfund issues and providing greater community access and participation , not fulfilling an ombudsman role , particularly with respect to the independent investigation and resolution of individual complaints . to determine how epa is implementing its reorganization of the ombudsman function , we met with key officials from epa's office of inspector general and office of solid waste and emergency response . we also reviewed relevant testimony by epa and oig officials and other pertinent documents , such as the oig's new case selection criteria for the ombudsman and epa's response to congressional inquiries about the reorganization . to identify issues raised by the reorganization , we followed up on preliminary observations provided in our testimony of june 2002 and july 2002 . as part of this effort , we used information developed for our july 2001 report , including information on relevant professional standards for ombudsmen , such as those published by aba , the ombudsman association , and the u.s. ombudsman association . we also reviewed legislation applicable to inspector general offices and other relevant gao reports . we conducted our review from june 2002 through september 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the administrator , epa , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this assignment were ellen crocker , les mahagan , richard johnson , and cynthia norris .