( app . ii depicts sec's flowchart summary of the rule ) . of the 1,321 companies that filed conflict minerals disclosures in 2014 , the sample of filings that we reviewed indicates that almost all of the companies conducted an rcoi and a majority of them exercised due diligence , but most reported that they were unable to determine the country of origin of conflict minerals they had used in 2013 . company representatives we interviewed cited difficulties in obtaining information from suppliers . according to our analysis , an estimated 67 percent reported that they were unable to determine the 4 percent reported that conflict minerals came from covered 24 percent reported that conflict minerals did not originate in 2 percent reported that conflict minerals came from scrap or 3 percent did not provide a clear determination . according to our estimate , just about all of the companies that filed conflict minerals disclosures reported that they conducted an rcoi , with 96 percent of them reporting that they conducted a survey of their suppliers to try to obtain information about whether they used conflict minerals , the country of origin of those conflict minerals , and the processor of the conflict minerals . based on some of the filings that we reviewed and interviews with company representatives , in general , companies used a supplier survey and industry template to conduct their rcois . a challenge noted by representatives of some companies we spoke with was that they received incomplete information from suppliers , limiting their ability to determine the source and chain of custody of the conflict minerals they used in 2013 . we should note that in a july 2013 report , we found that a company's supply chain can involve multiple tiers of suppliers . as a result , a request for information from a company could go through many suppliers , as figure 1 illustrates , delaying the communication of information to the company . for example , as we noted in our 2013 report , companies required to report under the rule could submit the inquiries to their first - tier suppliers . those suppliers could either provide the reporting company with sufficient information or initiate the inquiry process up the supply chain , such as by distributing the inquiries to suppliers at the next tier — tier 2 suppliers . the tier 2 suppliers could inquire up the supply chain to additional suppliers , until the inquiries arrived at the smelter . smelters could then provide the suppliers with information about the origin of the conflict minerals . representatives of some companies that we spoke with told us that they were making efforts to address concerns about the lack of information on the country of origin of conflict minerals they had used . our analysis shows that the exercise of due diligence on the source and chain of custody of conflict minerals yielded little or no additional information , beyond the rcoi , regarding the country of origin of conflict minerals or whether the conflict minerals that companies used in 2013 in their products benefited or financed armed groups in the covered countries .