how did they develop these ways ? have participating agencies agreed on common terminology and definitions ? has a lead agency or individual been identified ? how will the collaborative mechanism be staffed ? are there incentives available to encourage staff or agencies to have participating agencies developed online tools or other resources participate ? if relevant , do agencies have compatible technological systems ? stbic was established in 2012 . stbic is a facility designed to intensify and integrate intelligence gathering and sharing activity among law enforcement agencies across south texas . actt was established in 2009 . actt was established to counter the threats posed by transnational criminal organizations operating in the arizona corridor . specifically , actt leverages the capabilities and resources of more than 60 federal , state , local and tribal agencies in arizona and the government of mexico to combat individuals and criminal organizations that pose a threat to communities on both sides of the border . ioc was established in 2006 . mechanism purpose / description mandated by the security and accountability for every port act of 2006 ( safe port act ) , iocs were established to improve multiagency maritime security operations and enhance cooperation among partner agencies at 35 u.s. ports . specifically , iocs transformed the coast guard sector command centers by upgrading their information management tools . iocs also help port agencies to collaborate on first response , law enforcement , and homeland security operations . mechanism purpose / description sewg is an interagency forum that ensures comprehensive , coordinated interagency awareness of , and federal support to , special events . locations washington , d.c. sewg was established in 2004 . we were asked to continue our work on dhs's efforts to improve collaboration and integrate its field operations . this report ( 1 ) assesses the extent to which dhs has identified the collaborative field mechanisms — that is , multiagency groups such as task forces , committees , and teams that enhance stakeholder collaboration across the participating agencies in order to more effectively and efficiently achieve their mission — of its key operational components , and ( 2 ) describes factors that participants of selected mechanisms identified that enhance or are challenges to their collaboration , and assesses the extent to which dhs has collected and disseminated successful collaborative practices . to address the first objective , we contacted dhs officials to identify a list of collaborative mechanisms that they deemed to be successful examples of field component collaboration while we also independently identified such mechanisms . upon receiving dhs's list of mechanisms , we combined this list with our own and sought input from dhs and the seven key operational component agencies to create a master list of agreed - upon collaborative field mechanisms . our final list included 13 collaborative mechanisms that dhs and operational component officials agreed were models of collaboration among component agencies in the field . the 13 collaborative mechanisms we identified are used by federal agencies to implement interagency collaborative efforts , such as agencies colocating within one facility or establishing interagency task forces .