under executive order no . 11935 , only u.s. citizens and nationals may be appointed into competitive service positions . in 2005 , 72 percent of executive branch employees were in the competitive service . in rare cases , noncitizens may be appointed when necessary to promote the efficiency of the service , such as if an agency is unable to find a qualified citizen to fill a position ( 5 c.f.r . §7.3 ( c ) and §338.101 ) . iv. ) our review was based on descriptive data and did not take into account citizenship , education , or other factors that can affect an individual's placement in the federal government . eeoc also instructs agencies to analyze workforce data by grade level , applicants , new hires , separations , promotions , career development programs , and awards to identify where there may be barriers to participation . below is an example from eeoc's md - 715 instructions of such an analysis to determine the existence of limits or barriers to participation . with respect to grade level , our review of data on hispanic representation in the federal workforce showed that hispanics are more highly represented in the lower grade levels than in higher grade levels ( see app . iv ) . when numerical measures indicate low representation rates , eeoc instructs that agencies conduct further inquiry to identify and examine the factors that contributed to the situation revealed by the data . in the fourth step , we used a multivariate logistic regression model that estimated the difference in the likelihood of hispanic and non - hispanic citizens being employed in the federal workforce versus the nonfederal workforce after controlling for all other factors simultaneously . among citizens , we controlled simultaneously for gender , education , veteran's status , race , english proficiency , age , disability status , school attendance ( enrolled or not enrolled ) , employment status ( full - or part - time ) , and geography ( state where employed ) . in our analyses , we express differences in the likelihoods of being in the federal workforce rather than the nonfederal workforce using odds ratios . an odds ratio is generally defined as the ratio of the odds of an event occurring in one group compared to the odds of it occurring in another group — the reference or comparision group . in our analyses , the event of interest to us was employment in the federal workforce versus employment in the nonfederal workforce . we computed odds ratios to indicate the difference between hispanics and non - hispanics in the likelihood of being employed in the federal workforce ( 1 ) before controlling for any of the other factors , ( 2 ) after controlling for all of the factors one at a time , and ( 3 ) controlling for all factors simultaneously . in our analyses , an odds ratio of 1.0 would indicate that hispanics and non - hispanics were equally likely to be employed in the federal workforce as in the nonfederal workforce , or that the ratio of hispanics to non - hispanics was the same in the two workforces .