some of these issues are listed below . in all of these cases , the key consideration is whether the performance evaluated can reasonably be considered predictive of the offeror's performance under the contract being considered for award . who: one issue is whose performance agencies should consider . source selection officials are permitted to rate the past performance of the prime contractor that submits the offer , the key personnel the prime contractor plans to employ , the major teaming partners or subcontractors , or a combination of any or all of these . for example , in one case , gao found that the agency could consider the past performance of a predecessor company because the offeror had assumed all of the predecessor's accounts and key personnel , technical staff , and other employees . in another case , gao held that an agency could provide in a solicitation for the evaluation of the past performance of a corporation rather than its key personnel . what: also at issue is what information agencies are required or permitted to consider in conducting evaluations of past performance . the issue is one of relevancy . agencies must determine which of the contractor's past contracts are similar to the current contract in terms of size , scope , complexity , or contract type . for example , is past performance building single family homes relevant to a proposal to build a hospital ? agencies do not have to consider all available past performance information . below are some examples that illustrate the types of guidance available . in one case , gao found that an agency reasonably determined that the protester's past performance on small projects was not relevant to a contract to build a berthing wharf for an aircraft carrier . when: agencies also have to determine the period of time for which they will evaluate the past performance of contractors . agencies are required to maintain performance data for 3 years after the conclusion of a contract although agencies have discretion as to the actual length of time they consider in their evaluation of past performance and could , for example , choose a period longer than 3 years . in one case , gao held that although the solicitation required the company to list contracts within a 3-year time frame , the agency could consider contract performance beyond this timeframe because the solicitation provided that the government may “consider information concerning the offeror's past performance that was not contained in the proposal.” where: once agencies determine who they will evaluate , what information they will consider , and the relevant time frame , they still may have difficulties obtaining past performance information . dod offers instruction on using past performance in source selection and contractor responsibility determinations through the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement and related procedures , guidance , and information . dod's office of defense procurement and acquisition policy also has made available a guide that provides more detailed standards for the collection and use of past performance information , including criteria applicable to various types of contracts .