postal service . in july 2004 , the 9 / 11 commission reported that having too many different biometric standards , travel facilitation systems , credentialing systems , and screening requirements hampers the development of information crucial for stopping terrorists from entering the country , is expensive , and is inefficient . the commission recommended that a coordinating body raise standards , facilitate information - sharing , and survey systems for potential problems . in august 2004 , homeland security directive 11 announced a new u.s. policy to “implement a coordinated and comprehensive approach to terrorist - related screening — in immigration , law enforcement , intelligence , counterintelligence , and protection of the border , transportation systems , and critical infrastructure — that supports homeland security , at home and abroad.” dhs has taken steps , both at the department level and within its various agencies , to consolidate , coordinate , and harmonize such background check programs . at the department level , dhs created sco in july 2006 to coordinate dhs background check programs . sco is in the early stages of developing its plans for this coordination . in december 2006 , sco issued a report identifying common problems , challenges , and needed improvements in the credentialing programs and processes across the department . the office awarded a contract in april 2007 that will provide the methodology and support for developing an implementation plan to include common design and comparability standards and related milestones to coordinate dhs screening and credentialing programs . dhs components are currently in the initial stages of a number of their own initiatives . for example , in january 2007 , tsa determined that the background checks required for three other dhs programs satisfied the background check requirement for the twic program . an applicant who has already undergone a background check in association with any of these three programs does not have to undergo an additional background check and pays a reduced fee to obtain a twic card . similarly , the coast guard plans to consolidate four credentials and require that all pertinent information previously submitted by an applicant at a coast guard regional examination center be submitted to tsa through the twic enrollment process . the safe port act required us to conduct a study of dhs background check programs similar to the one required of truck drivers to obtain a hazardous material endorsement . our work on other projects indicates that dhs is likely to face additional challenges in coordinating its background check programs . these challenges include: ensuring its plans are sufficiently complete without being overly restrictive . the varied background check programs related to transportation workers may have substantially different standards or requirements . sco will be challenged to coordinate dhs's background check programs in such a way that any common set of standards developed to eliminate redundant checks meets the varied needs of all the programs without being so strict that it unduly limits the applicant pool or so intrusive that potential applicants are unwilling to take part . ensuring that accurate performance information is available .