( see fig . once the salary schedules are complete , wage and salary division personnel meet with representatives from the fea and agency officials to discuss the results of the survey . once all parties agree on the results , the new salary schedule is issued . the courts have interpreted the pay and personnel practices act as requiring that dod overseas teachers be paid the same salary that the u.s. teachers in dod's comparison group receive for the same year . because the salary schedule is typically issued near the end of the school year , overseas teachers receive their pay increases retroactively . to what extent do dod overseas schools experience difficulties recruiting and retaining well - qualified teachers ? what is the process for determining teacher salaries and paying teachers , and which aspects of the process , if any , could be improved ? to answer these questions , we reviewed laws , regulations , and policies on salary , benefits , and allowances for dod overseas teachers , as well as for other federal civilian employees overseas . we also examined dod promotional materials , planning documents , and information provided to dod overseas teachers . we conducted a literature review on teacher quality , compensation , and demographics in the united states . we analyzed salary data on u.s. teachers and dod overseas teachers , as well as demographic data on dod overseas teachers . finally , we interviewed officials in several dod offices and representatives of teachers' unions . we performed our work between january and november 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for additional information on our scope and methodology , please see appendix i . the department of defense education activity ( dodea ) oversees all dod schools in the united states and abroad . the department of defense dependents school system ( dodds ) is the entity within dodea that manages dod's overseas schools . in school year 2001-02 , dodds operated 155 schools in 14 countries ( see figs . 1 and 2 ) and employed roughly 6,200 educators , including both traditional classroom teachers and instructional staff , such as school psychologists , nurses , and counselors . classroom teachers comprise over 90 percent of all dod overseas educators . they are represented by two different teachers' unions: the federal education association ( fea ) and the overseas federation of teachers ( oft ) . although classroom teachers and instructional staff are paid on different salary schedules , both groups are subject to the same salary determination and payment process . legal requirements and union arbitration agreements form the basis for the dod overseas teachers' salary determination process . prior to 1959 , teachers in dod overseas schools were paid according to the general schedule , the standard pay schedule for many federal government employees . these salaries did not reflect teachers' academic backgrounds or qualifications . as a result , dod overseas teachers' salaries were significantly lower than those paid to public school teachers in the united states . congress attempted to remedy these inequities in 1959 by passing the defense department overseas teachers pay and personnel practices act ( pay and personnel practices act ) .