verification closure notices . nasa has made progress verifying that the contractors have met iss and commercial crew program requirements , but much work remains . when a contractor is ready for nasa to verify that it has met a requirement , such as that the contractor's system can detect and alert the crew to critical faults that could result in a catastrophic event , the contractor submits data for nasa to review through a verification closure notice . table 3 shows the agency's progress approving verification closure notices for each contractor . program officials told us that , because the contract solicitation did not require an uncrewed test flight , they had not previously determined the minimum number of commercial crew program requirements that the contractors should meet prior to an uncrewed test flight . subsequently , both contractors included an uncrewed test flight as part of their schedules . as these test flights approached , nasa determined that it must verify that the contractors met approximately 20 percent of the program's requirements before the contractors' uncrewed test flight and the remaining 80 percent before the contractors' crewed test flights . the program made this determination based on ensuring the contractors met requirements related to the spacecraft safely approaching and docking to the iss ; ensuring the safety of the iss and its crew ; and meeting any mission - specific requirements for cargo . both contractors originally planned for the program to verify they had met more than 20 percent of the commercial crew program requirements before the uncrewed test flight but have subsequently changed their plans . for both contractors , the program is allowing the contractors to submit more verification closure notices between the uncrewed and crewed test flight than initially envisioned . program officials told us that contractors proposed deferring the submission of verification closure notices because they were having difficulties meeting the original targets . figure 4 includes spacex and boeing's original and current plans for verification of requirements compared to the commercial crew program's minimum level of requirements it determined was necessary for the uncrewed test flight . as reflected in the figure , these new plans , which defer submission of work to the crewed test flight , may compound the program's bow wave of work and create uncertainty about the timing of certification . further , the commercial crew program will need to reassess a subset of requirements closed for the uncrewed test flight prior to the crewed test flight . for example , of the 78 requirements boeing plans to close prior to the uncrewed test flight , the program will re - assess 16 ; for spacex's 49 requirements , the program will re - assess 32 . program officials told us that some of this work is expected based on known changes to the contractors' systems between the uncrewed and crewed test flight . for example , officials told us that they approved a verification closure notice for spacex's air conditioning system in order to support the uncrewed test flight , but they know that they will need to re - assess it because spacex is making changes before its crewed test flight .