most reservists have civilian jobs . the 2000 survey shows that 75 percent of drilling unit members worked full - time in a civilian job . of those with civilian jobs , 30 percent of reservists worked for government at the federal , state , or local level ; 63 percent worked for a private sector firm ; and 7 percent were self - employed or worked without pay in their family business or farm . the 2000 survey shows that one of the most serious problems reported by reservists in previous mobilizations and deployments was hostility from their supervisor . it should be noted , however , that many employers changed company policies or added benefits for deployed reservists after september 11 , 2001 . in a small nonprojectable sample of employers , we found that more than half provided health care benefits and over 40 percent provided pay benefits that are not required by the uniformed services employment and reemployment rights act of 1994 . maintaining employers' continued support for their reservist employees will be critical if dod is to retain experienced reservists in these times of longer and more frequent deployments . dod has activities aimed at maintaining and enhancing employers' support for reservists . the national committee for employer support of the guard and reserve serves as dod's focal point in managing the department's relations with reservists and their civilian employers . two specific functions of this organization are to ( 1 ) educate reservists and employers concerning their rights and responsibilities and ( 2 ) mediate disputes that may arise between reservists and their employers . although dod has numerous outreach efforts , we have found that a sizeable number of reservists and employers were unsure about their rights and responsibilities . for example , a 1999 dod survey found that 31 percent of employers were not aware of laws protecting reservists . in a recent report , we listed several factors that have hampered dod's outreach efforts to both employers and reservists . dod has lacked complete information on who reservists' employers are ; it does not know the full extent of problems that arise between employers and reservists ; and it has no assurance that its outreach activities are being implemented consistently . we recommended that dod take a number of actions to improve the effectiveness of outreach programs and other aspects of reservist - employer relations . dod concurred with most of these recommendations and has taken some actions . most notably , dod is moving ahead with plans to collect employer data from all of its reserve personnel . the data , if collected as planned , should help dod inform all employers of their rights and obligations , identify employers for recognition , and implement proactive public affairs campaigns . however , dod has not been as responsive to our recommendation that the services improve their compliance with dod's goal of issuing orders 30 days in advance of deployments so that reservists can notify their employees promptly . while our recommendation acknowledged that it will not be possible to achieve the 30-day goal in all cases , our recommendation was directed at mature , ongoing contingency mobilization requirements , such as the requirements that have existed in bosnia since 1995 .