performance management . federal agencies have faced long - standing challenges developing modern , credible , and effective employee performance management systems and dealing with poor performers . going forward , to help agencies effectively carry out their missions , opm and federal agencies must take some important steps to address ongoing human capital problems . these actions include continuing to develop the capacity to measure and address existing mission - critical skills gaps and using workforce analytics to predict and mitigate future gaps . chairman takano , ranking member roe , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have at this time . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact robert goldenkoff , director , strategic issues , at ( 202 ) 512-2757 or goldenkoffr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are shirley hwang ( assistant director ) , alexander ray ( analyst - in - charge ) , sarah green , allison gunn , and shelby kain . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . recruiting and hiring . federal agencies need a hiring process that is applicant friendly and flexible while also meeting policy requirements . pay system . employees are compensated through an outmoded system that ( 1 ) rewards length of service rather than individual performance and contributions , and ( 2 ) automatically provides across - the - board annual pay increases , even for poor performance . acquire and assign talent . to ensure agencies have the talent capacity to address evolving mission requirements and negative perceptions of federal work ( eg , that it is too bureaucratic ) , agencies can cultivate a diverse talent pipeline , highlight their respective missions , recruit early in the school year , support rotations , and assign talent where needed . agencies can better ensure their workforces are engaged by managing employee performance , involving employees in decisions , and developing employees . a number of the staffing challenges facing va are actually part of a broader set of human capital issues affecting government as a whole . as we noted in our march 2019 update of government high - risk areas , the federal government faces long - standing challenges in strategically managing its workforce . we first added strategic human capital management to our list of high - risk government programs and operations in 2001 . incentivize and compensate employees . while federal agencies may struggle to offer competitive pay in certain labor markets , they can leverage existing incentives that appeal to workers' desire for schedules and locations that provide work - life balance . engage employees . engaged employees are more productive and less likely to leave .