variation also existed among states and categories . specifically , we examined ( 1 ) the fiscal pressures facing state and local governments during the next several decades and the past expenditure and revenue trends that influence these pressures , ( 2 ) state and local government expenditure and revenue trends to identify patterns among states , and ( 3 ) what is known about the implications of long - term state and local government fiscal pressures for current and future federal policies . to characterize and quantify the long - term fiscal outlook for the state and local government sector over the next 50 years , we drew information from the march 2010 update to our state and local government fiscal model . specifically , we present simulations of the state and local sectors' operating budget balance as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) and an estimate of the fiscal gap — the amount of spending reduction or tax increase needed to prevent operating deficits ( or negative operating balances ) . to develop these long - run scenarios , we simulate each major receipt and expenditure category of the state and local government sector in future years using the bureau of economic analysis's national income and product accounts ( nipa ) as our primary data source . we simulate the growth in each category of receipts and expenditures using the congressional budget office's ( cbo ) economic assumptions whenever possible . in several cases we were not able to obtain existing projections and needed to develop our own assumptions about the likely future growth path of certain receipts or expenditures . low contributions raise concerns about the future funded status of these plans . state and local governments also face fiscal pressure from other postemployment benefits ( opeb ) , the largest of which is typically retiree health benefits . accounting standards issued by the governmental accounting standards board in 2004 require governments to account for the costs of opeb as employees earn the benefits and as costs are accrued , rather than when the benefits are paid or provided . because state and local governments have historically funded retiree health benefits when paid or provided rather than when the benefits are earned , much of their opeb liability is unfunded , raising concerns about the fiscal pressures state and local governments face in the coming decades . in a 2009 review , we found that the total unfunded opeb liability reported in states and the largest local governments' comprehensive annual financial reports ( cafr ) exceeded $530 billion . we reported that spending on state and local government retirees' health benefits is expected to more than double as a share of total operating revenues by 2050 , from 0.9 percent to 2.1 percent . the pew center on the states published similar findings on opeb obligations and found that state governments' opeb liability in fiscal year 2008 was $587 billion to pay for current and future benefits , with only $32 billion of that amount pre - funded . low funded ratios will eventually require action by state and local governments to close the gap between promised benefits and dedicated resources and may shift costs to future generations .