not met . few , if any , actions towards meeting the criterion have been taken . we are removing two areas — dod supply chain management and mitigating gaps in weather satellite data — from the list due to the progress that was made in addressing the high - risk issues . each overview discusses ( 1 ) why the area was high risk , and ( 2 ) why the area is being removed from the list . each of these high - risk areas is also described on our high - risk list website , http: / / www.gao.gov / highrisk / overview . since our 2017 high - risk report , dod has continued to meet the criteria of leadership commitment , capacity , and action plan for asset visibility . further , dod has fully addressed the three remaining actions and outcomes we outlined in 2017 in order to mitigate or resolve long - standing weaknesses in asset visibility . consequently , dod has met the monitoring and demonstrated progress criteria for asset visibility to remove this area from our high - risk list . leadership commitment: met . senior leaders have continued to demonstrate commitment through their involvement in groups such as the supply chain executive steering committee — senior - level officials responsible for overseeing asset visibility improvement efforts — and through the asset visibility working group , which identifies opportunities for improvement and monitors the implementation of initiatives by issuing its strategy for improving dod asset visibility ( strategy ) in 2014 , 2015 , and 2017 . capacity: met . dod continues to demonstrate that it has the capacity — personnel and resources — to improve asset visibility . for example , dod's 2015 and 2017 strategies advise the components to consider items such as staffing , materiel , and sustainment costs when documenting cost estimates for the initiatives in the strategy , as we recommended in january 2015 . action plan: met . a provision in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 required dod to submit to congress a comprehensive strategy and implementation plans for improving asset tracking and in - transit visibility . in january 2014 , dod issued the strategy and accompanying implementation plans , which outlined initiatives intended to improve asset visibility . dod updated its 2014 strategy in october 2015 and in august 2017 . importantly , since 2017 dod addressed the three remaining actions and outcomes related to the monitoring and demonstrated progress criteria through updates to and implementation of the strategies ( see table 7 ) . monitoring: met . dod provided guidance in its 2017 update to the strategy for the military components to consider key attributes of successful performance measures during metric development for their improvement initiatives . as appropriate , the military components have followed the guidance and provided high - level summary metrics updates to the asset visibility working group . in addition , dod has taken steps to monitor asset visibility by incorporating into after - action reports , as appropriate , information relating to performance measures . these after - action reports serve as closure documents and permanent records of each initiative's accomplishments . demonstrated progress: met .