attorneys . additional examples associated with this topic are sensitive and have been omitted from this report . these statements are consistent with those expressed in an august 2016 report assessing quality - of - life issues at the secret service . senior secret service officials told us that investigations can help prepare phase 1 special agents for the protective responsibilities required in phase 2 of their career , which includes an assignment to a permanent protective detail or a specialty division ( eg , counter - assault team ) . to what extent has the secret service developed a plan to combat its priority criminal threats ? to what extent does the secret service office of investigations' staffing model ensure compensation limits are accounted for when estimating staffing needs ? this is a public version of a sensitive gao report that we issued in september 2019 . secret service deemed some of the information in our september report as sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information on whether secret service's investigative operations negatively affect its protective operations . although the information provided in this report is more limited , the report addresses the same objectives as the sensitive report and uses the same methodology . to determine how the secret service's investigative operations potentially support or negatively affect protective operations , we reviewed secret service policies and guidance , including those related to the office of investigations' roles and responsibilities . we also analyzed secret service time and attendance data for fiscal years 2014 through 2018 to determine the number of hours special agents spent on investigation and protection activities . we focused on fiscal years 2014 through 2018 as it was the most recent data available at the time of our review ; included a fiscal year in which the secret service experienced the operational tempo of a presidential campaign ( i.e. , fiscal year 2016 ) ; and included data from two administrations . based on our review of the data and related controls , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of reporting the number of hours that special agents in the office of investigations expended on different activities and the number of cases opened and closed during fiscal years 2014 through 2018 . we also interviewed secret service officials at headquarters and selected field offices . we visited the secret service miami , florida field office ; west palm beach , florida resident office ; new york city , new york field office ; and white plains , new york resident office . we selected office locations using criteria such as highest number of criminal investigation and protection hours and geographic diversity . we also conducted semi - structured interviews with 40 secret service special agents , including 30 current and 10 former special agents , to discuss their views on investigation and protection activities . the information obtained from our interviews cannot be generalized across all current and former special agents ; however , the information provided examples and perspectives on how investigative operations can support or negatively affect protective operations .