no record may be destroyed unless it has been scheduled . at one department , training for senior officials on their records management responsibilities took place only at the beginning of the current administration . officials who joined the department subsequently were not trained on records management . similarly , several administrative staff responsible for managing the e - mail of senior officials told us that they had not been trained to recognize a record . a draft bill , the electronic communications preservation act , would mandate agencies to transition to electronic records management by requiring the archivist of the united states to promulgate regulations governing agency preservation of electronic communications that are federal records . requiring a governmentwide transition to electronic recordkeeping systems could help federal agencies improve e - mail management . for example , storing e - mail records in an electronic repository could make them easier to search and potentially speed agency responses to freedom of information act requests . as our review shows , agencies recognize that devoting significant resources to creating paper records from electronic sources is not a viable long - term strategy and have accordingly begun to plan or implement such a system . the 4-year deadline in the draft bill could help expedite this transition . mr. chairman , this concludes my testimony today . i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . if you have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact linda koontz , director , information management issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6240 , or koontzl@gao.gov . other individuals who made key contributions to this testimony were timothy case , barbara collier , jennifer stavros - turner , and james sweetman . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . in addition , the development of minimum functional requirements by nara should reduce the development risk that could have resulted from multiple agencies concurrently developing similar systems . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . advances in information technology and the explosion in computer interconnectivity have had far - reaching effects , including the transformation from a paper - based to an electronic business environment and the capability for rapid communication through e - mail . although these developments have led to improvements in speed and productivity , they also require the development of ways to manage information that is increasingly in electronic rather than paper form . for federal agencies , such information includes e - mail messages that may have the status of federal records .