roof repair . in fiscal year 2001 , fort carson used $12,000 of environmental quality funds to repair a roof on a historic ranch house , according to installation resource management officials . the ranch house was being used by environmental quality program staff and students performing environmental research , according to the installation's environmental director . the funds used for the roof replacement were taken from an approved activity to update and implement the installation's integrated natural resources management plan required under the sikes act . the description of the activity as approved for funding does not mention roof repair . according to the environmental director , the activity's narrative was a “catch all” that could be used to fund anything related to implementation of the natural resources plan , including repairing a roof on a historic structure . although the environmental director acknowledged that this roof replacement could have been funded through the installation's public works department , which is responsible for maintaining and repairing installation structures , he also said that the public works department did not have funding available for this activity , while the environmental quality program did . according to our review of army policy , minor construction costs not related to new or expanded legal environmental requirements are not eligible for environmental funds . army installation management agency officials agreed that environmental funds should not have been used to fund this roof repair and said that they would not have funded this activity had it been specifically mentioned in the funding request for the natural resources plan . the environmental quality program could fund certain repairs of historic structures to maintain compliance with the national historic preservation act , according to the officials . although dod's and the services' policies call for funding of all high - priority environmental quality program activities , the services have not always been able to fund all such activities through their environmental quality program . while program managers for most of the installations we visited said that the environmental quality programs were generally able to fund high - priority environmental activities during fiscal years 1999 through 2002 , in some instances installations were not able to fund all such activities . to address such situations , installation officials deferred certain high - priority activities , sought an extension of a compliance deadline , obtained funding from other sources at the installation , or stretched their allotment of environmental funding to pay for more activities than planned . according to some environmental managers at the installations where high - priority activities were deferred , the activities they were most likely to defer were those that do not have a firm timeline for completion , such as surveys of cultural resources . certain requirements , such as those in the sikes act or the national historic preservation act that require installations to survey their natural or cultural resources , do not provide for a penalty for missing a deadline or do not specify when these activities must be undertaken .