yet more can be done . many of the problematic methods we examined involved categories of claims where cms policy has been inconsistently applied , evolving , or unspecified . they have also involved increasing payments to units of state and local government — which states have long used to maximize federal medicaid funding , in part because igts can help facilitate illusory payments — suggesting that greater cms attention is needed to payments among levels of government , regardless of whether consultants are involved . we believe that it is important to act promptly to curb opportunistic financing schemes before they become a staple of state financing and further erode the integrity of the federal - state medicaid partnership . addressing recommendations that remain open from our prior work on state financing schemes and on cms's financial management could help resolve some of these issues . in addition , in the report being issued today , we are making new recommendations to the administrator of cms to improve the agency's oversight of states' use of contingency - fee consultants and to strengthen certain of the agency's overall financial management procedures . these recommendations address developing guidance to clarify cms policy on tcm , supplemental payment arrangements , rehabilitation services , and medicaid administrative costs ; ensuring that such guidance is applied consistently among states ; and collecting and scrutinizing information from states about payments made to units of state and local governments . understandably , states that have relied on certain practices to increase federal funds as a staple for the state share of medicaid spending are concerned about the potential loss of these funds . the continuing challenge remains to find the proper balance between states' flexibility to administer their medicaid programs and the shared federal - state fiduciary responsibility to manage program finances efficiently and economically in a way that ensures the fiscal integrity of the program . states should not be held solely responsible for developing arrangements that inappropriately maximize federal reimbursements where policies have not been clear or clearly communicated or where cms has known of risks for some time and has not acted to mitigate them . without clear and consistent communication of policies regarding allowable claims in high - risk areas , such as those for tcm and upl where billions of dollars are claimed each year , cms is at risk of treating states inconsistently and of placing undue burdens on states to understand federal policy and comply with it . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the committee may have . for future contacts regarding this testimony , please call kathryn g. allen at ( 202 ) 512-7118 . katherine iritani , ellen m. smith , helen desaulniers , and kevin milne also made key contributions to this testimony . medicaid fnancing: sates' use of coningency - fee consultants to maximize federal rembursements highlighs need for improved federal ti oversight . gao - 05-748 . washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2005 . high - rsk seres: an updae . gao - 05-207 . washington , d.c.: january 2005 . medicaid program integrity: sate and federal e orts to prevent and detect improper payments .