that concludes my testimony . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . for further information on this testimony , please contact ms. robin nazzaro at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included carole blackwell , robert crystal , doreen feldman , chris hatscher , george hinman , gary jones , nancy kintner - meyer , avani locke , mehrzad nadji , cynthia norris , tom perry , stan stenersen , and bill swick . this initiative is still evolving . as of april 2003 , doe had identified several strategies to help reduce the time needed to treat and dispose of the waste . based on these strategies , doe estimated that it could reduce the waste cleanup schedule by about 20 to 35 years at its high - level waste sites and save about $29 billion compared to the existing program baseline . while some degree of savings is likely if the strategies are successfully implemented , the extent of the savings is still uncertain . many of doe's proposals to speed cleanup and reduce environmental risk involve ways to do one or more of the following: deal with some tank waste as low - level or transuranic waste , rather than as high - level waste . doing so would eliminate the need to vitrify the waste for off - site disposal in the geologic repository for high - level waste . complete the waste treatment more quickly by using additional or supplemental technologies . for example , doe's hanford site is considering using up to four supplemental technologies , in addition to vitrification , to process its low - activity waste . doe believes these technologies are needed to help it meet a schedule milestone date of 2028 agreed to with regulators to complete waste processing . without these technologies , doe believes waste treatment would not be completed before 2048 . segregate the waste more fully than initially planned and tailor waste treatment to each of the waste types . by doing so , doe plans to apply less costly treatment methods to waste with lower concentrations of radioactivity . by not assessing these benefits and risks to workers and the environment , doe leaves unclear how important these risks and trade - offs are to choosing an alternative treatment approach . doe faces significant legal and technical challenges in achieving the cost and schedule reductions proposed in its new initiative . close waste storage tanks earlier than expected , thereby avoiding the operating costs involved in maintaining the tanks and monitoring the wastes . table 1 summarizes the estimated cost savings for each doe site if accelerated proposals for cleaning up high - level waste are successfully implemented . doe noted that the accelerated lifecycle estimate could likely change depending on which one of the technologies is selected and the associated costs of treating the waste are developed . according to omb guidance , agencies should ensure that the timing of when the savings will occur is accounted for , that uncertainties are recognized and quantified where possible , and that nonbudgetary impacts , such as a change in the level of risk to workers , are quantified , or at least described .