the investigation phase . opm conducts a majority of the government's background investigations ; however , some agencies , such as state , are delegated to conduct their own background investigations . federal investigative standards and agencies' internal guidance are used to conduct and document the investigation of the applicant ( see app . ii ) . the scope of information gathered during an investigation depends on the level of clearance needed . we identified the opm central verification system ( cvs ) database as the appropriate data for our analysis after meeting with opm officials and discussing the types of data available . we used this time frame because prior to april 1 , 2006 , the provision of the date a clearance was granted was not required and was therefore not consistently available for analysis . opm provided us with an extract of the opm database that included information only on executive - branch , non – department of defense ( dod ) , and non - intelligence - community employees and contractors who were eligible for a clearance during our time frame . the opm cvs database does not maintain information on the denial of security clearances on the basis of an individual's nonpayment of federal taxes . thus , we were not able to determine the number of individuals who were denied security clearances for this reason.to determine the extent to which individuals eligible for a security clearance had unpaid federal taxes , we used the taxpayer identification number ( tin ) as a unique identifier and electronically matched the internal revenue service's ( irs ) tax - debt data to the opm data of individuals eligible for a security clearance . specifically , we used the irs unpaid assessment file as of june 30 , 2012 , to match against the opm cvs data . the irs unpaid assessment file used for our analysis contains all tax modules that are unpaid as of june 30 , 2012 . the june 30 , 2012 , file was used because it contained the most - recent unpaid assessment information at the time we conducted our analysis . to avoid overestimating the amount owed and to capture only significant unpaid federal taxes , we excluded from our analysis tax debts meeting specific criteria to establish a minimum threshold in the amount of tax debt to be considered when determining whether a tax debt is significant . the criteria we used to exclude tax debts are as follows: ( 1 ) unpaid federal taxes the irs classified as compliance assessments or memo accounts for financial reporting , and ( 2 ) recipients with total unpaid federal taxes of $100 or less . specifically , compliance assessments or memo accounts were excluded because these taxes have neither been agreed to by the taxpayers nor affirmed by the court , or these taxes could be invalid or duplicative of other taxes already reported . we excluded tax debts of $100 or less because the irs considers it a de minimis amount .