implementation is left to each state . there is no federal role unless the congress determines that federal legislation on the subject is needed . the same is true when states adopt standards developed through private standards development organizations . uniform state laws or regulations are also developed by entities that address a particular regulatory area , such as insurance . this presentation reveals more clearly how the mechanisms differ in terms of the factors that a policymaker may consider critical to a particular objective . the table also highlights program design choices that can be made within each mechanism . for example , while flexibility is inherently limited under federal fixed standards , grant conditions can be written to give as much or as little flexibility as is appropriate to the federal objective concerned . although direct implementation by a federal agency can be advantageous in certain situations , this approach presents its own set of challenges and limitations . in this study , we focused on the operational challenges that arise in shared federal - state implementation . first , shared implementation raises delicate issues of federal - state agency relations , oversight , and accountability . legislators and agencies may have difficulty finding a level of oversight that is sufficient to protect against the harm that could come from inadequate state action while providing states the authority and flexibility needed to do the job effectively . oversight tools such as the performance incentives and sanctions illustrated in our discussion of federal minimum standards programs can be designed with this purpose in mind . another approach is the use of performance partnerships . second , while overall resource adequacy may be an issue under any pattern of implementation , reliance on states to implement federal standards also raises questions about allocating costs between the federal government and the states . if federal funds are provided , the issue of fiscal substitution ( use of federal funds to replace state funds ) may also arise . options for addressing these issues include the following: the state's share can be preserved through the use of fiscal provisions such as maintenance of effort or matching requirements . the federal share may be provided through grants to participating states or by permitting states to retain payments generated through program operation and enforcement . grant payments may be “up to” a specified percentage of state program cost , but actual payments depend on funds available and have sometimes been substantially less . if both levels of government participate in administering federal regulations , both levels contribute toward the cost . however , if the state does not participate , the federal agency administers the program at no cost to the state , which leads to a third challenge . the third challenge is that implementation arrangements that give the federal agency a back - up role can leave it vulnerable to sudden increases in responsibility and costs . this can happen when states drop their participation , as has happened in the osha and meat and poultry programs . it can also happen when states are judged by the agency to have failed to meet their responsibilities .