we subsequently received comments from both agencies . doj advised that it could not address the accuracy of , or otherwise comment on , the statements of epa officials contained in the report . the agency did not address or comment on those portions of the report concerning public access to emissions data that gao discussed exclusively with epa . the court ruled that this requirement was inappropriate . epa then issued a rule for electric steam - generating utilities only that allowed them to estimate their projected annual emissions after the change based on their actual emissions history for purposes of preconstruction permitting , but they would have to report their actual emissions for 5 years after making the change . more recently , in january 2001 , the president established a task force — the national energy policy development group ( nepdg ) — chaired by the vice president to develop a national energy policy . figure 1 illustrates this permitting process . the state or local permitting agency determines if the application is complete ; develops a draft permit , if justified ; notifies epa and the public of the application ; and solicits comments on the draft permit . some epa enforcement officials and officials from environmental groups and states have raised concerns that the announced august 2003 rule , and any subsequent rules more explicitly defining what facility changes qualify for the routine maintenance exclusion , could negatively impact the enforcement cases even further . in a september 2003 legal filing in one of the enforcement cases , doj stated epa's position that the announced august 2003 rule is prospective in nature and does not affect the ongoing enforcement cases , which are based on past conduct . officials from the new york and new jersey attorney general offices have said that the charges against the companies in these cases were brought under the previous nsr program , before any of the recent revisions , and the officials are confident that the judges will make decisions based on whether the companies violated the rules that were in effect at that time . while these officials did not expect the cases to be delayed on the basis of any motions that industry may file in light of the august 2003 rule , they noted that if such motions were filed , the officials would have to spend additional time and resources to defeat them . in addition to these effects , some stakeholders are also concerned that the rule could affect the remedies imposed on companies ( including fines companies must pay or actions they must take ) if the courts find the companies to be in violation of the old nsr rule . officials from environmental groups and state attorney general offices expressed concerns that industry attorneys would attempt to argue that since the modifications for which they were found liable under the old rule were now permissible under the new rule , they should not be penalized . if judges were to agree , this could mean that fines may be reduced or companies may not be required to install pollution controls and reduce emissions to the extent that they might have been before the new rule .