this study has not yet been completed . in addition , we gathered information on dod's annual industrial capabilities report submitted to the congress by march 1 of each year . we performed our work from august 2002 to january 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the table below lists the procurements included in our sample . dollar amounts shown for the improved physical fitness uniform pants and sound protector procurements represent actual obligations placed against the contracts in fiscal year 2001 . dollar amounts shown for the remaining procurements represent estimated contract values , including the basic contract period and all option periods . in addition to the name above , robert l. ackley , marie p. ahearn , carl s. barden , charles d. groves , john d. heere , and william e. petrick , jr. made key contributions to this report . we did not independently verify the information the officials provided to us . dod's comments appear in appendix iii . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and the director , dla . we also will make copies available to others upon request . the results of our evaluation in each functional area are presented on the following pages . the 12 procurements in our sample that were based on a tradeoff source selection process generally complied with the solicitation content criteria . five solicitations , however , did not authorize prospective suppliers to provide information on problems encountered on prior contracts and corrective actions taken . nevertheless , in these five solicitations , some suppliers identified problems and corrective actions taken , while others did not report any problems on their prior contracts . dscp officials noted that offerors generally submit this information with their proposals even when it is not specifically authorized in the solicitation . in addition , the solicitations for 7 of the 12 procurements that were based on a tradeoff process did not describe dla's approach for evaluating past performance of offerors with no relevant past performance history . the solicitations should have provided that a “neutral” rating be assigned to such offerors . the effect of not describing a neutral rating in the solicitation was mitigated in most of these cases , however . additional information on our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . in four cases , neutral ratings generally were not an issue in the evaluation of past performance , because nearly all offerors provided relevant past performance information in their proposals . in one case , where simplified acquisition procedures were used based on a tradeoff analysis , the contracting officer assigned unacceptable ratings to the proposals with no past performance history because they did not provide other information required by the solicitation . on march 1 , 2002 , dscp implemented a new proposal rating system to be used in evaluating clothing and textile best value acquisitions . it includes notice to offerors that a neutral rating will be assigned to an offeror with no relevant past performance . dscp officials expect that all future solicitations will properly cite the neutral rating approach for offerors lacking relevant past performance history .