in capital cases , i.e . we will combine your answers with those of many others , and we will not publish any information that could identify you . we will not share any identifiable information from this survey unless required by law or a member of congress . if you have any questions about this survey , or the gao study , please contact ________ , an analyst on this study , at proceedings@gao.gov ________ . to better understand your perspective on the events of 9 / 11 or the attack on the uss cole , which one of the following best describes you ? family member of a victim ( parent , sibling , daughter , son ) family member of a victim ( aunt , uncle , niece , nephew , grandparent ) . we used these data collected from the commissions' website in three analyses , as discussed below . analysis , as of june 19 , 2018: according to our research , the first document recorded as being filed with the trial judiciary , and included in our scope , on the current omc website has a file date in april of 2011 . on june 19 , 2018 , we began data collection using the web - scraping tool , as described above . while the website provides a file date for all documents , the website does not provide a date when documents are uploaded . thus , for documents uploaded before june 19 , 2018 , we were not able to assess the department of defense's ( dod ) timeliness performance with data from the web - scraping tool . however , our analysis as of june 19 , 2018 , allowed us to asses other aspects of performance . specifically , we determined the following: on june 19 , 2018 , the number of documents that had been filed with the trial judiciary , number that had been uploaded , or number that had yet to be uploaded . on june 19 , 2018 , the number of documents that had not been uploaded within 15 business days of the file date . we refer to these documents as having missed dod's 15 business day timeliness standard . on june 19 , 2018 , for documents that missed the 15 business day standard , the median number of days that they were uploaded after the timeliness standard . on june 19 , 2018 , dod's performance in these parameters , for five different types of court documents: motions , rulings , transcripts from open hearings , transcripts from closed hearings , and docket - related documents . recent performance analysis , june 19 to november 19 , 2018: while the website does not provide a date when documents are uploaded , our web - scraping tool provided this information for each document uploaded on or after june 19 , 2018 . thus , for the five months we used the tool , we were able to assess dod's timeliness performance for each document filed with the trial judiciary or uploaded . for these documents , we determined the following: the number and percentage of documents that were uploaded after dod's 15 business day timeliness standard .