( see fig . in their effort to combat potential fraud , some states implemented a way to leverage their available investigative resources . specifically , four of the states we reviewed — florida , massachusetts , michigan and nebraska — had implemented and two states — maine and north carolina — were in the process of implementing state law enforcement bureau ( sleb ) agreements . fns has been supportive of states' efforts to establish these agreements between state snap agencies and federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies which enable state snap investigators to cooperate in various ways with local , state , and federal law enforcement agents , including those within the usda oig . for example , under these agreements , law enforcement agencies can notify the snap fraud unit when they arrest someone who possesses multiple ebt cards , and snap agencies can provide “dummy” ebt cards for state and local officers to use in undercover trafficking investigations . according to officials in one florida county , this type of cooperation allowed local police officers to make 100 arrests in its first undercover operation of recipients who were allegedly trafficking snap benefits . furthermore , some state and local officials in michigan , maine , and florida told us that increasing awareness of snap trafficking among local law enforcement officials helps in resolving these matters when potential trafficking is uncovered in other police investigations . for example , while investigating drug - related crimes , officials in those states told us they have uncovered multiple ebt cards in the possession of one person . in light of their increased snap caseload , some officials suggested changing the incentive structure to help states address the costs of investigating potential snap fraud . according to gao's fraud prevention framework , investigations , although costly and resource - intensive , can help deter future fraud and ultimately save money . officials in one state told us that it would help if fns would provide additional financial incentives for states to prevent potential fraud at the time of application beyond what is currently provided for recovered funds . when fraud by a recipient is discovered , the state may generally retain 35 percent of the recovered overpayment , but when a state detects potential fraud by an applicant and denies the application , there are no payments to recover . officials in four of the states we reviewed said that their anti - fraud efforts could be enhanced if the percentage of recovered overpayments that states may retain was increased , and officials in three states said that fns should direct that states apply the retention money to anti - fraud efforts . overall , state anti - fraud incentives have the potential to produce federal cost savings by encouraging state officials to prevent the benefits from being issued to ineligible people as well as deter fraud by more actively investigating and recovering funds . officials in most of the 11 states we reviewed said that they have mainly pursued cases of eligibility fraud , such as the misrepresentation of household income or composition .