likewise critical will be stakeholder commitment . actions taken and decisions reached in the coming months to more fully define the networx program and finalize an appropriate acquisition strategy will significantly influence the telecommunications choices federal agencies will have for the next several years . unless gsa follows through to resolve the challenges outlined today , the potential of networx may well not be realized . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . should you have any questions about this testimony , please contact me by e - mail at koontzl@gao.gov or kevin conway , assistant director , at conwayk@gao.gov . we can also be reached at ( 202 ) 512-6240 and ( 202 ) 512-6340 , respectively . another major contributor to this testimony was michael p. fruitman . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . provide expanded opportunities for small businesses . to achieve those goals , the program calls for two acquisitions — networx universal and networx select . the networx universal contracts are expected to satisfy requirements for a full range of national and international network services . according to gsa , networx universal seeks to ensure the continuity of services and prices found under expiring contracts that provide broad - ranging service with global geographic coverage . gsa expects all networx universal offerors to provide a full range of voice and data network services , managed networking services and solutions , and network access , wireless , and satellite communications services . this acquisition is expected to result in multiple contract awards to relatively few offerors because few are expected to be able to satisfy the geographic coverage and comprehensive service requirements . gsa also intends to apply competitive incentives to obtain best value for its customer agencies , although those incentives are not yet defined . further , gsa expects to establish minimum revenue guarantees for these contracts . in contrast , gsa plans to award multiple contracts for a more geographically limited set of services under network select . gsa generally describes these select contracts as providing agencies with leading edge services and solutions with less extensive geographic and service coverage than that required by networx universal ; specific networx select service requirements have not yet , however , been defined . details of pricing structures and select service delivery mechanisms are planned to be provided in the networx select request for proposals , which gsa intends to release in the summer of 2005 . gsa anticipates awarding both the networx universal and the networx select contracts well before the expiration of the fts2001 contracts .