we have not verified or evaluated these actions . these actions include: national explosive canine detection teams: since late 2005 , tsa reported that it has trained and deployed 53 canine teams to 13 mass transit systems to help detect explosives in the passenger rail system and serve as a deterrent to potential terrorists . visible intermodal prevention and response teams: this program is intended to provide law enforcement , canines , and inspection teams to mass transit and passenger rail systems to deter and detect potential terrorist actions . since the program's inception in december 2005 , tsa reported conducting more than 25 exercises at mass transit and passenger rail systems throughout the nation . mass transit and passenger rail security information sharing network: according to tsa , the agency initiated this program in august 2005 to develop information sharing and dissemination processes regarding passenger rail and mass transit security across the federal government , state and local governments , and rail operators . national transit resource center: tsa officials stated that they are working with fta and dhs ogt to develop this center , which will provide transit agencies nationwide with pertinent information related to transit security , including recent suspicious activities , promising security practices , new security technologies , and other information . national security awareness training program for railroad employees: tsa officials stated that the agency has contracted to develop and distribute computer - based training for passenger rail , rail transit , and freight rail employees . the training will include information on identifying security threats , observing and reporting suspicious activities and objects , mitigating security incidents , and other related information . according to tsa , the training will be distributed to all passenger and freight rail systems . transit terrorist tool and tactics: this training course is funded through the transit security grant program and teaches transit employees how to prevent and respond to a chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , or explosive attack . according to tsa , this course was offered for the first time during the fall of 2006 . national tunnel security initiative: this dhs and dot initiative aims to identify and assess risks to underwater tunnels , prioritize security funding to the most critical areas , and develop technologies to better secure underwater tunnels . according to tsa , this initiative has identified 29 critical underwater rail transit tunnels . dhs and tsa have also sought to enhance passenger rail security by conducting research on technologies related to screening passengers and checked baggage in the passenger rail environment . for example , tsa conducted a transit and rail inspection pilot , a $1.5 million effort to test the feasibility of using existing and emerging technologies to screen passengers , carry - on items , checked baggage , cargo , and parcels for explosives . according to tsa , the agency completed this pilot in july 2004 . tsa officials told us that based upon preliminary analyses , the screening technologies and processes tested would be very difficult to implement on heavily used passenger rail systems because these systems carry high volumes of passengers and have multiple points of entry .