lmp . in february 1998 , the u.s. army materiel command began an erp effort — lmp — to replace its legacy materiel and maintenance management systems — the commodity command standard system and the standard depot system — with lmp . the army has been using the existing legacy systems for over 30 years . lmp is intended to transform the army's working capital fund logistics operations in six core processes: order fulfillment , demand and supply planning , procurement , asset management , materiel maintenance , and financial management . lmp became operational at the u.s. army communications and electronics command , fort monmouth , new jersey , and tobyhanna army depot , tobyhanna , pennsylvania , in july 2003 . the initial deployment of lmp consisted of inventory items such as electronics ; electronic repair components ; and communications and intelligence equipment such as night vision goggles , electronic components such as circuit boards , and certain munitions such as guidance systems included in missiles . figure 1 shows the lmp time line as of march 2007 . the communications - electronics life cycle management command , tobyhanna army depot , and the defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) are the primary lmp users . in addition , the army currently estimates that it will invest another $1.3 billion to implement gfebs . in 2005 , dod adopted a “tiered accountability” approach to improve control and accountability over the billions of dollars it invests annually in dod business systems . under this approach , executive leadership for the direction , oversight , and execution of dod investments is the responsibility of several entities within dod and its components . as shown in figure 4 and described below , the investment control process begins at the component level and works its way up through a hierarchy of review and approval authorities , depending on the size and significance of the investment . at the dod enterprise level , key entities involved in maintaining control and accountability over army business system investments with systems modernizations over $1 million include the dbsmc , which serves as the highest ranking governance body for business systems modernization activities ; the principal staff assistants , who serve as the certification authorities for business system modernizations in their respective core business missions ; the investment review boards ( irbs ) , which form the review and decision - making bodies for business system investments in their respective areas of responsibility and review each investment for bea compliance ; and bta , which provides support to the dbsmc and the irbs and is responsible for leading and coordinating business transformation efforts across the department . the bta is organized into seven directorates , one of which is the defense business systems acquisition executive — the component acquisition executive for dod enterprise - level ( dod - wide ) business systems and initiatives . this directorate is responsible for developing , coordinating , and integrating dod enterprise - level projects , programs , systems , and initiatives — including managing resources such as funding , personnel , and contracts for assigned systems and programs .