doe disagreed with the recommendation . according to doe officials , doe is now developing plans to begin to use data analytics in fiscal year 2021 . we continue to believe it is important for doe to employ data analytics as a cost surveillance tool so doe can better identify improper payments to its contractors in a timely manner and look forward to reviewing doe's plans and actions to address our prior recommendation . audit coverage of doe payments is limited , and some audits are not completed until several years after the audited payments were made . as we also found in march 2017 , doe uses incurred cost audits and assessments to identify contractors' improper payments . however , our review of doe oig and other external entities' audits and assessments of incurred costs for doe's 24 largest contractors for this report shows that , historically , these audits are infrequent and may occur several years after the costs have been incurred . for example , our updated analysis shows that as of september 2019 , only about $25 billion — or 23 percent — of the nearly $108 billion in costs incurred during fiscal years 2014 through 2018 by doe's 24 largest contractors had been audited or assessed ( see table 3 ) . it is not an audit that is performed in accordance with government auditing standards . omb m - 18-20 also states that for high - priority programs the agency shall report any action it has taken or plans to take to recover improper payments and intends to take to prevent future improper payments . if an agency has determined that performing payment recapture audits for any applicable program or activity is not cost - effective , a justification for that determination must be reported . further , omb m - 18-20 states that agencies should report a justification for that determination through afrs , performance accountability reports , or in the format required through data requests from omb . doe's 15 field chief financial officers , in cooperation with doe contracting officers , are responsible for overseeing contractor and other activities in the field , and they assist the ocfo in implementing improper payment reporting requirements . the ocfo issues annual payment integrity requirements and guidance that transmits doe's instructions for meeting improper payments reporting and recapture requirements prescribed by omb m - 18-20 . this guidance includes instructions for completing an attached template for reporting risk assessments and improper payments and payment recapture information . using this template , 48 payment reporting sites provide information that is the basis for doe's department - wide improper payment risk assessment and reporting . these payment reporting sites consist of four types of federal entities and two types of contractors . ( see appendix i for more information about doe's payment reporting sites. ) in addition to the completed template , sites are directed to submit a signed certification that attests to the accuracy of the improper payment information and risk assessment and , if applicable , a justification for why payment recapture audits were not conducted . the ocfo completes a quality assurance checklist for each site and consolidates and reports the data as one program in doe's annual afr .