guidance . in their implementation plans , 19 agencies reported the lack of adequate guidance as a challenge to implementing the data act . several agencies noted that they cannot fully determine how their policies , business processes , and systems should be modified to support data act reporting because , in their view , omb and treasury have not yet issued complete , detailed , finalized data act implementation guidance on required data elements , the technical schema , and other key policies . according to these agencies , issuance of such guidance is part of the critical path to meeting their implementation goals . for example , one agency noted that its implementation plan greatly depends on treasury developing the technical schema for data act implementation . the agency also reported that any delays or changes to treasury requirements in the technical schema will significantly affect the agency's solution design , development and testing schedule , and cost estimate . another agency included a list of unanswered questions in its implementation plan that it wanted omb to address in its guidance related to the time frames , various technical requirements , level of reporting , linking systems , and tracking and reconciling data . dependencies . eighteen agencies reported in their implementation plans that the completion of certain implementation activities is subject to actions or issues that must be addressed by omb and treasury in order for the agencies to effectively implement the data act . some agencies also noted that they were relying on their shared service providers' implementation of the data act for agency compliance with the act . for example , one agency noted that it will rely on its shared service provider to enhance its system , but funding may be restricted to enhance a system that the agency does not own . another key dependency noted in one agency's implementation plan is the need for treasury to provide detailed information or requirements regarding the data formats , validation module , error correction and resubmission process , and testing schedule . without this information , the agency noted that it cannot provide complete cost estimates , determine changes to system and business processes , and determine the level of effort and resources required to develop the data submissions . time frames . in their implementation plans , 16 agencies reported time constraints as a challenge in implementing the data act . for example , one agency noted that the time frame to get everything done indicated in the original guidance coupled with the complexity of the known issues makes it highly unlikely that its data act initiative will stay on target . the agency also noted that there is no mitigation strategy for meeting the expected deadline on all aspects of the reporting because even if all tasks were worked concurrently , the schedule is not attainable for the agency . another agency noted that its current reporting of award and awardee information to usaspending.gov is in accordance with the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 .