and ranges . the appropriate targets are engaged by both strategic and tactical missile defense systems developed by mda , the army , and the navy . mda originally used numerous contractors to design and build the various targets ; however in december 2003 lockheed martin was awarded a contract to be the lead systems integrator for most of the existing targets . flight test program ? ( 2 ) what are the causes of any deficiencies or delays ? ( 3 ) what are the prospects for resolution of any problems identified ? on ( 3 ) what are the prospects for resolution of any problems identified ? on july 17 , 2008 , we briefed committee staff on our findings and conclusions . july 17 , 2008 , we briefed committee staff on our findings and conclusions . ( 2 ) what are the causes of any deficiencies or delays ? the detailed briefing can be found in appendix i . this report summarizes the detailed briefing can be found in appendix i . this report summarizes the briefing and includes recommendations to the secretary of defense the briefing and includes recommendations to the secretary of defense and a matter for congressional consideration . and a matter for congressional consideration . in developing the information for this report , we focused our work on in developing the information for this report , we focused our work on assessing the ability of mda's targets program to provide support for the assessing the ability of mda's targets program to provide support for the test efforts . we analyzed test plans and schedules , flight test reports , test efforts . we analyzed test plans and schedules , flight test reports , budget documents , and program execution reviews . we also analyzed budget documents , and program execution reviews . we also analyzed program directives and acquisition policies and procedures . we program directives and acquisition policies and procedures . we interviewed mda officials from the ground - based midcourse defense ( gmd ) , terminal high altitude area defense ( thaad ) , aegis bmd , and the targets and countermeasures program offices as well as officials from mda's business , test and engineering directorates . we also interviewed officials from dod's office of the director , operational test and evaluation ( dot&e ) and the u.s. army's space and missile defense command . our analysis covered data ranging from december 2003 through july 2008 . we assessed the reliability of the data on missile defense targets by evaluating the agency's management control processes , interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data , and confirming the accuracy of mda - generated data with multiple sources within mda and , when possible , with independent experts . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted this performance audit from february 2008 through september 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .