ann . 9:5141 ; 35:17 requires that only last four digits of ssn appear on mortgage records and notarial acts . md . code ann. , com . law ยง 14- 3301 et seq . generally prohibits any person or entity , except government entities , from ( 1 ) publicly displaying or posting an individual's ssn ; ( 2 ) printing an individual's ssn on any card required to receive products or services ; ( 3 ) requiring an individual to transmit his or her ssn over the internet unless the number is encrypted or the connection is secure ; ( 4 ) initiating the transmission of an individual's ssn unless the connection is secure ; ( 5 ) requiring the use of a ssn to access an internet web site unless a password or other security device is used ; ( 6 ) printing an individual's ssn on any material to be mailed to the individual , unless the inclusion of the ssn is required by law ; ( 7 ) electronically transmitting an individual's ssn unless the connection is secure or the ssn is encrypted ; and ( 8 ) faxing an individual's ssn to that individual . mich. comp . laws ยง 445.81 et seq . generally prohibits any person or entity from ( 1 ) publicly posting or displaying more than four sequential digits of an individual's ssn ; ( 2 ) using more than four sequential digits of an individual's ssn as the primary account number for an individual ; ( 3 ) visibly printing more than four sequential digits of an individual's ssn on any identification badge or card , membership card , or permit or license ; ( 4 ) requiring an individual to transmit more than four sequential digits of his or her ssn over the internet unless the number is encrypted or the connection is secure ; ( 5 ) requiring the use of more than four sequential digits of an individual's ssn to access an internet web site unless a password or other security device is used ; and ( 6 ) printing more than four sequential digits of an individual's ssn on any material to be mailed to the individual . generally prohibits any person or entity , except government entities , from ( 1 ) publicly posting or displaying an individual's ssn in any manner ; ( 2 ) printing an individual's ssn on any card required to receive products or services ; ( 3 ) requiring an individual to transmit his or her ssn over the internet unless the number is encrypted or the connection is secure ; ( 4 ) requiring the use of a ssn to access an internet web site unless a password or other security device is used ; and ( 5 ) printing an individual's ssn on any material to be mailed to the individual , unless the inclusion of the ssn is required by law .