department of the treasury . the secretary of energy , who has final approval authority . following the secretary's approval , the lgp offers the applicant a “conditional commitment” for a loan guarantee . tear sheets are updated periodically , or as needed , but lgp officials could not easily consolidate them because they were kept in word processing software that does not have analysis or summarization capabilities . “application trackers,” which are spreadsheets that give basic descriptive information and status of applications for some solicitations . lgp staff said they were maintained for most , but not all , solicitations . “project tracking information” documents showing graphic presentations of application status summaries , loan guarantee amounts requested , technology type , planned processing dates , and procurement schedules for technical reports . these documents were updated manually through december 20 , 2010 . “credit subsidy forecasts,” which are documents that track the actual or projected credit subsidy costs of the section 1705 projects in various stages of the review process and the cumulative utilization of credit subsidy funding . lgp staff needed over 3 months to assemble the data and fully resolve all the errors and omissions we identified . lgp staff also made further changes to some of these data when we presented our analysis of the data to the lgp in october 2011 . according to lgp officials in 2010 , the program had not maintained up - to - date and consolidated documents and data . an lgp official said at the time that lgp considered it more important to process loan guarantee applications than to update records . because it took months to assemble the information required for our review , it is also clear that the lgp could not be conducting timely oversight of the program . federal regulations require that records be kept to facilitate an effective and accurate audit and performance evaluation . these regulations — along with guidance from the department of the treasury and omb — provide that maintaining adequate and proper records of agency activities is essential to oversight of the management of public resources . in addition , under federal internal control standards , federal agencies are to employ control activities , such as accurately and promptly recording transactions and events to maintain their relevance and value to management on controlling operations and making decisions . under these standards , managers are to compare actual program performance to planned or expected results and analyze significant differences . managers cannot readily conduct such analysis of the lgp if the agency does not maintain consolidated information on applications to the program and their status . moreover , the fact that it took the lgp 3 months to aggregate data on the status of applications for us suggests that its managers have not had readily accessible and up - to - date information and have not been doing such analysis on an ongoing basis . this is not consistent with one of the fundamental concepts of internal control , in which such control is not a single event but a series of actions and activities that occur throughout an entity's operations and on an ongoing basis .