milestones . the hhs strategy does not provide milestones with specific time frames to help the agencies gauge their progress in advancing exchange . exchange - related milestones with specified time frames could be particularly useful because they could provide a framework for determining whether any actions hhs intends to take could help lead to progress in addressing the challenges providers face related to exchange . milestones with time frames could also set realistic expectations so stakeholders can anticipate when they can expect to see actions to advance exchange . cms and onc officials acknowledged the importance of providers being able to exchange health information effectively by stage 3 of the ehr programs to allow for improved outcomes such as quality , efficiency , and patient safety . determining specific , prioritized actions and exchange - related milestones with specified time frames can help to ensure that the agencies' principles and future actions result in timely improvements in addressing the key exchange - related challenges reported by providers and stakeholders , which are particularly important because planning for stage 3 is expected to begin as soon as 2014 . this information could also help hhs prioritize its future actions based on whether health information is being exchanged effectively among providers , in order to better achieve the ehr programs' ultimate goals of improving quality , efficiency , and patient safety . hhs and providers have made some progress toward addressing challenges reported by providers and others related to the electronic exchange of health information , but these challenges are complex and difficult to address and are likely to continue to persist . some of hhs's most important efforts , such as designing the 2014 edition of the standards and certification criteria to include an increased exchange capability in ehr systems , may lead to greater exchange over the next year . in addition , exchange may increase as providers modify their systems to meet more stringent exchange - related requirements in stage 2 of the ehr programs . however , a number of remaining challenges make these outcomes uncertain . hhs has both ongoing programs and future plans to address concerns about exchange , but it is not always clear how hhs will effectively prioritize and implement its potential responses to the challenges of exchange . specifically , the hhs strategy to advance electronic health information exchange does not identify specific actions that cms and onc expect will lead to increased exchange , prioritize these actions , or include milestones for gauging progress over time . guidance on planning and implementing effective strategies highlights the importance of key elements , such as specific , prioritized actions and milestones for gauging progress . these elements could help the agencies make future adjustments based on the effectiveness of their efforts . exchange is especially important because of its potential to help improve coordination of care within the fragmented health care system . according to cms and onc officials , ensuring progress in providers' ability to electronically exchange information is critical for the effective implementation of the ehr programs .