nyse saw the same trend in complaints . during the first quarter of 2000 , nyse member firms reported 7,625 on - line trading complaints , or 27 percent of the total complaints received . by the fourth quarter of 2000 , the number of complaints had fallen to 1,737 , or 11 percent of the 15,371 total it received . some of the growth in complaints about on - line trading during the first half of 2000 may be attributed to growth in the volume of on - line trading . we took these factors into account by comparing the volume of complaints involving on - line trading with the volume of on - line trading ( see fig . while the volume of daily on - line trades almost doubled between the first quarter of 1999 and the last quarter of 2000 , the number of complaints to sec fell by almost one half . in the first quarter of 1999 , there were about 4 times as many complaints per 100,000 on - line trades as there had been in the last quarter of 2000 . on - line investors who are dissatisfied with the processing of an order or the handling of their account have several options for filing a complaint . they can file a complaint directly with their broker - dealer , with sec , nasdr , or nyse ( if their brokerage firm is a member ) . sec and sros have their own procedures for compiling complaints . for example , sec sorts on - line trading complaints into 1 of 26 categories . many brokerage firms now have a link to the sec's investor education web site , which provides a convenient form for filing a complaint on - line . investors can also file a complaint through the nasdr web site . nasd and nyse rules require member firms to report complaints to regulators , and nyse added an on - line complaint category during 1999 . in both years , complaints involving failure or delay in processing orders and difficulty accessing accounts were among the most common ; but in 2000 , complaints involving margin position sellouts and transfer of accounts increased dramatically . table 1 compares the 10 most common on - line complaints filed with sec in 2000 with complaints filed in 1999 . the single most frequent complaint to sec involving on - line trades during 2000 was failure or delays in processing orders — typically a buy or sell order was either not executed by a broker or was not executed in a timely fashion . under nasd rules , suitability becomes an issue when broker - dealers or registered representatives recommend securities to investors . nyse rules establish certain responsibilities for broker - dealers that have been interpreted as imposing upon them suitability requirements . we reported that sec's examinations found that many firms had implemented measures to address customer privacy and confidentiality , but some firms' privacy policies did not disclose that they might share information with affiliated vendors offering related financial services . we also noted sec's finding that only a limited number of firms used a second layer of password protection or required customers to periodically change their password .