( see app . i for a complete list of the psychiatric , pain , and sleep medications on the dod and va formularies , as well as information on dod prescriptions for these medications. ) we also found that the vast majority of these medications that were actually prescribed by dod in fiscal year 2014 were on both formularies . ( see table 1. ) additionally , we found the most agreement between the formularies for psychiatric medications , with the medications on va's formulary representing 98 percent of the prescriptions that had been filled by dod in fiscal year 2014 . vha officials told us that clinical considerations and cost are factors in determining whether to include a medication on the formulary . specifically , they said they first consider which medications are the safest and most effective for treating each condition , and then they select the most cost - effective options . as a result of this process , the va formulary includes fewer medications than dod's . for example , vha officials told us that va's formulary did not include the pain medication piroxicam because the formulary already included safer alternatives . vha officials also said the va formulary only included two sleep medications because of concerns about the appropriateness of some sleep medications for the treatment of insomnia . further , vha officials and providers noted that sleep problems are often a symptom of other conditions , including those related to mental health , and , therefore , treating the underlying condition may also treat the insomnia . rather than including more of these medications on the va formulary , vha has developed evidence - based clinical recommendations for treating insomnia , which includes off - label use of other types of medications , such as antidepressants ; over - the - counter medications , such as antihistamines ; and nonmedication treatments . we selected the vamcs and army mtfs for variation in size and geographic location . as part of our review , we examined the extent to which the army's and vha's efforts were consistent with the standards for internal control in the federal government — specifically those related to control activities and monitoring . to determine the extent to which the psychiatric , pain , and sleep medications on dod's formulary are also on va's formulary and how , if at all , any differences have affected the continuation of medications for servicemembers transitioning from dod to vha , we conducted a comparison of the two formularies and interviewed dod and vha officials and stakeholders for their perspectives on any differences . we selected these three categories of medications because they are used to treat symptoms that are common among patients with ptsd or mild tbi . dod's pharmacy operations division identified the psychiatric , pain , and sleep medications on dod's formulary as of august 2015 . we compared the active pharmaceutical ingredients on this list with those on the va formulary as of august 2015 , as provided by vha . because we focused on transitions of care from dod to vha , we did not determine which medications on va's formulary were not on dod's formulary .