we are not making any recommendations in this report . we have reported on this program since 2011 . in 2013 , the house armed services subcommittee on tactical air and land forces requested that we continue to monitor the vh - 92a presidential helicopter acquisition through a series of reviews , with each review tailored to where the program is in the acquisition process . the national defense authorization act for 2014 subsequently included a provision that we continue reporting on the program annually to the congressional defense committees . this report discusses ( 1 ) the cost , schedule , and performance status of the program , ( 2 ) challenges it faces in system development , and ( 3 ) its adherence to acquisition best practices . to determine how the program is progressing in terms of its cost , schedule , and performance , we analyzed program documents ( including the acquisition strategy and contractor progress reports ) and plans . to understand potential program challenges , and steps taken to address those challenges , we examined the department of defense's ( dod ) risk management planning guidance and reviewed a copy of the program's draft risk management plan and the contractors' latest risk assessment . if you or your staff have any questions on concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff contributing to this report are listed in appendix vi . to conduct this work , we analyzed program documents ( including the acquisition strategy and contractor progress reports ) and plans to determine how the program is progressing in terms of its cost , schedule , and performance , and how well the program is adhering to best practices . we interviewed program officials from the navy's presidential helicopter program office , as well as officials from the office of the director of operational testing and evaluation and the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for developmental test and evaluation to discuss the status of the program . to develop the numbers on the cost and cycle time of the vh - 92a program in table 1 , we obtained and analyzed cost , quantity , and schedule data from the program's selected acquisition report and other information provided by the program . we converted all cost information to fiscal year 2016 dollars using conversion factors from the department of defense ( dod ) comptroller's national defense budget estimates for fiscal year 2016 . through discussions with dod officials responsible for the database and confirming selected data with the program office , we determined that the information obtained was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to understand potential program challenges and steps taken to address those challenges , we examined program and contractor documents and other reports relating to the development effort . we also examined dod's risk management planning guidance and reviewed a copy of the program's draft risk management plan and the contractors' latest risk assessment .