see figure 3 below . according to omb's january 2012 sustainability scorecards for the agencies , gsa's and va's efforts to assess and incorporate sustainable guiding principles in their buildings are on track , but department of the interior's effort is not . while nps has a sustainable buildings implementation plan , agency officials report that they have not assessed many of their historic buildings to determine if they currently meet the guiding principles . nps officials told us that their efforts thus far to comply with the guiding principles have focused largely on new construction projects — such as new visitor centers — or on existing building rehabilitations rather than on historic buildings where there are no planned projects . while nps is not currently on track to meet the guiding principles as assessed by omb , we found that nps had implemented sustainable projects in 9 of 13 nps buildings we visited and , in some cases , had conducted energy audits to identify where future projects could improve the sustainable performance of its historic buildings . we discussed the issues faced by federal agencies to make historic buildings sustainable with three outside experts . based on our discussions with those experts — and a review of professional articles written by those individuals — we found that many historic buildings may be inherently sustainable . in general , historic buildings built before world war ii often incorporated many sustainable principles , such as orienting a building for solar efficiency and making effective use of natural light and ventilation . in addition , generally , the rehabilitation and reuse of a historic building consumes fewer raw materials and affects the environment to a lesser degree than constructing a new building of comparable size . all three experts indicated that nps has generally been an effective advocate for disseminating information about incorporating sustainable improvements in historic buildings . they identified actions — by nps's national center for preservation training and technology or its technical preservation services — to make sustainable green building information available to the preservation community such as nps's recently released technical preservation brief entitled improving energy efficiency in historic buildings . independent of our discussion with these experts , we found that gsa and va have been partnering with nps as well as other federal agencies — such as the department of energy — to further advance federal initiatives aimed at improving the sustainability of historic federal buildings . the three agencies we reviewed face challenges related to the functionality of historic buildings , the amount of funding available for preservation projects , and federal requirements to consult stakeholders on historic preservation . maintaining and making historic buildings functional for contemporary purposes in a constrained budget environment poses a challenge . see figure 2 . when a federally owned historic building becomes underutilized because it no longer serves mission needs , agencies may sell a building or exchange it for comparable historic property so long as the exchange will ensure the preservation of the historic property .