cable households . we found that 57 percent , or 63.7 million american households , view television through a cable service . on average , cable households have 2.7 television sets . sixteen percent of cable households have at least one television set in the home that is not connected to cable but instead receives only over - the - air television signals . of the cable households surveyed , roughly 29 percent had household incomes of less than or equal to $30,000 , and about 13 percent had incomes exceeding $100,000 . we also found that 44 percent of the cable homes have at least one set - top box . of those cable subscribers with a set - top box , about 67 percent reported that their box is capable of viewing channels the cable system sells on “digital cable tiers,” meaning that the channels are transmitted by their cable provider in a digital format . all over - the - air households — which account for approximately 21 million households in the united states — must do one of two things to be able to view digital broadcast signals . first , they could purchase a digital television set that includes a tuner capable of receiving , processing , and displaying a digital signal . the survey data we used indicated that only about 1 percent of over - the - air viewers have , as of now , purchased a digital television that contains a tuner . however , some large televisions sold today are required to include such a tuner and by july 2007 , all television sets larger than 13 inches are required to include a tuner . after that time , consumers who purchase new television sets will automatically have the capability of viewing digital signals . approximately 25 to 30 million new television sets are purchased each year in the united states . the second option available to over - the - air households is to purchase a digital - to - analog set - top box . that is , for those households that have not purchased a new television set , the set - top box will convert the digital broadcast signals to analog so that they can be viewed on an existing analog television set . viewers with digital - to - analog set - top boxes would not actually see the broadcast digital signal in a digital format , but would be viewing that signal after it has been downconverted , by the set - top box , to be compatible with their existing analog television set . although subscribers typically rent , rather than purchase , set - top boxes , we assume that the same level of subsidy is provided to these households as is provided to over - the - air households to defray the cost of having to obtain a new or upgraded set - top box from their provider . there are two issues that stand as important caveats to the analyses we have presented on estimated set - top box subsidy costs . the first is that we based the majority of the analyses on survey results that provide information on the status of american television households as of early 2004 .