sufficient funding . officials for all seven selected investments cited active engagement with program stakeholders — individuals or groups ( including , in some cases , end users ) with an interest in the success of the acquisition — as a critical factor to the success of those investments . agency officials stated that stakeholders , among other things , reviewed contractor proposals during the procurement process , regularly attended program management office sponsored meetings , were working members of integrated project teams , and were notified of problems and concerns as soon as possible . in addition , officials from two investments noted that actively engaging with stakeholders created transparency and trust , and increased the support from the stakeholders . additionally , officials for six of the seven selected investments indicated that the knowledge and skills of the program staff were critical to the success of the program . this included knowledge of acquisitions and procurement processes , monitoring of contracts , large - scale organizational transformation , agile software development concepts , and areas of program management such as earned value management and technical monitoring . finally , officials for five of the seven selected investments identified having the end users test and validate the system components prior to formal end user acceptance testing for deployment as critical to the success of their program . similar to this factor , leading guidance recommends testing selected products and product components throughout the program life cycle . testing of functionality by end users prior to acceptance demonstrates , earlier rather than later in the program life cycle , that the functionality will fulfill its intended use . if problems are found during this testing , programs are typically positioned to make changes that would be less costly and disruptive than ones made later in the life cycle . use of the critical success factors described above can serve as a model of best practices for va . application of these acquisition best practices presents opportunities for the department to increase the likelihood that its planned acquisition of a new electronic health record system will meet its cost , schedule , scope , and performance goals . in conclusion , va continued to obligate billions of dollars for its vista system . recently , the department has undertaken important analyses to better understand the scope of the system and identify capabilities that can be provided by the cerner electronic health record system it is acquiring . va has additional key activities underway , such as establishing program governance and ehrm program planning . based on these preliminary observations and as the department continues its activities to transition from vista to the cerner electronic health record system , critical success factors can serve as a model of best practices that va could apply to enhance the likelihood that the acquisition of the new system will be successfully achieved . while it is early in va's acquisition of the cerner system , it will be important for the department to leverage all available opportunities to ensure that its transition to a new system is carried out in the most effective manner possible . our experience has shown that challenges can successfully be overcome through using a disciplined approach to it acquisition management .