at the ft . drum location , one of the apcs had a position description that included “serves as travel card program manager” as a major duty ( with the recognition that this duty , combined with duties as the unit's program manager for cost accounting , should require about 30 percent of the employee's time ) . allowing army travel cardholders to maintain accounts in an active status when not needed for government travel unnecessarily exposes the army to an increased risk of misuse — through cardholders either mistakenly or intentionally using the card for personal purposes . dod's fmr provides that restricted cards are issued to cardholders in an “inactive” status and initially activated only when the cardholders have authorized government travel needs . appendix ii includes the specific criteria we used to conclude on the effectiveness of these controls . the army's inability to establish effective controls in several of these key control areas , particularly relating to timeliness of payment , contributed to its high delinquency rate . as discussed previously , for the four locations , we estimate that the percentage of transactions during fiscal year 2001 that represented personal use varied from 15 percent at one location to 45 percent at another location . timely approval of the travel orders is the first step in ensuring that travel is authorized . at three of the four installations we audited , the controls over travel order approval were effective . we estimate that 0 to 3 percent of transactions at these installations did not have documented evidence that travel orders were approved prior to the beginning of travel . at fort bragg , forces command , travel order controls had an estimated 6 percent failure rate associated with travel orders that were not approved prior to travel . the control breakdown we noted in our sample transactions occurred when the travel took place prior to written approval of the travel order . for example , one traveler had travel duty from april 8 , 2001 , to april 19 , 2001 , but did not get his travel order approved until april 27 , 2001 . according to army officials , this often occurred because travelers neglected to document the date of verbal travel authorization on their written travel orders . once the travel is complete , the traveler is to submit a voucher for all reimbursable expenses and must include receipts for certain claimed amounts . the voucher review process is intended to ensure that only authorized , properly supported travel charges are reimbursed and that the amounts are accurate and properly calculated . the california national guard had an estimated failure rate for voucher review that was two to six times higher than that of the other three installations . we found undetected instances of travel voucher errors by travelers , voucher reviewers ( both installation - level and dfas - level ) , and dfas . travel voucher errors result in either over - or underpayments to the traveler and create an additional administrative burden for army and dfas when the traveler must file a supplemental voucher to claim amounts that were not paid initially or when the initial travel vouchers are incomplete or erroneous .