stamp retailers . usps's stamps on consignment program , managed by abnote north america ( abnote ) , a company specializing in secure distribution and order fulfillment , makes stamps available at retailers such as grocery stores and pharmacies and at banks' automated teller machines . usps generally provides no compensation for stamp retailers , and retailers cannot sell stamps above face value ; however , banks that sell stamps through automated teller machines may charge customers a fee for this service , and other stores that are not stamps on consignment program participants may also resell stamps and charge additional fees . according to usps , as of fiscal year 2010 , there were more than 56,000 stamps on consignment locations selling stamps . the types of usps products and services available at post offices ices available at post offices compared with those available at retail alternatives are shown in figure 4. compared with those available at retail alternatives are shown in figure 4 . retail alternatives are available in urban , suburban , and rural areas , supplementing usps's traditional retail network of post offices , as illustrated in figure 5 . usps employees in headquarters and field offices have roles in implementing retail alternatives . headquarters officials are responsible for designing and overseeing the retail alternatives programs , including setting goals , developing marketing campaigns , managing usps.com , and developing policies for local officials that oversee kiosks and retail partners . they also maintain databases on retail revenue and facilities . officials in administrative field offices , particularly district offices , and post offices supervise postmasters and other managers who oversee and support local implementation of retail alternatives , in addition to their duties supporting the mail delivery network . these oversight duties include monitoring and servicing kiosks and training and monitoring retail partners . the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) requires usps to establish outcome - related performance goals for its major functions . gpra also requires usps , as it does other federal agencies , to develop performance indicators for measuring the relevant outcomes of each program activity to demonstrate how well it is achieving its goals . we have previously reported that performance data should be complete , accurate , valid , timely , and easily accessible to be useful . furthermore , we have reported on the importance of reliable cost data , noting that it can help provide accurate comparisons of costs and benefits ; inform budgets and proposals for reorganization ; identify potential savings , efficiencies , and waste ; benchmark programs and activities ; and measure program and managers' performance . usps's efforts to expand access through retail alternatives are intended to support its strategic goals of improving service and financial performance . according to usps's 2010 comprehensive statement on postal operations , retail alternatives improve service by making postal products and services available at times and places consistent with customer preferences , and they improve financial performance by increasing revenue and providing services at a lower cost than traditional outlets .