specific performance measures are established in each contract . dod believes this contracting strategy for supporting weapon systems and components will achieve higher levels of performance while minimizing costs . for example , dod has claimed millions of dollars in cost savings and significant performance improvements in such areas as material availability and logistics response time through the use of performance - based logistics . as a result of aggressively pursuing this contracting strategy , dod expected an increasing number of weapon systems and components to be maintained for the military services by private sector companies under long - term , fixed - price , performance - based contracts . to justify the use of a performance - based logistics strategy , according to dod guidance , program offices should conduct a business case analysis prior to adopting this approach . following implementation of a performance - based logistics contract , program offices should update their business case analysis to validate the assumptions used based on actual cost and performance data and to support future weapon systems plans . as requested , we reviewed dod's implementation of performance - based logistics arrangements . our objective was to determine whether dod could demonstrate cost savings or improved responsiveness through the use of performance - based logistics arrangements . this is the second of two reports addressing dod's implementation of performance - based logistics . in an august 2004 report , we identified the types of contractor logistics support arrangements the private sector used when outsourcing the maintenance of complex and costly equipment with life - cycle management issues similar to those of military systems . we will also send copies to the under secretary of defense ( acquisition , technology and logistics ) . copies of this report will be made available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions on the matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8412 or solisw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . william m. solis ( 202 ) 512-8412 or solisw@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , thomas gosling , assistant director ; thom barger ; judith collins ; pamela valentine ; and cheryl weissman were major contributors to this report . dod has increasingly relied on contractors to provide logistics support for weapon system maintenance . then , based on recommendations in our august 2004 report , the under secretary of defense ( acquisition , technology and logistics ) issued a memorandum reemphasizing that the use of this type of support strategy was intended to optimize weapon system availability while minimizing costs and the logistics footprint and may be applied to weapon systems , subsystems , and components . the memorandum also provided specific definitions of performance metrics to be used .