work . for example , we commonly heard that employees rely on local , knowledgeable co - workers to help them with their computer problems or provide advice on completing human resources - related actions . although this practice may greatly benefit the employees in need of assistance , it could take time away from the other employees' regular work duties , and if accurate and up - to - date information is not given , it could also result in unintentional errors . we also often heard from field - unit employees that given repeated problems with accessing network drives or other databases , they may store agency data on their hard drives , rather than on central servers , or may share their computers or passwords with others who lack ready access , such as seasonal field staff or visiting research fellows . such workarounds , however , may result in the loss of information if a hard drive fails , and they are in violation of the agency's computer security policies . increased frustration and lowered morale . field - unit employees' frustrations over their perceived loss in productivity , as well as problems that have directly affected employees' careers with the agency , have often lowered employees' morale . we commonly heard that spending more time on administrative tasks that are often confusing and complex , and spending less time on mission work , has resulted in significant employee frustration and has often directly lowered employee morale . we also heard numerous examples where employees' benefits , pay , position , or other personnel - related actions were negatively affected as a result of a mistake made by or a miscommunication with , a help - desk agent or other business service staff , which has often greatly affected employee morale , according to those we spoke with . for example , problems cited ranged from confusion over leave balances and appropriate pay levels to promotions that were initially approved by human resources management officials but then later rescinded . several employees told us that such errors have become so frequent that an “expectation of failure” has generally taken root with many employees , which also contributes to their low morale . increased safety concerns . in some cases , field - unit employees told us that problems or delays in getting business service tasks accomplished have increased safety risks for forest service employees or the public , for example by distracting employees from important safety work or by delaying needed equipment repair or replacement . we commonly heard concerns that centralization has caused employees to , as one senior official put it , “take their eye off the ball” — that is , reduce their focus on efficiently and safely carrying out their assigned tasks — because of the increased workload and distractions associated with centralization . we also frequently heard about delays or problems with technical assistance for radios — a key communication tool for firefighting and fieldwork . for example , before centralization , field units would have relied on local technicians to conduct needed repairs , but under centralization , the field - unit staff now first contact the help desk to make such a request .