mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . the hud study provides one answer to this question . the subcommittee may wish to consider possibilities with either a greater or lesser effect . the inclusion of the metropolitan pci introduces more controversial issues as well . the policy question this raises is: can these differences be justified by differences in funding capacity or cost differences ? clearly , the introduction of per capita income can be justified on the grounds that it provides a means of taking into account the underlying economic strength of communities and their ability to fund local needs from local resources . i would also observe that doing so is consistent with the administration's strengthening america's community initiative , which emphasizes indicators of economic conditions such as job loss and unemployment . however , introducing economic capacity also raises the question of to what extent should low income places be targeted ? for example , should a community with half the average income be given a grant that is twice the average , or possibly even more ? this factor , rather than targeting more funding to low - income areas , does the opposite . it actually targets more funding to communities in higher income metropolitan areas . however , the rationale for doing so is not discussed in hud's report . one possible reason for introducing metropolitan pci as a factor is that it would take account of geographic differences in the cost - of - living . however , consensus within the research community has not yet been achieved regarding the magnitude of these cost differences . technical experts are therefore unable to provide guidance regarding how these cost differences may be offset in a funding formula . as a consequence , there is no objective basis to determine if hud's use of metropolitan per capita income is appropriate . in conclusion , the prospect of increasing budgetary stringency at the federal level appropriately prompts a reexamination of programs that respond to challenges faced by communities throughout the nation . the administration's proposal to restructure assistance for community development opens up important issues regarding how to focus such aid on the nation's more hard pressed areas . for the most part , the hud study does a very effective job of identifying the critical decisions regarding grant targeting for congressional consideration . however , additional formula options are not explored as part of the process of reaching a decision on how best to target cdbg funding . if program funding continues to decline in inflation - adjusted dollars , it may be appropriate to go beyond simply a needs - based targeting policy and consider alternatives to also take into account the underlying strength of local economies to meet those needs . finally , while the formula is a central instrument in targeting program funding , the criteria used to establish entitlement status could also play an important role in directing a larger share of program funding to communities with the greatest need .