both questionnaires are presented below . in addition to the contact named above , susan iott ( assistant director ) , rodney bacigalupo , mark braza , john w. delicath , elizabeth m. dretsch , charles egan , richard p. johnson , ilga semeiks , and sarah veale made key contributions to this report . we asked municipalities to describe these instances . epa officials said that they have agreements with each municipality that the agency will provide each group with technical assistance . epa officials also said that they would provide $150,000 to each municipality , for a total of $750,000 for the pilot . when we asked about what resources or documents epa would use to guide the pilot project and the work with the five municipal groups , epa officials referred us to the following agency resources that provide guidance to communities and wastewater utilities for planning for sustainability and managing stormwater planning more generally . community solutions for stormwater management: a guide for voluntary long - term planning ( 2016 ) . according to the guide , it describes how to develop a comprehensive long - term community stormwater plan that integrates stormwater management with a municipality's broader plans for economic development , infrastructure investment , and environmental compliance . the document says that when developing a plan , a community should determine and define the scope of the integration effort , ensure the active participation of entities that are needed to implement the plan , and identify the role each entity will have in implementing the plan . epa officials said that this document outlines the approach they will use for the pilot projects . epa is also developing a web - based toolkit that will include technical and financing resources to walk communities through the long - term stormwater planning process provided in the community solutions for stormwater management guide integrated municipal stormwater and wastewater planning approach framework ( 2012 ) . according to the document , it is for use by epa , states , and local governments to develop and implement integrated plans under the clean water act . steps for developing a plan include defining the scope of the integration effort , ensuring participation of the entities needed to implement the integrated plan , and identifying the role each entity will have in implementing the plan . epa officials said that the pilot project's approach to long - term planning reflects epa's integrated planning framework . in addition , we identified other epa resources which include some features that we have identified as being helpful for collaborative groups . these documents include the following information: green infrastructure in parks: a guide to collaboration , funding , and community engagement ( 2017 ) . according to the guide , it is intended to encourage partnerships between park agencies and stormwater agencies aimed at promoting the use of green infrastructure on park lands . it identifies steps to facilitate the implementation of green infrastructure in parks , including identifying and engaging stakeholders ; building relationships ; leveraging funding opportunities ; and undertaking high - visibility pilot projects , which it says helps gain support for more green practices . planning for sustainability: handbook for water and wastewater utilities ( 2012 ) .