purpose . congress sets limits on the activities or purposes for which an agency may use collections . congress has granted some agencies broad authority to use some of their collections for any program purpose , but has limited the use of other collections to specific sets of activities . narrower restrictions may benefit stakeholders and increase congressional control . on the other hand , statutes that too narrowly limit how collections can be used reduce both congress's flexibility to make resource decisions and an agency's flexibility to reallocate resources . this can make it more difficult to pursue public policy goals or respond to changing program needs , such as when the activities intended to achieve the purposes of the related program change . these funds are not dedicated to the agency or program under which they were collected ; they are used for the general support of federal government activities . for example , penalties from financial institutions: civil monetary penalty payments collected from financial institutions by certain financial regulators , including the office of the comptroller of the currency and the federal deposit insurance corporation , are deposited to the treasury as miscellaneous receipts . in march 2016 , we reported that , from january 2009 through december 2015 , financial regulators and components within the department of the treasury deposited $2.7 billion to the treasury as miscellaneous receipts from enforcement actions assessed against financial institutions for violations related to anti - money laundering , anti - corruption , and u.s. sanctions programs requirements . federal communications commission ( fcc ) application fees: the fcc regulates interstate and international communications by radio , television , wire , satellite , and cable , and telecommunications services for all people of the united states . fcc collects application fees from companies for activities such as license applications , renewals , or requests for modification . as we reported in september 2013 , these fees are deposited to the treasury as miscellaneous receipts . some fees , fines , and penalties cannot be used by an agency without being further appropriated to the agency . for example , customs and border protection's ( cbp ) merchandise processing fee: importers of cargo pay a fee to offset the costs of “customs revenue functions” as defined in statute , and the automation of customs systems . cbp deposits merchandise processing fees as offsetting receipts to the customs user fee account , with availability subject to appropriation . in july 2016 , we reported that in fiscal year 2014 merchandise processing fee collections totaled approximately $2.3 billion . requiring an appropriation to make the funds available to an agency increases opportunities for congressional oversight on a regular basis . when the amount of collections exceeds the amount of the appropriation , however , unobligated collection balances that are not available to the agency may accumulate . for example , security and exchange commission ( sec ) fees: when sec collects more in section 31 fees than its annual appropriation , the excess collections are not available for obligation without additional congressional action .