rationale . wic was designed to serve poor and low - income women and children as an adjunct to good health care ; therefore , it should be highly accessible to this population . service delivery by wic agencies has become more difficult due to changing health and social services delivery systems and changing characteristics of the population served by the wic program . by having greater variety of providers and service locations , applicants or participants may have greater access to wic services . potential advantages of this approach include the following: participation among working families and students may increase . at - risk individuals who do not have access to traditional clinics may be reached . partnerships with other community organizations may be formed , reducing the funding required to support multiple locations . additional providers may create a more competitive market for wic services , improving customer service . the local wic program may receive added exposure in the community , improving its ability to attract potential participants . potential disadvantages of this approach include the following: authorized grocery store vendors that are allowed to provide space could compromise the independence of the state and local agencies in their vendor management roles and create the appearance of a conflict of interest . the integration of wic with health services may be more difficult if wic is operated at alternative locations , such as grocery stores . inconsistent and inaccurate information may be provided at alternative locations , resulting in a lack of program continuity and standardization . staff members who are bilingual or willing to work evening and weekend hours or in low - income neighborhoods due to safety concerns are difficult to find . few new agencies are applying to be wic providers . wic applicants , participants , staff and others may get confused about service delivery if multiple wic providers exist without defined service boundaries . improve wic's ability to respond to emerging health issues , such as obesity and diabetes , and to participants' nutritional needs by expanding the range and scope of nutrition education . this could be accomplished by the following: expand nutrition education and breastfeeding promotion curricula to include such topics as the benefits of physical activity and influence of media advertising on the food preferences of parents and children . place greater emphasis during educational sessions on participants' eating , feeding , and shopping practices or behaviors . increase the use of multiple strategies when counseling participants . provide more age - appropriate nutrition education to preschool - age wic participants . rationale . over the past decade , the incidence of obesity and diabetes among adults and children has reached epidemic proportions , especially among lower income individuals . the nutrition education and breastfeeding promotion sessions provide an opportunity for wic staff to help participants prevent these diseases . however , we observed that the quality of the nutrition education to wic participants varied significantly . experts indicate that nutrition counseling that addresses eating behaviors and / or that uses variety of teaching strategies can be more effective in preventing obesity and other nutrition - related illnesses . potential advantages of this approach include the following: disease prevention may be less costly than treatment .