we did not evaluate the effectiveness of these programs . we conducted our review from february 2002 through july 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . according to the state department's 2002 annual performance plan , the department's counterterrorism goals are to reduce the number of terrorist attacks , bring terrorists to justice , reduce or eliminate state - sponsored terrorist acts , delegitimize the use of terror as a political tool , enhance the u.s. response to terrorism overseas , and strengthen international cooperation and operational capabilities to combat terrorism . the secretary of state is responsible for coordinating all u.s. civilian departments and agencies that provide counterterrorism assistance overseas . the secretary also is responsible for managing all u.s. bilateral and multilateral relationships intended to combat terrorism abroad . state requested over $2.3 billion to combat terrorism in fiscal year 2003 . this includes more than $1 billion for overseas embassy security and construction , as well as for counterterrorism assistance and training to countries cooperating with the global coalition against terrorism . table 1 provides a breakdown of state's funding to combat terrorism . by contrast , state spent about $1.6 billion in fiscal year 2001 and received about $1.8 billion to combat terrorism in fiscal year 2002 . state received an additional $203 million through the emergency response fund as part of the $40 billion appropriated by the congress in response to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks against the united states . the office of management and budget reported that determining precise funding levels associated with activities to combat terrorism is difficult because departments may not isolate those activities from other program activities . some activities serve multiple purposes — for example , upgrades to embassy security help protect against terrorism as well as other crimes . the state department conducts multifaceted activities in an effort to prevent terrorist attacks on americans abroad . the office of the legal advisor also works with the u.n. and with other nations in drafting multilateral agreements , treaties , and conventions on counterterrorism . the bureau of diplomatic security , working with the department of justice , cooperates with foreign intelligence , security , and law enforcement entities to track and capture terrorists in foreign countries , assist in their extradition to the united states , and block attempted terrorist attacks on u.s. citizens and assets abroad . the office of the coordinator for counterterrorism , in conjunction with the department of justice and other agencies , coordinates state's role in facilitating the arrest of suspected terrorists through an overseas arrest , known as a rendition , when the united states lacks an extradition treaty . the bureau of diplomatic security manages the rewards for justice program . this program offers payment for information leading to the prevention of a terrorist attack or the arrest and prosecution of designated individuals involved in international terrorism . these rewards reach up to $25 million for those involved in the september 11 attacks . the bureau of intelligence and research prepares intelligence and threat reports for the secretary of state , high - level department officials , and ambassadors at u.s. missions .