this is our fifth report . specifically , we determined ( 1 ) the progress of f / a - 22 development in terms of performance , schedule , and cost and ( 2 ) implications of this progress on the department of defense's ( dod ) acquisition plans . the f / a - 22 is to be an air superiority and ground attack aircraft with advanced features to make it less detectable to adversaries ( stealth characteristics ) and capable of high speeds for long ranges . it is designed to have integrated avionics that greatly improve pilots' awareness of the situation surrounding them . the objectives of the f / a - 22 development program are to ( 1 ) design , fabricate , test , and deliver nine f / a - 22 development test aircraft , two non - flying structural test aircraft , six production representative test aircraft , and 37 flight - qualified engines ; ( 2 ) design , fabricate , integrate , and test the avionics ; and ( 3 ) design , develop , and test the support and training systems . the f / a - 22 is being developed under contracts with lockheed martin corporation , the prime contractor ( for the aircraft ) , and pratt & whitney corporation ( for the engine ) . following a history of increasing cost estimates to complete the development phase of the f / a - 22 program , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1998 established a cost limitation for both the development and production . subsequently , the national defense authorization act of 2002 eliminated the cost limitation for the development , but left the cost limit for production cost in place . the production program is now limited to $36.8 billion . the current cost estimate of the development program is $21.9 billion . currently , the f / a - 22 program is in both development and production . development is in its final stages , and low rate initial production has begun . since fiscal year 1997 , funds have been appropriated to acquire production aircraft , and the f / a - 22 acquisition plan calls for steadily increasing annual production rates . the aircraft's development problems and schedule delays have caused congressional concerns , particularly in light of dod's planned increase in production rates . the national defense appropriations act for fiscal year 2003 prohibited the obligation of funds for the acquisition of more than 16 production aircraft in fiscal year 2003 , until the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics submits the following to the congressional defense committees: ( 1 ) a formal risk assessment that identifies and characterizes the potential cost , technical , schedule , or other significant risks resulting from increasing the f / a - 22 production quantities prior to the dedicated initial operational test and evaluation ( diot&e ) of the aircraft and ( 2 ) either a certification that increasing the f / a - 22 production quantity for fiscal year 2003 beyond 16 aircraft involves lower risk and lower total program cost than staying at that quantity or implementing a revised production plan , funding , and test schedule .