we have several observations to offer on the bill . as we have discussed with your staff , we have specific concerns about section 5 of the bill , which would require gao to establish and implement a rating system for agency compliance with and participation in telework initiatives and report the results . for executive branch agencies , we believe this function is more appropriately placed with opm . a gao rating system that does not have the benefit of a full gao evaluation of the underlying information would raise concerns that our independence is compromised if we were asked at a future time to evaluate telework programs in the federal government . accordingly , we have provided committee staff with substitute language that would place these rating and report functions in opm , the agency that is currently responsible for reporting on most telework activities and participation in the executive branch . our substitute language would have the comptroller general instead provide his views on the opm report to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and the house committee on oversight and government reform within 6 months of the report . we would also like to bring several other issues to your attention . the bill would extend coverage of these telework initiatives to the legislative and judicial branches . we suggest substituting a reference to “the head of each legislative branch entity” in sections 2 ( c ) ( 3 ) and 4 ( a ) of the bill so that the heads of the library of congress , the government printing office , and gao , for example , would be responsible for developing agency policies on telework , determining which employees are eligible for telework , and designating senior - level employees to serve as telework managing officers . this approach would be consistent with the coverage of the executive branch under the bill where the head of each agency would perform similar functions . with regard to the bill's requirement to appoint a telework managing officer in each executive branch agency , it is not clear how that employee's duties would relate to the duties of the agency officials currently designated as telework coordinators pursuant to the provisions of section 627 of public law no . another provision of the bill would define telework as occurring on at least 2 business days per week , leaving unclear how this would relate to the broader definitions of telework currently defined in existing legislation and opm guidance , which includes episodic or occasional instances . it is also unclear whether the bill intends to allow agencies to consider employee performance in making telework eligibility decisions . current legislation and agency practice requires employees to be performing satisfactorily . the bill also provides for “productivity awards” for teleworking employees , but it is not clear whether nonteleworking employees would also be eligible to receive productivity awards and would be evaluated on the same performance standards . we would note that one of the key practices identified in our 2003 report was ensuring that the same performance standards are used to evaluate both teleworkers and nonteleworkers .