governance . several officers noted that due to the relatively small size of lrps , particularly those conducted through wfp's p4p program , their ability to result in positive development impacts are limited and ultimately depends on whether local governments also have sound agricultural policies in place that support lrp . wfp business practices . what is the likelihood of supply disruptions or delays due to breach of contract , insufficient storage capacity , supplier inability to deliver on contract terms , government interference ( such as export bans and currency controls ) , and logistical bottleneck ? study: food procurement in developing countries , world food program , executive board , first regular session , feb. 2006 , rome . report summarizes other wfp studies on lrp in bolivia , burkina faso , ethiopia , nepal , south africa , uganda , and congo . the vast majority of wfp operations is in response to emergencies and has wide fluctuations in needs . wfp's food purchasing tends to be irregular and unpredictable , which seriously limits its ability to contribute to market development . wfp has not had success in procuring directly from farmers and farmer groups . the case studies indicate that supporting farmers and farmer groups has mixed results and may lead to higher prices paid , higher administrative costs , more contracts , and greater risk of default . in many low - income countries , national market intelligence systems are weak , and reliable and timely data are not available . often , it is not the cost of the food , but the management costs associated with local procurement in surplus - producing regions where there is little or no market infrastructure that is prohibitive . these management costs include monitoring and supporting the completion of contracts , the costs and risks of contract default , and risk of inadequate food quality . study: world food program local and regional food procurement - an analytical review ( ethiopian case study ) , final report . addis ababa: june 2005 . year: 2001-2004 country: ethiopia commodity: corn and wheat in 2003 there would have been a cost savings of $78 per ton on locally purchased wheat and corn . based on analysis in 1996-2004 , 60-70 percent of the markets are integrated . producers receive 75 percent of retail price in addis ababa , leaving a 25 percent retail margin . ethiopia's grain marketing system is constrained by lack of access to financial resources , inadequate infrastructures , poor roads , inadequate access to market information , storage facilities , lack of standards and grades , high transfer costs , and nonfulfillment of delivery options . traders deal with small annual volume and do not hold grain in storage for seasonal arbitrage . delivery of the product is a real challenge , particularly ensuring the quality of the product delivered . rejection of delivery for failure to fulfill quality standards is frequent . since traders do not keep stocks on hand , contract default is a problem when traders are unable to procure the proper amount or quality at the expected price . default occurs if traders get a better offer ; there are problems with traders not honoring their commitments .