one of these is responsible for policy , management and budget . the others are responsible for mission - related matters including land and minerals management , indian affairs , fish and wildlife and parks , and water and science . at the next level of the organization , eight bureaus , aligned with these assistant secretaries , are responsible for achieving interior's diverse missions . for example , the department uses a land mobile radio infrastructure to support geographically dispersed public safety and protection missions . these missions include law enforcement on federal and tribal lands , urban and wildland firefighting , seismic monitoring , wildlife tracking management of national parks , and water reclamation activities . in contrast , interior's minerals management service owns systems that track oil and gas production on public lands and maintains records on royalties that are due to the federal government and to american indian tribes . interior's bureaus and associated program offices propose , fund , and manage these kinds of investments , while certain departmental offices — such as the offices of financial management and personnel policy — propose and manage other systems that support administrative functions . interior's national business center is responsible for managing and operating departmental information systems on a fee - for - service basis and for providing other kinds of administrative support , such as facilities management . in fiscal year 2003 , interior invested over $850 million in it — about 6 percent of its total budget . while the secretary of the interior has the ultimate responsibility for managing these investments — including overseeing and guiding the development , management , and use of information resources and information technology throughout the department — interior's cio is responsible for providing leadership and oversight for it investment management processes throughout the agency . to that end , interior's cio serves as the chair of the department's it management council , which oversees “major” investments in it . about 2,255 of interior's staff of about 70,000 are classified as it professionals . thirty - four staff provided direct support to the cio in the department's office of the cio during fiscal year 2003 . appendix i provides additional information about each bureau's missions , functions , staffing , and total expenditures on it for fiscal year 2003 . prior reviews of it projects performed at interior over the past decade — by gao and the office of management and budget ( omb ) as well as interior's office of the inspector general ( oig ) — have revealed significant weaknesses in it investment management practices at both the department and the bureau levels . over the last several years , we have issued a series of reports on interior's major it investments and associated management practices . in april and july of 1999 , we reported that interior had not followed sound management practices in the early stages of its effort to acquire the trust asset and accounting management system , a system designed to manage indian assets and land records . we also reported that , as a result of poor planning , interior could not ensure that the system would meet financial management needs cost effectively or mitigate system development risks adequately .