this program , the d.c . 106-98 ) states that the funding shall remain available until expended . the tag program office engaged in a variety of publicity and outreach efforts to both d.c. residents and eligible institutions to promote the tag program in its first year of operation . efforts to inform potential applicants about the tag program included staff visits to public and private high schools in d.c. , information about the program mailed to every d.c. public high school senior , radio advertisements , and marketing posters at subway and bus stations around the city . tag program staff also worked with staff at the d.c. college access program ( d.c. cap ) to provide information to d.c. public schools about the grant . the d.c. cap is a nonprofit organization , funded by a consortium of 17 private sector companies and foundations , whose intent is to complement the tag program by encouraging d.c. public high school students to enter and graduate from college . d.c. cap provides d.c. public school students with support services both before and during college , including placing college advisors in each public high school beginning in academic year 2000-01 , assisting students with college and financial aid applications , and providing both information resources at d.c. public high schools and educational planning workshops for students and parents . tag program staff provided training and information about the grant to d.c. cap college advisors . in order to inform eligible institutions about the grant program , staff mailed information to the president and financial aid officer of each public institution and eligible private institution . in addition , the secretary of education sent a letter to each chief executive officer of public higher education undergraduate institutions nationwide in july 2000 , providing information about the grant program and urging institutions to sign a program participation agreement with the mayor of the district of columbia . currently , if a grant - eligible applicant decides to attend an eligible but nonparticipating institution , the tag program staff contact the institution and provide information on the program as well as on the participation agreement . however , according to the tag program director , the applicant and his or her family often play a vital role in persuading the institution to sign an agreement with the program . in order to be eligible for the grant , an applicant must meet certain criteria , including graduation from any high school or attainment of a secondary school equivalency diploma after january 1998 and enrollment or acceptance for enrollment in an undergraduate program at an eligible institution . applicants must also be domiciled in d.c. for 12 consecutive months prior to the start of their freshman year of college and must continue to maintain their primary residence in d.c. throughout the grant period . in academic year 2000-01 , approximately 3,500 individuals applied for the grant and 70 percent , or approximately 2,500 individuals , met the eligibility criteria . twenty - two percent of the applicants , on the other hand , were found ineligible for the grant , and about 8 percent of the applications were pending or inactive at the time of our review .