pub . under the act , federal agencies must evaluate the likely environmental effects of their activities using an environmental assessment or , if the activity likely would significantly affect the environment , a more detailed environmental impact statement . restructured futuregen , doe would fund several projects proposed by industry , including entities such as electric power companies , to add ccs to commercial power plants . the plants would begin using ccs by the end of 2015 ; and , as planned under the original futuregen , they would be required to capture , store , and monitor the stored co for 3 to 5 years , and to continue monitoring the stored co however , with both the original and restructured futuregen , a nonfederal source must pay at least 50 percent of any demonstration component's cost . in october 2008 , doe received a small number of applications for the restructured futuregen ; however , some of these applications are for proposals outside of the restructured futuregen's scope . doe is currently assessing proposals received and had stated it expected to announce a selection of projects by december 2008 ; however , as of the beginning of february 2009 , it had made no decision . doe requested supplemental information from restructured futuregen applicants which will be reviewed prior to any selection decision . while igcc is a promising technology for generating electricity from coal , currently , coal - fired electricity is almost exclusively generated in existing pulverized coal - fired power plants . in these plants , pulverized coal is combusted in air to boil water , which raises steam that , in turn , is routed to turbines to generate electricity . the co that results from burning coal is exhausted in the flue gas at atmospheric pressure . global emissions of greenhouse gases , such as coproduction of some crops and livestock productivity , and a decrease in the availability of fresh water in certain parts of the world . electricity , often referred to as the energy penalty or parasitic power , is required for capture and compression . oxyfuel combustion: oxyfuel combustion , which is in its developmental stages , is a technology that is being developed for using coal to generate electricity that could reduce co emissions . according to doe , oxyfuel combustion could be applied to existing pulverized coal - fired plants . oxyfuel combustion burns coal using pure oxygen diluted with recycled co and water vapor , with some excess oxygen , facilitating the capture of the co is not necessary under this approach , the co . however , depending on the level of excess oxygen and other trace components , some additional gas cleanup may be required to make the co would be transported , likely via pipeline , to a storage site and injected at depths of over 800 meters ( or about 2,600 feet ) into underground geologic formations ( such as depleted oil reservoirs and saline formations ) , thought to be conducive for isolating the co leakage and the ownership of co must be monitored to ensure it does not escape into the environment .