accelerated depreciation . when accelerating depreciation , the navy pays the shipyard higher payments for depreciation of an asset over a shortened timeline than under a normal depreciation payment schedule . in exchange , the shipyard agrees to fund the investment . this benefits the shipyard because it recoups its investment faster than it would have under a normal depreciation schedule . for example , if a shipyard asset has a useful life of 9 years , the shipyard recoups a portion of the investment each year over that span . however , if an incentive agreement accelerated the depreciation schedule , the shipyard would receive larger payments earlier and over fewer years . navy and shipbuilding officials explained that this kind of incentive can help bridge a gap between an investment's expected rate of return and the corporation's desired rate of return to help justify making an investment . see table 2 for a comparison of normal and accelerated straight - line depreciation . special contract - incentive fee . while incentive fees are used in contracts across the department of defense generally to motivate contractor efforts , the navy also uses special contract - incentive fees to specifically encourage investments in facilities and equipment . on a contract that includes such a special incentive fee , a shipyard may earn a fee for making an investment . this special fee is available to the shipyard only if it agrees to make a navy - approved investment . the special fee may pay for all or part of the investment . in some cases , the incentive bridges the difference between the corporation's desired rate of return and the projected return on an investment . contract share - line adjustment . the contract share - line defines what share of underruns or overruns will accrue to the contractor and the navy . by adjusting the contract share - line ratio , the navy can incentivize a contractor to invest in facilities or equipment that will reduce costs . for example , during original contract negotiations for a fixed - price incentive or cost - plus incentive contract , the two parties may agree to an even share of the savings if the total negotiated or allowable cost ends up being less than the total target cost . through a contract modification , the navy could change the original sharing ratio so that more of the savings are given to the contractor . under this modification , the contractor is incentivized to invest in a facility or equipment that may reduce costs so that it earns a higher fee . maintaining capabilities . from time to time , shipyards make major investments to replace or repair facilities and equipment . this allows the shipyards to maintain existing capabilities for years or decades . for example , electric boat officials explained that its shipyard had to make a major investment in dock repair in order to maintain the shipyard's ability to launch and repair submarines . through investments to improve efficiencies and develop new capabilities , major shipyards modernized their facilities and equipment , thus transforming their shipbuilding processes . some of these investments completely changed the physical layouts of shipyards .