( see app . the $374 million annual upper payment limit provision that wisconsin submitted to hcfa on february 7 , 2001 , was separate from , and in addition to , its previously approved arrangements costing about $23 million annually . wisconsin therefore had no established historical budgetary reliance on its february 7 proposed financing scheme , which hcfa approved in may 2001 . as arranged with your offices , unless you release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issuance date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , the administrator of cms , and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-7118 or frank pasquier on ( 206 ) 287-4861 . other major contributors included tim bushfield , terry saiki , stan stenersen , and stefanie weldon . impact of event on states with pending amendments letter announces hcfa's intent to ( 1 ) phase out upper payment limit financing mechanisms and ( 2 ) pursue steps that put an immediate end to paying states that file plan amendments in the intervening period before any regulation takes effect . the proposed rule says that states with pending plan amendments not in compliance with the new regulation would qualify for a transition period only if they were approved before the effective date of the final regulation . the act directs the secretary of health and human services to issue a final regulation based on the october 2000 proposed rule . hcfa again says that noncompliant pending plan amendments would be reviewed under the new regulation . plan amendments not in compliance with the new regulations would not qualify for transition periods . the final rule is silent as to whether plan amendments currently under consideration would be reviewed using the new regulation or the old one . according to hcfa officials , the language change from the proposed rule resulted from an inadvertent editing revision . hcfa indicated that it had decided to review pending plan amendments under the old regulation , essentially reversing its earlier position . this change in position gave states with such plan amendments the opportunity to receive excess federal payments through september 30 , 2002 . the rule proposes reducing the transition period to 1 year for such pending plan amendments . the final rule adopts shorter transition periods for plan amendments that were pending when the january regulation was issued , that were subsequently approved , and that did not comply with the january regulation . the final rule limits the transition period to 1 year after the effective date of the plan amendment or november 5 , 2001 , whichever is later . medicaid: state financing schemes again drive up federal payments ( gao / t - hehs - 00-193 , sept. 6 , 2000 ) . medicaid in schools: poor oversight and improper payments compromise potential benefit ( gao / t - hehs / osi - 00-87 , apr .