( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report to state , commerce , usda , and ustr for review and comment . the three offices that were not aware of the restrictions were from state . although these officials were not aware of the restrictions , they said they had never provided services to u.s. tobacco companies . commerce and usda headquarters officials said that it is widely known within their agencies that staff should not promote tobacco . commerce and usda officials said the guidance concerning these restrictions has been consistent for many years and that staff in the field and in headquarters are very aware of the restrictions . most officials overseas had received some guidance concerning the restrictions on promoting tobacco . officials in 21 of the 24 offices overseas we interviewed had received written or verbal guidance concerning the restrictions on promoting tobacco at some point in their career . for example , officials in 15 offices mentioned receiving the state - issued interagency guidance cable when we asked them what type of tobacco - related guidance they had received . we conducted this performance audit from november 2017 to december 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the united states exported over $2.1 billion in tobacco and tobacco products in 2017 . figure 1 shows how tobacco exports fluctuated from 2007 to 2017 . for example , one usda official stated that he could not recall the last time he received guidance and noted that cables can easily be overlooked . he recommended that usda improve its efforts to distribute the cable and have supervisors maintain an annual checklist to ensure staff have read and understand it or incorporate it into annual training . a state official told us that he was in washington , d.c. when state issued the prior cable and he did not learn about it until he had been stationed at his next overseas post for several months . a commerce official noted that some officials new to post may not receive the interagency guidance cable for several months . all officials working overseas can access the interagency guidance cable through the state cable database or access other resources if a tobacco - related issue arises . for example , the commerce client eligibility policy and the interagency guidance cable are available on an internal commerce website . usda officials in headquarters stated that they do not remind officials overseas about the restrictions or available guidance , but that , in response to our audit work , they plan to send an annual reminder . finally , many post officials we interviewed said that they are aware of the activities their colleagues are undertaking and would have the opportunity to educate their colleagues before they provided any services to a tobacco company .