i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . in several instances patients cancelled multiple times . in 4 of the cases vamc staff closed the consults without the patients being seen ; in the other 6 cases vamc staff rescheduled the appointments for times that exceeded the 90-day timeframe . our ongoing work also identified variation in how the five vamcs we reviewed have implemented key aspects of vha's business rules , which limits the usefulness of the data in monitoring and overseeing consults systemwide . as previously noted , vha's business rules were designed to standardize aspects of the consult process , thus creating consistency in vamcs' management of consults . however , vamcs have reported variation in how they are implementing certain tasks required by the business rules . for example , vamcs have developed different strategies for managing future care consults — requests for specialty care appointments that are not clinically needed for more than 90 days . at one vamc , officials reported that specialty care providers have been instructed to discontinue consults for appointments that are not needed within 90 days and requesting providers are to track these consults outside of the electronic consult system and resubmit them closer to the date the appointment is needed . these consults would not appear in vha's systemwide data once they have been discontinued . at another vamc , officials stated that appointments for specialty care consults are scheduled regardless of whether the appointments are needed beyond 90 days . the results of our review of outpatient consults are not generalizable across all vamcs . the scope of our work is limited to outpatient consults ; however , providers may also request consults for inpatient care and administrative needs , among other things . for our december 2012 report , we reviewed vha's scheduling policy and methods for measuring medical appointment wait times , and interviewed vha central office officials responsible for developing them . we also visited 23 high - volume outpatient clinics at four vamcs selected for variation in size , complexity , and location . in addition , oversight of the implementation of vha's business rules has been limited and has not included independent verification of vamc actions . vamcs were required to self - certify completion of each of the four tasks outlined in the business rules . visns were not required to independently verify that vamcs appropriately completed the tasks . without independent verification , vha cannot be assured that vamcs implemented the tasks correctly . furthermore , vha did not require that vamcs document how they addressed unresolved consults that were open greater than 90 days , and none of the five vamcs in our review were able to provide us with specific documentation in this regard . vha officials estimated that as of april 2014 , about 450,000 of the approximately 2 million consults ( both clinical and administrative consults ) remained unresolved systemwide . vamc officials noted several reasons that consults were either completed or discontinued in this process of addressing unresolved consults , including improper recording of consult notes , patient cancellations , and patient deaths .