this is a cause for greater concern . efforts to combat identity fraud in its many forms likely will command continued attention from policymakers and law enforcement . such efforts will include investigating and prosecuting perpetrators , as well as focusing on prevention measures to make key identification documents and information less susceptible to being counterfeited or otherwise used fraudulently . my testimony today will be based primarily on the results of work that we have completed in recent years , namely our may 1998 and march 2002 reports on identity theft , march 2002 report on the ins's forensic document laboratory , january 2002 report on immigration benefit fraud,may 2000 report on alien smuggling , july 1999 congressional testimony on illegal aliens and fraudulent documents , and april 1999 report on ins's worksite enforcement efforts . we also obtained information from the u.s. secret service , the social security administration's office of the inspector general ( ssa / oig ) , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the united states sentencing commission , and publicly available sources . no single hotline or database captures the universe of identity theft victims . some individuals do not even know that they have been victimized until months after the fact , and some known victims may not know to report or may choose not to report to the police , credit bureaus , or established hotlines . thus , it is difficult to fully or accurately measure the prevalence of identity theft . some of the often - quoted estimates of prevalence range from one - quarter to three - quarters of a million victims annually . generally speaking , the higher the estimate of identity theft prevalence , the greater the ( 1 ) number of victims who are assumed not to report the crime and ( 2 ) number of hotline callers who are assumed to be victims rather than “preventative” callers . however , we found no information to confirm the extent to which these assumptions are valid . nevertheless , although it is difficult to specifically or comprehensively quantify identity theft , a number of data sources can be used as proxies or indicators for gauging the prevalence of such crime . these sources include the three national consumer reporting agencies that have call - in centers for reporting identity fraud or theft ; the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , which maintains a database of complaints concerning identity theft ; the ssa / oig , which operates a hotline to receive allegations of ssn misuse and program fraud ; and federal law enforcement agencies — department of justice components , department of the treasury components , and the postal inspection service — responsible for investigating and prosecuting identity theft - related cases . each of these various sources or measures seems to indicate that the prevalence of identity theft is growing . according to the three national consumer reporting agencies , the most reliable indicator of the incidence of identity theft is the number of long - term ( generally 7 years ) fraud alerts placed on consumer credit files . fraud alerts constitute a warning that someone may be using the consumer's personal information to fraudulently obtain credit .