increased minimum bids . in 2011 , interior increased the minimum bid for leases offered in at least 400 meters of water in the gulf of mexico to $100 per acre , up from $37.50 per acre . according to interior's proposed final outer continental shelf oil & gas leasing program 2012-2017 , the minimum bid was raised , in part , to account for increases in oil prices and to encourage optimal timing of leasing . interior officials told us that a review of the minimum bid was initiated because the minimum bid had not been changed in some time . in addition , interior analysis showed that a minimum bid of $100 per acre would be generally equivalent to the cost of the minimum bid in the past , going back to 1999 , adjusted for differences in prices , costs , and royalty rates . for details on the recent history of lease terms in the gulf of mexico , see table 1 ; changes in lease terms are highlighted in gray . interior has also taken actions to encourage the development of oil and gas resources , which reduces the time from when federal leases are issued and the federal government receives its share of revenue from them , in response to our october 2008 recommendation that the secretary of the interior develop a strategy to evaluate options to encourage faster development of its oil and gas leases . specifically , in 2010 , interior shortened lease terms by reducing the duration of the initial period for gulf of mexico leases in water depths of 400 to less than 800 meters from an 8-year initial period to a 5-year initial period . for water depths of 800 to less than 1,600 meters , it reduced leases from a 10-year initial period to a 7-year initial period . according to interior documents , these lease terms can generally be extended if the lessee begins drilling a well during the initial period . for onshore resources , interior has considered , but not made , changes to onshore lease terms in order to provide greater assurance that the public is getting a fair return on federal oil and gas resources . interior acts on behalf of the american people to manage the federal oil and gas system to ensure a fair return to the public for the development of oil and gas resources . interior officials told us that since 2009 the department has been considering increasing the onshore royalty rate — which is currently established in its regulations at 12.5 percent for both oil and gas . according to the officials , several factors prompted efforts to consider changing the royalty rates , including our september 2008 report , oil and gas prices , and office of management and budget initiatives calling for increased revenue from onshore royalties . although both onshore and offshore leasing programs are subject to many of the same market conditions , interior officials are currently unable to make timely adjustments to onshore royalty rates because blm's regulations generally establish a set royalty rate of 12.5 percent .