iv ) . key best practices identified in gao's september 2003 report are shown in figure 3 . based on our review of mission performance plans and on fieldwork in nigeria , pakistan , and egypt , we found that posts' public diplomacy programming generally lacked these important elements of strategic communications planning . in particular , posts lacked a clear theme or message and specific target audiences were generally not identified . posts also failed to develop detailed strategies and tactics to direct available public diplomacy programs and tools toward clear , measurable objectives in the most efficient manner possible . further , research and evaluation efforts to inform all facets of strategic communications are limited by the relatively small budget in washington , d.c. , allocated to such efforts and a general lack of expertise in the field with regard to commissioning and conducting such studies . according to data provided by state , the average tour length at posts in the muslim world is 2.1 years , compared with 2.7 years in the non - muslim world . figure 7 shows the average tour length by region . furthermore , as a result of the security concerns mentioned above , tours at many posts in the muslim world are for only 1 year , without family members . of state's 20 so - called unaccompanied posts , 15 are in the muslim world . shorter tours contribute to insufficient language skills and limit officers' ability to cultivate personal relationships , which , according to a senior public diplomacy officer , are vital to understanding arabs and muslims . another senior state official , noting the prevalence of one - year tours in the muslim world , told us that public affairs officers who have shorter tours tend to produce less effective work than officers with longer tours . in pakistan , we were told that the public affairs officer views himself as a “management consultant,” in part because of his short tour in islamabad . furthermore , the department's inspector general observed that the rapid turnover of american officers in pakistan was a major constraint to public diplomacy activities in the country . in addition , public diplomacy positions in the muslim world have received fewer bids than public diplomacy positions elsewhere . an analysis of data from state's summer 2005 posting cycle shows that public diplomacy positions in the muslim world received fewer than half the average number of bids of non - muslim posts — averaging 3.7 bids per position at posts in the muslim world , compared with 8.9 bids per position elsewhere . as a result of the lower number of bids for public diplomacy positions in the muslim world , it has been harder to fill these positions . many public diplomacy officers in the muslim world do not meet the language requirements established for their positions by state . according to data provided by state , in countries with significant muslim populations , 30 percent of language - designated public diplomacy positions are filled by officers without the requisite proficiency in those languages , compared with 24 percent elsewhere .