marshals . this form includes the traveler's name , passport number , travel information , criminal record , and contact information in the destination country . however , not all jurisdictions have elected to implement the doj guideline requiring registered sex offenders to provide advance notice of international travel . tourists . we selected australia , canada , and the united kingdom because they are known to have national sex offender registries , similar to those of the united states , and have expressed an interest in receiving information from the u.s. government on sex offenders traveling there . ( 2 ) how and to what extent have federal agencies notified foreign officials about registered sex offenders traveling internationally ? to address both objectives , we identified relevant legislation , regulations , and other guidance that directs federal agencies' efforts to identify registered sex offenders leaving or returning to the united states . we also obtained documentation and testimonial evidence from members of the international tracking of sex offenders working group ( iwg ) , which is composed of representatives from various agencies within doj , dhs , state , and the department of defense ( dod ) and was tasked with developing mechanisms for identifying registered sex offenders leaving and returning to the country . we also interviewed agency officials from three of the federal departments represented on the iwg . the agencies within doj include the office of sex offender sentencing , monitoring , apprehending , registering , and tracking ( smart office ) ; federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) ; united states marshals service ( u.s . marshals ) ; and international criminal police organization ( interpol ) washington - united states national central bureau ( usncb ) . the agencies within dhs include u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) . the agencies within state include the bureau of consular affairs and bureau of diplomatic security . the 5 u.s. territories included in our review are american samoa , commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , guam , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands . we did not include federally recognized indian tribes eligible under sorna because we will analyze tribal jurisdictions' efforts to implement sorna and identify registered sex offenders leaving and returning to the united states in a separate review . maryland , florida , michigan , and arizona — to conduct site visits and 1 jurisdiction ( new mexico ) to conduct telephone interviews . during the site visits , we obtained additional information on how jurisdictions implemented and enforced the requirement and shared information on traveling registered sex offenders with relevant federal agencies . we chose these jurisdictions to achieve variation in ( 1 ) the extent of international travel from the jurisdiction ; ( 2 ) percentage of the population that is composed of sex offenders ; and ( 3 ) whether the state has land and sea ports of entry , in addition to airports , to cover the various modes by which sex offenders could enter and leave the country . during the site visits , we met with officials from the following federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies: u.s .