earlier this month , we issued our report . specifically , my statement will ( 1 ) examine total military compensation for active duty officers and enlisted personnel , ( 2 ) compare private - sector pay and benefits for civilians with those of officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces , and ( 3 ) assess the 10th qrmc's recommendation to include regular military compensation and select benefits when making such comparisons . we focused our work on active duty servicemembers' perspectives on compensation — that is , cash compensation and the value of benefits to servicemembers versus the costs to the government of providing compensation . to conduct our work , we identified and reviewed studies on compensation by such organizations as cna corporation ( cna ) , cbo , the congressional research service , dod , gao , and rand . my testimony today summarizes the findings of that report . to assess total military compensation , we reviewed a 2008 dod - commissioned report — completed by cna — and identified estimated values for the elements of military compensation ( that is , regular military compensation , health care , retirement , and additional tax advantages ) . we also identified the employee benefits available to active duty servicemembers and used dod survey data to identify the utilization rates of these benefits by servicemembers . in fact , our previous work has shown that use of targeted bonuses may be more appropriate for meeting dod's requirements for selected specialties where dod faces challenges in recruiting and retaining sufficient numbers of personnel . in closing , we note that comparisons between military and civilian compensation are important management tools — or measures — for the department to use to assess the adequacy and appropriateness of its compensation . however , such comparisons present both limitations and challenges . we do not believe that such comparisons demonstrate the existence of a pay gap or facilitate accurate comparisons between military and civilian compensation because they assume that military basic pay is the only component of compensation that should be compared to changes in civilian pay and exclude other important components of military compensation , such as the housing and subsistence allowances . we note that cbo also previously discussed three other shortcomings of making such comparisons in a 1999 report . specifically , cbo noted that such comparisons ( 1 ) select a starting point for the comparison without a sound analytic basis , yet the results of the pay gap calculation are very sensitive to changes in that starting point ; ( 2 ) do not take into account differences in the demographic composition of the civilian and military labor forces ; and ( 3 ) compare military pay growth over one time period with a measure of civilian pay growth over a somewhat different period . to compare military compensation with private - sector pay and benefits of comparable civilians , we used cna's report to identify estimated values for private - sector compensation — pay and benefits — for comparable civilians . in addition , we reviewed the methods cna used to estimate values for several benefits — retirement , health care , and additional tax advantages .