postal service . in january 2003 , we released a comprehensive review of career senior executives by race , ethnicity , and gender governmentwide and by major executive agencies as of october 2000 , and we also projected what the profile of the senior executive service ( ses ) would be in october 2007 if appointment and separation trends did not change . most recently , in may 2007 , we testified before the house subcommittee on federal workforce , postal service , and the district of columbia , committee on oversight and government reform on the fiscal year 2006 levels of representation of women and minorities in the federal government's career ses and the levels that serve as the developmental pools from which the vast majority of potential successors for career ses positions will come . we also provided data for the postal service's postal career executive service ( pces ) , which includes postal officers and executives and certain levels of the service's executive and administrative schedule ( eas ) , from which potential successors could come . the federal government continues to face new and more complex challenges in the 21st century resulting from long - term fiscal constraints , changing demographics , and other factors . leadership in agencies across the federal government , especially at senior executive levels , is essential to providing accountable , committed , consistent , and sustained attention to human capital and related organizational transformation issues . having a diverse ses corps , which generally represents the most experienced segment of the federal workforce , can be an organizational strength that can bring a wider variety of perspectives and approaches to bear on policy development and implementation , strategic planning , problem solving , and decision making . today , as requested , we are providing updated information as of the end of fiscal year 2007 on the representation of women and minorities in career ses positions and the ses developmental pool ( i.e. , gs - 15 and gs - 14 positions ) as well as baseline data from october 2000 , which we previously reported for those same positions in 2003 . as requested , we also will compare the fiscal year 2007 data to statistically estimated projections for fiscal year 2007 that we made in our 2003 report . we also are providing updated information from the postal service on the representation of women and minorities in the pces and eas as of the end of fiscal year 2007 as well as baseline data from 1999 , which we previously reported for those same positions . we did not make projections for the profile of postal service positions based on retirement trends . in addition , we are providing representation data for the postal service's corporate succession planning ( csp ) program as of the end of fiscal year 2007 and the end of fiscal year 2004 — the fiscal year that the csp program first accepted participants . in 2006 , opm reported that approximately 60 percent of the executive branch's 1.6 million white - collar employees and 90 percent of about 6,000 federal executives will be eligible for retirement over the next 10 years .