documentation provided to us . once we determined that the 2011 cost estimate did not fully meet best practices , we determined why this occurred . to this end , we interviewed officials in irdm's program management office and mits's estimation program office ( epo ) . gao - 11-557 . project data to provide reports on project status . we also compared irdm's evm system with guidance in the department of the treasury's earned value management guide . as part of that analysis , we assessed irdm's implementation of three guidelines from the american national standards institute ( ansi ) , which treasury's guidance states that irdm should be following . we selected the three guidelines to represent some of the fundamental steps for maintaining a reliable evm system , as identified in our cost guide , and because these guidelines are also treasury department requirements . for both research objectives , we interviewed officials with irs's modernization and information technology services ( mits ) division , including those from the irdm program management office , and the investment planning and management office , which includes the estimation program office ( epo ) . we conducted this performance audit from august 2011 through january 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we determined that the irs data we used were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we also made appropriate attribution indicating the sources of the data . we are making recommendations to irs to improve data reliability in the future . see appendix i for more information on our scope and methodology . irs initiated the irdm program , in part , to implement new information reporting requirements , but more generally to increase voluntary compliance with tax laws by expanding and maximizing irs's ability to match existing and future information returns with tax return data and establishing a new business information matching program . previously , irs had only matched information returns to individuals' and sole proprietors' tax returns . under irdm , irs plans to build several new it systems and enhance some existing systems as well as implement numerous organizational and process changes . irs plans for irdm to use information returns to identify individual and business tax returns that are likely sources of revenue , which the current individual tax return matching system is not designed to identify . irdm implementation is led by irs's small business / self employed division and mits , which is leading the irdm it system development . this report builds on our may 2011 reportservice's ( irs ) information reporting and document matching ( irdm ) program and analysis performed during a budget justification review of the irdm program , conducted from june 2011 to august 2011 , which we provided to congress as technical assistance . in the may 2011 report , we assessed irdm's 2009 solution - concept based cost estimate .