we reported on the first phase of these efforts . in particular , district office employees continue to experience some frustration as they adjust to their new responsibilities and work toward achieving their goals with fewer resources . as sba continues to adjust priorities and operations to achieve its goals , employing key practices relating to communications and employee involvement will position the agency in good stead in this area , as well . the centralization of the remaining loan functions previously performed by district offices was another key aspect of sba's transformation and those initiatives have been completed . but the functioning of the centers — particularly the ngpc — represents a work in progress . sba recently has re - engineered the guaranty purchase process and center operations and developed measures to track progress . the emphasis has been on improving the efficiency of the guaranty process because of the need to reduce significant backlogs and the desire to provide good customer service to lenders . recognizing that many employees had taken on new roles and responsibilities , the administrator supported the need to develop a training program . this program — sba university — started in 2007 . the first sessions were for field office employees , with the goal of training them in the new roles and responsibilities incurred as part of transformation . sba held three sessions of week - long training during late july and august 2007 , with more than 1,300 employees from field offices across the country . we are making two recommendations to the administrator of sba: to support sba's development of a core curriculum for sba university and communicate sba's training development efforts to employees , sba should develop a strategic training plan with specific goals , strategies , and milestones . to ensure that its streamlined purchase guaranty process also provides an incentive to focus on quality and thereby results in good purchase decisions , sba should develop performance measures that will provide information on the quality of its guaranty purchase reviews . we provided a draft of this report to sba for review and comment . in written comments ( see app . ii ) , sba generally agreed with the report and recommendations . sba stated that the report recognized the agency's efforts and initiatives leading to improvements in agency operations and employee morale and that it is committed to continuing to build upon the success achieved . in addition to agreeing to our recommendation to develop measures that focus on the quality of purchase reviews , sba stated that the ngpc will continue to build on the quality processes in place and is developing new quality assurance review plans for ngpc and other processing centers that will be implemented during fiscal year 2009 . specifically , sba provided additional information on how it measures quality in its processes for reviewing , recommending , and approving guaranty purchases . for example , ngpc tracks the number of work items of its loan specialists returned for substantial revision and randomly samples processed guaranty purchase disbursements to test them for accuracy . sba stated that this information helps to identify areas where training is needed and ultimately contributes to improving the quality of its reviews .