we presented these data in 2008 constant dollars . because of limited time in preparing this testimony , we were unable to fully assess the reliability of the agencies' expenditure data and the data are therefore of undetermined reliability . however , we concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented to meet our objectives because we ( 1 ) attribute the data to what agencies report as their expenditures , ( 2 ) present rounded data to minimize the perception of precision , and ( 3 ) do not base any conclusions or recommendations on the data . to answer our second objective , we summarized selected prior survey efforts by federal agencies and organizations to document differences in estimates , definitions , and methodologies . epa has spent the most — $2.2 billion . although the amount each agency spent annually varied considerably , the median amount spent for the public lands by blm and the forest service was about $5 million and about $21 million , respectively . epa spent substantially more — a median of about $221 million annually — to clean up mines that are generally on nonfederal lands . finally , osm provided grants with an annual median value of about $18 million to states and indian tribes through its smcra program for hardrock mine cleanups . table 1 summarizes information on expenditures and hardrock mine cleanup activities at blm , the forest service , epa , and osm . see appendix ii for more detailed information on agency expenditures by fiscal year . according to available data , as of september 30 , 2007 , blm had spent the largest share of its funds in montana — about $18 million ; epa had spent the largest share of its funds in idaho — about $352 million ; and wyoming was the largest recipient of osm grants for cleaning up hardrock mine sites — receiving about $99 million . wyoming was eligible for osm grants after osm's acceptance of the state's certification that it had completed its cleanup of coal mine sites . the forest service was unable to provide this information by state . see appendix ii for blm , epa , and osm total funding by state . previous state estimates of the number of abandoned hardrock mine sites vary widely in the six studies that we reviewed because , in part , there is no generally accepted definition for a hardrock mine site and the studies rely on the states' different definitions of hardrock mine sites . in addition , we found problems with blm's and the forest service's estimate of 100,000 abandoned hardrock mines on their lands because the agencies included non - hardrock mines and mines that may not be on their lands . using our consistent definition , 12 western states and alaska estimated a total of at least 161,000 abandoned hardrock mine sites in their states on state , private , or federal lands . we identified six studies conducted in the past 10 years that estimated the number of abandoned hardrock mine sites in the 12 western states and alaska .