classified parts . lanl has allocated nearly $1.7 million for a project to inventory tens of thousands of classified nuclear weapon parts , destroy those that are no longer useful , and centrally manage those that remain . through a laboratorywide effort , nearly 30,000 classified parts were identified and destroyed between february 2007 and march 2008 by either melting the parts , grinding them into shapes that are no longer classified , or by blowing them up . according to lanl officials , additional destruction of classified parts is under way . accountable classified documents . lanl completed consolidation of all accountable documents into a single storage library in november 2007 . while accountable classified documents are created and destroyed on an ongoing basis , as of march 2008 , lanl was managing just over 6,000 accountable classified documents . classified documents . according to a senior lanl security official , the laboratory completed an assessment of nonaccountable classified documents in february 2008 and estimates there are approximately 9 million classified documents at the laboratory . from april 2007 through february 2008 , lanl destroyed over 1.6 million pages of classified documents , and another destruction effort is planned for may 2008 . vaults and vault - type rooms . lanl has reduced the number of vault - type rooms at the laboratory from 142 to 111 and plans to further reduce the number to 106 . lanl plans to further reduce the number of nuclear facilities at the site to five by 2016 . the number of facilities that store category i special nuclear material has already been reduced from nine to one . this remaining category i facility — lanl's plutonium facility 4 at technical area - 55 ( see fig . 4 ) — contains the nation's only plutonium research , development , and manufacturing facility and the laboratory's only material access area . it is protected with a combination of safeguards that include fences , controlled access points , electronic sensors and surveillance , and armed guards . according to the lanl director , the laboratory has embarked on a multiyear transformation effort to reduce its facility footprint and better manage its infrastructure investments . many facilities at lanl were built in the early 1950s and are beginning to show signs of structural or systems failure . other structures at lanl , such as trailers , are temporary and do not provide quality office or laboratory space . furthermore , the geographic separation of lanl's facilities makes effective collaboration difficult , according to lanl program managers . stockpile services . this program supports research , development , and production work that is applicable to multiple nuclear weapon systems rather than a specific weapon system . for example , scientists may conduct basic research on critical factors of nuclear weapon operations in this program or run tests on components shared by nuclear weapon systems . in fiscal year 2007 , the budget for stockpile services was $140.7 million , and the program was supported by 361 ftes . stockpile systems .