epact provides tva with certain protections from competition . under epact , tva is exempt from having to allow other utilities to use its transmission lines to transmit power to customers within tva's service territory . further , the moody's official stated , as long as tva is able to set its own rates and to benefit from legislative and other competitive advantages over other utilities , moody's will continue to assign tva's bonds a aaa rating . we requested written comments from tva on a draft of this report . tva's chief financial officer provided us with oral comments , which we incorporated , as appropriate . to determine the opinion of bond analysts regarding the effect of any such guarantee , we interviewed officials at the credit rating firms that rate tva's bonds — moody's and standard & poor's ; and reviewed and analyzed documents issued by moody's and standard & poor's on their methodology for rating tva and other electric utilities . to determine the impact of tva's bond rating on its annual interest expense , we obtained information from tva about its outstanding bonds at september 30 , 2000 ; reconciled information from tva about its outstanding bonds at september 30 , 2000 , to its audited financial statements ; reviewed information pertaining to tva's outstanding debt contained in its annual reports ; reviewed a report issued by the department of energy's energy information administration which assessed the impact of tva's bond rating on its interest expense ; interviewed moody's regarding the availability of historical bond yield data by rating category for electric utilities and public utilities ; obtained moody's information on the average bond yields applicable to public utilities in the various bond rating categories from standard & poor's dri ( long - term ) and moody's investors service credit perspectives ( intermediate - term ) ; and estimated the additional annual interest expense on tva's bonds outstanding at september 30 , 2000 , using the average bond yield rates for public utilities in various investment - grade rating categories . using moody's public utility long - term and intermediate - term ( unweighted ) bond yield data in various investment - grade rating categories , we applied two methods for estimating what the additional annual interest expense on tva's bonds outstanding at september 30 , 2000 , would have been if tva's debt were rated lower . our analysis considered the characteristics of tva's bonds , such as date of issuance and term ; however , we did not assess the effect of call provisions . as agreed with your offices , we issued a separate report on february 28 , 2001 , on the three other issues regarding tva's ( 1 ) debt and deferred assets , ( 2 ) financial condition compared to its likely competitors , and ( 3 ) potential stranded costs .