this is not the case . as we noted in this report , state's business plan for the purchase of the facility indicated it has space to accommodate regional staff from outside germany who are assigned to embassies with security vulnerabilities . moreover , state's plan identified 73 staff from five agencies at posts outside germany for potential relocation . as further noted in this report , state's subsequent efforts at its european and eurasian posts identified suitable candidates for relocation , but that exercise was halted because state mistakenly believed that the facility did not have sufficient space . our work at the four posts outside germany validated the existence of significant numbers of staff with regional responsibilities , many of which were located in buildings with substandard security . we did not identify specific candidates for relocation in this report because state said that it was conducting a full assessment of staffing options for frankfurt , and we did not want to preempt that assessment . however , in our briefings with state and omb officials , we discussed our fieldwork observations and told them that there were many staff that could be considered for relocation . for example , there were at least 87 staff with regional responsibilities in vienna and budapest that were assigned to space with substandard security . furthermore , we noted that in 2002 , we had identified regional positions in paris that could be considered for relocation to frankfurt based on security , mission , and / or cost factors . state also said that it believes , based on their follow - up to the 1999 overseas presence advisory panel report , that the u.s. government's overseas presence is already rightsized . we have previously pointed out the substantial weaknesses in the pilot studies which provided the basis of state's follow - up . state subsequently indicated that it intended to reinvigorate the rightsizing process consistent with the president's management agenda , omb's directives , and our rightsizing framework . in our view , state's comments are inconsistent with its ( 1 ) stated expectations that the frankfurt project will achieve the department's key rightsizing and regionalization goals and ( 2 ) plans to conduct a full assessment of staffing options for the frankfurt regional center . in addition , state's comments lead us to question whether the department seriously intends to implement its business plan for the frankfurt center regarding relocating regional staff , as well as its commitment to the overall rightsizing process . we believe that state's actions regarding staffing of the facility warrant oversight . state also provided technical comments that we have incorporated into this report , as appropriate . in view of state's comments on a draft of this report and the continued importance of rightsizing the overseas u.s. presence consistent with security , mission , and cost factors , the congress may wish to direct the secretary of state to submit a detailed staffing plan for the frankfurt facility that specifically lists positions to be relocated to frankfurt . to determine state's process for creating staffing projections for the frankfurt regional center , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials in state's bureau of european and eurasian affairs , obo , and office of management policy .