identify risks . the goal of risk identification is to generate a comprehensive list of risks , regardless of whether those risks are under the control of the organization , based on events that could significantly affect the achievement of objectives . risk identification involves continuous and iterative communication and consultation with internal and external stakeholders to identify new risks , sources of risk , areas these risks affect , events ( including changes in circumstances ) , their causes ( root causes ) , and potential consequences to the objective . this can be performed through additional inquiry with subject matter experts , surveying and interviewing experienced executives , high - level and detailed documentation reviews , checklists based on historical information , and diagramming processes . analyze risks . risk analysis involves developing an understanding of identified risks to assist management in determining the most appropriate methods and strategies in prioritizing and responding to risk . it requires risks to be analyzed to determine the impact of interdependencies between the overall program risks and program component risks . according to guiding principles , risk analysis is a vital part of the entire risk management process as it helps managers determine where to focus their attention and allocate resources to maximize the likelihood of achieving objectives . this requires management to consult with key stakeholders , project managers , and experts to discuss , analyze , and rank risks based on their expert analysis . suggested techniques for risk analysis include the following: o risk categorization . risks can be categorized by sources of risk , the area of the program affected , or other useful categories to determine the areas of the program most exposed to the effects of uncertainty . effective tracking of risk mitigation implementation ( risk monitoring ) provides information that assists managers with making effective decisions before problems occur by continually monitoring mitigation plans for new and changing risks . risk monitoring is the process of identifying , analyzing , and planning for new risks ; tracking identified risks ; and reanalyzing existing risks throughout the life of the program . monitoring is also intended to help management determine whether program assumptions are still valid and whether proper risk management policies and procedures are being followed . risk management is an iterative process and these guiding principles are interdependent such that deficiencies in implementing one guiding principle will cause deficiencies in performing other guiding principles . for example , if the procedures for identifying risks are not comprehensive and not all significant risks are identified , then the other guiding principles for risk management will not be carried out for any risks not identified . similarly , if identified risks are not sufficiently analyzed , then it is less likely that effective risk mitigation plans will be developed . dod carried out some risk management practices centrally with respect to implementing the fiar plan , but did not follow many risk management principles necessary for effective risk management and did not document its risk management policies and procedures . specifically , dod identified some risks to its fiar effort , but its risk identification procedures were not comprehensive or documented .