doj and dod also did not have any official comments . dod provided two technical clarifications , which we have incorporated to ensure the accuracy of our report . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date . few legal issues surfaced in port exercises or after - action reports . none of these issues were statutory problems according to exercise participants and agency officials . exercises and after - action reports identified operational issues to varying degrees . key issues included: communication , incident command , and resource coordination concerns . many after - action reports are not submitted timely , and content and quality of some does not meet actions taken by the coast guard to address these problems have had limited effect thus far . the objectives of this report were to ( 1 ) describe the emerging framework under which the federal government coordinates with state and local entities to address a terrorist incident in a u.s. port ; ( 2 ) identify the issues , if any , regarding federal agencies' legal authority that have emerged from port security exercises and what statutory actions might address them ; ( 3 ) describe the types of operational issues being identified through these exercises ; and ( 4 ) identify any management issues related to coast guard - developed after - action reports . to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant legislation , regulations , directives and plans , analyzed agency operational guidance and coast guard after - action reports ( aars ) , interviewed a variety of federal officials , and observed several port security exercises . appendix ii describes our scope and methodology in more detail . we conducted our work from june to december 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . on november 25 , 2002 , the president signed into law the homeland security act , which created the new federal department of homeland security , and the maritime transportation security act , which created a consistent security program specifically for the nation's seaports . since that time , and in keeping with the provisions of these new laws , the federal government has been developing a variety of new national policies and procedures for improving the nation's response to domestic emergencies . these policies and procedures are designed to work together to provide a cohesive framework for preparing for , responding to , and recovering from domestic incidents . a key element of this new response framework is the use of exercises to test and evaluate federal agencies' policies and procedures , response capabilities , and skill levels . the coast guard has primary responsibility for such testing and evaluation in the nation's ports and waterways , and as part of its response , it has added multiagency and multicontingency terrorism exercises to its training program . these exercises vary in size and scope and are designed to test specific aspects of the coast guard's terrorism response plans , such as communicating with state and local responders , raising maritime security levels , or responding to incidents within the port .