mr . chairmen , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for future questions regarding this testimony , please contact michael j. sullivan , ( 202 ) 512-4841 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include marvin bonner , jerry clark , bruce fairbairn , j. kristopher keener , matt lea , brian mullins , daniel novillo , and charles perdue . to conduct our mandated work on the jsf acquisition program , we tracked and compared current cost and schedule estimates with prior years , identified major changes , and determined causes . we visited the prime contractor's plant to view manufacturing processes and plans for low rate production . we obtained earned value data , contractor workload statistics , performance indicators , and manufacturing results . we reviewed the mid course risk reduction plan and supporting documents , discussed pros and cons with dod officials , and evaluated potential impacts on flight plans and test verification criteria . we reviewed the cost estimating methodologies , data , and assumptions used by the jsf joint program office to project development , procurement , and sustainment costs . we assessed the program office's procedures and methodologies against gao's cost assessment guide and best practices employed by federal and private organizations . we obtained cost estimates prepared by the cost analysis improvement group , naval air systems command , and defense contract management command and discussed with the cost analysts the methodologies and assumptions used by those organizations . we discussed plans , future challenges , and results to date with dod and contractor officials . for our work on the alternate engine we used the methodology detailed below , the same as had been used in support of our statement in march 2007 . for this statement , we collected similar current information so the cost information could be updated . in conducting our analysis of costs for the joint strike fighter ( jsf ) engine program , we relied primarily on program office data . we did not develop our own source data for development , production , or sustainment costs . in assessing the reliability of data from the program office , we compared that data to contractor data and spoke with agency and other officials and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our review . other base assumptions for the review are as follows: unit recurring flyaway cost includes the costs associated with procuring one engine and certain nonrecurring production costs ; it does not include sunk costs , such as development and test , and other costs to the whole system , including logistical support and construction . engine procurement costs reflect only u.s. costs , but assumes the quantity benefits of the 730 aircraft currently anticipated for foreign partner procurement . competition , and the associated savings anticipated , begins in fiscal year 2012 . engine maturity , defined as 200,000 flight hours with at least 50,000 hours in each variant , is reached in fiscal year 2012 . two years are needed for delivery of aircraft . aircraft life equals 30 years at 300 flight hours per year .