scholarships . ihs's scholarship program provides financial support to qualified ai / an candidates in exchange for a minimum 2-year service commitment within an indian health program . nearly 7,000 ai / an students have received scholarship awards since the program started in 1978 . the awards include ( 1 ) scholarships for candidates enrolled in preparatory or undergraduate prerequisite courses in preparation for entry to a health professions school , ( 2 ) pre - graduate scholarships for candidates enrolled in courses leading to a bachelor's degree , including pre - medicine , pre - dentistry , and pre - podiatry , and ( 3 ) health professions scholarships for candidates who are enrolled in an eligible health profession degree program . according to ihs , in fiscal year 2017 , there were 805 new scholarship applications submitted . after evaluating the applications , 331 applications were deemed eligible for funding , and the program was able to fund 108 new awards . the ihs scholarship program also reviewed applications from previously awarded scholars who were continuing their education . in fiscal year 2017 , 154 continuation awards were funded . in addition to the scholarship program , according to ihs officials , the agency funds two medical students enrolled at the uniformed service university of the health sciences each year . each graduate agrees to a 10-year obligation to ihs after medical school graduation and completion of training . in future years , ihs endeavors to fund two additional medical students at the uniformed service university of health sciences . externships and internships . ihs provides scholarship recipients with opportunities to receive clinical experience in ihs facilities . in fiscal year 2017 , the agency funded 94 students , who were employed for 30 to 120 workdays per calendar year . in addition , ihs provides externships to students temporarily called to active duty as commissioned corps officers through the commissioned officer student training and extern program ( costep ) . ihs officials said that the agency funded about 60-70 students in costep in 2016 . ihs also offers a virtual internship program through a partnership with the department of state . virtual interns spend 10 hours a week from september through may working remotely on their projects , which have included producing bilingual navajo and english videos for rural health clinics , developing navajo - specific health education materials on palliative care , improving behavioral health data collection methods , and creating social media strategies and campaigns for health promotion . for the 2017-2018 academic year , about 15 students are participating in virtual internships with ihs . residency rotations . ihs service units offer rotation opportunities for medical , nursing , optometry , dental , and pharmacy residents as a recruitment tool because research shows students are likely to stay and practice medicine in the area where they studied . for example , the oklahoma city area has a memorandum of agreement with the oklahoma state college of medicine , which permits area officials to annually recruit up to two residents from the current year's residency class to become federal employees while completing their residency program .