lbb - kaiserslautern did not effectively manage the kmcc project . instead of using a general contractor who would be contractually responsible to build the project , lbb - kaiserslautern attempted to execute the project by managing more than 30 separate trade lot contracts by itself . each trade lot contractor was only responsible for its section of work , and no one party , other than lbb - kaiserslautern , was responsible for the overall completion of the project . in addition , the lbb - kaiserslautern's decision to use trade lot contracts also meant that lbb - kaiserslautern would be required to properly coordinate the effort of all the contractors , adequately staff the project , and appropriately monitor construction schedule and costs , so that work could progress . as described below , lbb - kaiserslautern did not carry out its requirements in the following areas: poor project coordination: lbb - kaiserslautern did not effectively coordinate the work of the more than 30 construction contractors on - site . this resulted in inefficiencies in construction as well as damage to finished work . a subsequent contract was issued for installation of the escalator itself . however , the contract specifications for the escalator installation did not sufficiently detail the size and location of the escalator pit , and the escalator provided by the contractor did not fit in the previously - built pit . as a result , rework was necessary to build a new pit in the proper location . for example , one contractor responsible for installing a tile floor was forced to delay work while the contractor responsible for installing the ceiling finished work over the area where the floor was to be installed . in another case , the contractor responsible for laying the paving stones outside the building was allowed to finish its work before major exterior construction was completed . this resulted in damage to the paving stones when heavy cranes were subsequently used on top of the stones to install exterior bracing to the building . inadequate staffing: in our interviews , lbb - kaiserslautern officials told us that their office was understaffed . lbb - kaiserslautern officials stated that this lack of staffing hindered lbb - kaiserslautern's ability to provide assurance that the project design was adequate and improve contractor coordination discussed previously . in part , as a result of the above listed design and coordination problems , numerous contract change orders were necessary . again , the lack of staffing hindered lbb - kaiserslautern's ability to process necessary change orders as required by abg - 75 . according to air force officials , there are hundreds of change orders that lbb - kaiserslautern has approved , yet has not submitted documentation to the united states for approval . many of these change orders also had corresponding invoices submitted and certified by lbb - kaiserslautern that the air force subsequently paid . lbb - kaiserslautern was only able to provide us a listing of the change orders involved . this was far less than the detailed specifications required for review by the air force prior to the approval of the change and payment .