mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be please to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or nazzaror@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . the agencies have improved their systems for dispatching and monitoring firefighting assets and for gathering and analyzing cost data . however , they have yet to complete the more fundamental step of determining the appropriate type and quantity of firefighting assets needed for the fire season . over the past several years , the agencies have been developing a fire program analysis ( fpa ) system , which was proposed and funded to help the agencies determine national budget needs by analyzing budget alternatives at the local level — using a common , interagency process for fire management planning and budgeting — and aggregating the results ; determine the relative costs and benefits for the full scope of fire management activities , including potential trade - offs among investments in fuel reduction , fire preparedness , and fire suppression activities ; and identify , for a given budget level , the most cost - effective mix of personnel and equipment to carry out these activities . we have said for several years — and the agencies have concurred — that fpa is critical to helping the agencies contain wildland fire costs and plan and budget effectively . recent design modifications to the system , however , raise questions about the agencies' ability to fully achieve these key goals . i presented the preliminary results of our work before this committee in january 2007 . over the past decade , the number of acres burned annually by wildland fires in the united states has substantially increased . federal appropriations to prepare for and respond to wildland fires , including appropriations for fuel treatments , have almost tripled . increases in the size and severity of wildland fires , and in the cost of preparing for and responding to them , have led federal agencies to fundamentally reexamine their approach to wildland fire management . for decades , federal agencies aggressively suppressed wildland fires and were generally successful in decreasing the number of acres burned . in some parts of the country , however , rather than eliminating severe wildland fires , decades of suppression contributed to the disruption of ecological cycles and began to change the structure and composition of forests and rangelands , thereby making lands more susceptible to fire . increasingly , the agencies have recognized the role that fire plays in many ecosystems and the role that it could play in the agencies' management of forests and watersheds . the agencies worked together to develop a federal wildland fire management policy in 1995 , which for the first time formally recognized the essential role of fire in sustaining natural systems ; this policy was subsequently reaffirmed and updated in 2001 . the agencies , in conjunction with congress , also began developing the national fire plan in 2000 .