to follow . participants struggled with technical terms , such as “classes of commonly prescribed drugs” and “formulary,” which is a list of drugs covered by a plan . even when most participants were able to complete the tasks , they expressed confusion and frustration . relevant contact information , which could aid in identifying next steps for coverage decisions . do you have a medigap policywith prescription drug coverage ? sold by private insurers to help pay for medicare cost - sharing requirements , as well as for some services not provided by medicare . tested the usability of sample documents with 16 participants — 11 medicare beneficiaries , including 1 disabled beneficiary who was under 65 , and 5 advisers to beneficiaries . everyone was asked to perform 18 specified tasks related to enrollment , coverage , costs , penalty , and informational resources . they were also asked to provide feedback about their experiences . although the size of the group was small , research shows that as few as 5 individuals can provide meaningful insights into common problems . consistency with laws , regulations , and cms guidance . benefit are written at a reading level that is difficult for many seniors . reading levels for the sample documents were challenging for at least the 40 percent of seniors , who read at or below the 5th grade level . reading level estimates for the sample texts1 ranged from 7th grade to postcollege level . reading levels remain challenging for at least 40 percent of seniors even after adjusting for 26 multisyllabic words , such as medicare , medicare advantage , and social security administration . after the adjustment , the estimated reading level ranged from 8th to 12th grade . estimates have a likely margin of error of ± two grades . documents demonstrated adherence to about half of the 60 commonly recognized written communications guidelines , on average . desirable features: the documents were written with a respectful and polite tone , were free of clichés and slang , contained useful contact information , included concise and descriptive headings , and generally followed graphic and formatting guidelines . undesirable features: the documents used too much technical jargon , often did not define difficult terms , included sentences and some paragraphs that were too long , did not use sufficient summaries to assist the reader in identifying key points . were frustrated by the documents' lack of clarity and often could not complete the 18 assigned tasks . one of the 18 assigned tasks was completed by all beneficiaries and advisers . eleven of the 18 assigned tasks were completed by at least half of the beneficiaries and advisers . four of the 18 assigned tasks were completed by 2 or fewer of the 11 beneficiaries . nine of the 18 assigned tasks , were completed by 2 or fewer of the 5 advisers .