leave benefits . while we previously reported that un secretariat staff are eligible for more generous leave benefits than those received by u.s. civil service employees , we were unable to compare the monetary value of leave used by un staff and u.s. employees because the un and u.s. agencies were unable to provide comparable data on leave amounts used by their employees . postal service . when we accounted for the 80 percent participation rate in federal employee health benefit plans , we found that the average agency cost per employee , excluding u.s . postal service employees , was approximately $6,417 , including both participants and nonparticipants . comparing allowances , we found that the un and the u.s. government both provide certain allowances with higher monetary value than those provided by the other . our scenarios had varying results . one scenario showed that income replacement rates under fers were higher than for the un pension fund , given the economic conditions of the time periods we analyzed . health and life insurance section . this office is part of the un office of program planning , budget , and accounts , and administers health plans , after - service health insurance , and life insurance for un secretariat staff . united nations system chief executives board for coordination ( ceb ) . the ceb provides coordination and strategic guidance , and prepares reports on staff demographics and other compensation issues for use by un organizations . the human resources network of the ceb brings together directors of human resources departments from more than 30 un and related organizations at biannual meetings . benefits and allowances offered by the un and the u.s. government are generally similar , and each provides certain benefits or allowances with greater monetary value than the other . similar un and u.s. benefits include retirement plans and health insurance for staff and retirees , while similar allowances include hardship pay and education grants . where comparable data were available , our comparisons of un and u.s. government benefits and allowances show that each entity provided some benefits or allowances of greater monetary value than those provided by the other . we did not compare some benefits and allowances , such as danger pay and retiree health benefits , because of the limited availability of comparable data . the un and the u.s. government offer generally similar benefits , with some minor differences . for example , both the un and the u.s. government offer health , dental , and retiree health insurance to their staff . table 1 compares the benefits available to eligible un professional staff and u.s. civil service employees . while similar in purpose , some of the benefits offered by the un and the u.s. government differ in design and structure . for instance , while both the un and the u.s. government offer retirement benefits , the un offers its professional staff a pension plan that provides retirees a defined benefit , based on factors including an employee's age , years of participation in the plan , and salary history .