improve . the administration , in an effort to strengthen national security , has set as one of its objectives decreasing u.s. reliance on foreign sources of energy . according to the energy information administration , in 2007 about 58 percent of the oil consumed in the united states was imported . through their potential to reduce oil consumption overall , plug - ins could help to reduce consumption of oil coming from foreign sources , but they could also create a reliance on another foreign resource . specifically , most of the world's reserves of lithium , which is needed to manufacture batteries for plug - ins , are located abroad , predominately in south america and china ( see table 2 ) . the united states has supplies of lithium , but if demand for lithium exceeded domestic supplies , or if lithium from overseas is less expensive , the united states could substitute reliance on one foreign resource ( oil ) for another ( lithium ) . the consequences of relying on foreign sources of lithium could vary . on one hand , to the extent that this product is less expensive and readily available , as has often been the case for foreign sources of oil , manufacturers would be able to produce batteries at lower cost . on the other hand , if lithium supplies prove unstable — for example , due to political unrest in the countries in which they are located — or follow a similar pattern of price shocks as has oil , cost and risk for battery and plug - in manufacturers would increase . furthermore , manufacturing batteries to mass produce plug - ins could be limited by the amount of lithium that can be extracted and produced . according to epa officials , there is considerable disagreement on the ultimate worldwide supply of lithium , making it difficult to determine how many ( or how few ) batteries for plug - in vehicles could be manufactured in the long term . in addition , while current levels of global production ( mining and refining ) of lithium are measurable , other uncertainties — such as how much lithium will be needed in each battery — make it difficult to determine whether current levels of lithium production will need to be increased to meet demand . despite these issues , reliance on foreign sources of lithium may not pose the same dependence issues as oil . for example , industry officials told us that lithium , including that from spent car batteries , is highly recyclable , so some future demand could be met by ensuring that sufficient recycling processes are in place . industry officials also noted that the current recycling process used for car batteries — which has a high rate of participation by consumers , auto dealerships , and parts suppliers — could be adapted to lithium ion batteries . in addition , technology such as ultracapacitors , which are energy storage devises that are an alternative to batteries and that do not need lithium , or batteries that use materials besides lithium , which are being researched by at least one auto manufacturer , could be used in plug - ins .