assess . plan regular fraud risk assessments and assess risks to determine a fraud risk profile . design and implement . design and implement a strategy with specific control activities to mitigate assessed fraud risks and collaborate to help ensure effective implementation . evaluate and adapt . evaluate outcomes using a risk - based approach and adapt activities to improve fraud risk management . each component includes overarching fraud risk management concepts and leading practices for carrying out the concepts . these concepts include creating a structure with a dedicated entity to lead fraud risk management activities ; conducting regular fraud risk assessments that are tailored to the program to determine the program's fraud risk profile ; design and implement a strategy to mitigate assessed fraud risks ; and designing and implementing specific control activities , such as data analytic activities , to prevent and detect fraud . leading practices for carrying out the concepts include: designated antifraud entity . a designated entity to design and oversee fraud risk management activities serves as the repository of knowledge on fraud risks and controls , manages the fraud risk assessment process , and leads or assists with training and other fraud awareness activities . the dedicated entity could be an individual or a team , depending on the needs of the agency . tailored fraud risk assessments and profiles . an effective antifraud entity tailors the approach for carrying out fraud risk assessments to the program . more specifically , antifraud entities that effectively plan fraud risk assessments identify specific tools , methods , and sources for gathering information about fraud risks . this information includes data on fraud schemes and trends from monitoring and detection activities . this approach allows the agency to develop a fraud risk profile that fully considers the specific fraud risks the agency or program faces , analyze the potential likelihood and impact of fraud schemes , and then ultimately document prioritized fraud risks . develop and document an antifraud strategy . managers who effectively manage fraud risks develop and document an antifraud strategy that describes the program's activities for preventing , detecting , and responding to fraud . data analytic activities . data analytic activities can include a variety of techniques . for example , data matching and data mining techniques can enable programs to identify potential fraud or improper payments that have already been awarded , thus assisting programs in recovering these dollars , and predictive analytics can identify potential fraud before payments are made . fraud awareness initiatives . increasing managers' and employees' awareness of potential fraud schemes through training and education can serve a preventive purpose by helping to create a culture of integrity and compliance within the program . further , increasing fraud awareness can enable managers and employees to better detect potential fraud . in addition , increasing fraud awareness through training and education of external stakeholders , such as contractors , can help prevent and deter fraud . our fraud risk framework incorporates long - standing industry practices related to the use of data analytics .