increase technical training . ntsb officials and some of the experts and transit agency officials we met with stated that fta should increase the technical components of the training for transit agency employees that it supports . transit agency officials reported that training provided by the national transit institute and transportation safety institute includes valuable safety information , but overall the training provided is introductory and does not cover enough technical aspects of safety . according to ntsb officials , transit agency safety staff need periodic , refresher training to continue to learn and more technical training to adequately understand and perform their job . technical aspects could include the overall mechanics and engineering involved in rail transit operations , as well as how problems with equipment can lead to unsafe conditions . some state safety oversight and transit agency officials we met with said that available technical training is limited and that fta could create a training curriculum that other organizations , such as local community colleges , could use to teach safety - related classes . similarly , apta has reported the need to develop core curricula to be used at universities and community colleges and to enhance partnerships between transit agencies and higher education in order to provide additional training and educational opportunities for current and future transit workers . increase federal support for training . in a past report , the transportation learning center has noted that , of the billions of dollars the federal government provides to transit agencies annually , little is invested in human capital — that is , the people , knowledge , and skills necessary to provide reliable and safe service . in response , the center has recommended that federal funding provide support for transit agencies' workforce training . in addition , officials at apta and transit agencies , as well as some experts we met with , favored increasing federal support to cover training and related travel costs for transit agency employees . fta has provided funding to state safety oversight agency staff to cover such costs to attend training offered by the national transit institute and the transportation safety institute , but this support generally has not been extended to transit agency staff . fta officials reported that they support training offered around the country and that demand is high . transit agencies also have the option of hosting training to reduce travel and other costs . fta's assistance to transit agencies to help achieve a state of good repair — and therefore help ensure safe operations — has primarily consisted of providing grant funding , although fta has also conducted studies and is taking steps to provide more guidance to agencies on asset management . they are supported by contractor staff . in december 2009 , dot proposed to congress major changes in fta's role that would shift the balance of federal and state responsibilities for oversight of rail transit safety . dot proposed the following: fta , through legislation , would receive authority to establish and enforce minimum safety standards for rail transit systems not already regulated by fra .