or were there other reasons ? without more specific information on each spare part or repair event , management would not be able to determine — or address — the reasons for rising repair costs . as noted above , our ability to determine the reasons for rising spare part costs was impaired because the navy lacked an effective data system to collect and analyze information relevant to material costs and usage . the current data system tracks repair costs for groups of spare parts but not for individual parts . the costs are accumulated for the group , divided by the number of spare parts in the group and analyzed as an average cost per item in the group . as a result , government repair facilities cannot determine the cause of significant increases in repair costs for an individual spare part . for example , the average reported material cost for individual repair parts needed to repair compressors for the f - 402 engine increased from $14,269 in fiscal year 1998 to $65,494 in fiscal year 2000 . while the detailed requisition data identifies what materials were ordered , it is impossible to determine — when more than one repair is associated with the requisition — how much of the material was used in a specific repair . consequently , the fact that more material is being used on multiple repairs can be discerned , but not the reason for the increased usage . in addition , there is no indication of whether the differences in materials ordered are due to the repair of one part or to the group as a whole . the navy has made little progress in identifying the underlying causes of spare parts price increases . while it has various initiatives aimed at reducing overall costs , it does not have a planned set of actions to identify the underlying causes of price increases . the navy has only partially implemented a recommendation we made in our november 2000 report to identify and implement solutions to reduce and stabilize prices . it has undertaken several initiatives to control repair costs , but these have centered on enhancing the reliability and maintenance process , which could help stabilize prices for repairable parts . however , they do not deal with the underlying reasons for cost increases . one new initiative , which will allow the navy to track individual spare part items by their serial numbers , may provide the tool it needs to effectively monitor and control its spare part prices . also , the navy might learn from dla's efforts to address price increases for consumable spare parts . of three recommendations we made in our november 2000 report , the first one , which was directly concerned with investigating why prices were rising , has been only partially implemented . this one recommended that the secretary of defense ensure that the navy follow through on the results of its planned studies by identifying and implementing solutions to reduce and stabilize prices . see appendix vi for a discussion of the other two recommendations .