idss can be publicly owned or private . while public idss have a mission of providing care to underserved populations , some private idss share this mission and others serve these populations to varying degrees . the health care safety net act of 2008 directed gao to report on integrated health system models that integrate primary , specialty , and acute care and serve uninsured and medically underserved populations . we provided an oral briefing to congressional staff on october 8 , 2009 . to improve availability of patient clinical information , some idss make their ehrs available to outside providers that also treat their patients . of those idss , some reported that while the outside providers can read the ehrs , they cannot directly enter clinical information . for example , geisinger makes its ehr available to outside providers to give them immediate access to patient medical records , but the providers are not able to enter any additional clinical information directly into the ehr . geisinger can scan this information into the ehr if the outside provider communicates it , but scanning is not instantaneous , as direct entry would be . a geisinger official noted that while scanning is not optimal , absent a common ehr where information can be directly entered , the scanned records can be a helpful supplement to a patient's ehr in many cases . similarly , providers serving patients at the fqhcs that henry ford partners with can only view information in the ehr and cannot directly enter clinical information themselves . while the geisinger and henry ford ehrs are available as read - only for outside providers , the denver health ehr cannot be viewed by mental health care providers outside of its system . a denver health official told us that , with the exception of enrollees in denver health's managed care plans , denver health's patients with severe and persistent mental illness receive their outpatient mental health care from a community mental health center in denver that uses an ehr that is separate from denver health's ehr . in this follow - on report , we provide more in - depth information on 1. organizational features that idss use to support strategies to improve 2. approaches idss use to facilitate access to care for underserved 3. challenges idss encounter in providing care , including care provided to underserved populations . to address our research objectives , we selected a judgmental sample of 15 idss that clinically integrate primary , specialty , and acute care and serve uninsured and medically underserved populations . to select our sample , we began by reviewing published research and interviewing researchers with expertise in idss . as a result , we identified 44 public and private nonprofit systems from which to select our sample . employment of physicians was reported to facilitate physician accountability for quality of care because physicians who are employed by the ids are expected to meet certain performance indicators , and the idss collect data on and review physician performance .