postal service . however , during our focus group discussions , servicemembers cited problems with the mail , such as it being a low priority when a unit is moving from one location to another ; susceptibility of mail shipments to attack while in theater ; and the absence of daily mail service on some military ships . for example , some servicemembers said that mail sat on the ships for as long as a week , waiting for pick up . others stated that in the desert , mail trucks are sometimes destroyed during enemy attacks . ( 1 ) what is the voter's state of voting residence ? ( 2 ) is the voter already or still registered to vote ? ( 3 ) does the voter's state send out absentee ballots early or late ? answering these questions is also a challenge for voters , given that each state has its own deadlines for receipt of fpcas , and the deadline is different depending on whether or not the voter is already registered . for example , according to the voting assistance guide , montana requires a voter that has not previously registered to submit an fpca at least 30 days prior to the election . a voter who is already registered must ensure that the fpca is received by the county election administrator by noon on the day before the election . for idaho voters , the fpca must be postmarked by the 25th day before the election , if they are not currently registered . if they are registered , the county clerk must receive the fpca by 5:00 p.m. on the 6th day before the election . for virginia uniformed services voters , the fpca must arrive not later than 5 days before the election , whether already registered or not . however , overseas citizens that are not already registered must submit an fpca to the general registrar not later than 29 days before the election . those overseas voters who are already registered must ensure that the fpca arrives to the general registrar not later than 5 days before the election . using different deadlines for newly registered and previously registered voters to return their absentee ballots may have some administrative logic and basis . for example , verifying the eligibility of a newly registered voter may take longer than that of previously registered voters , and if there is some question about the registration information provided , the early deadlines provide some time to contact the voter and get it corrected . dod encourages potential voters to complete and mail the fpca early , in order to receive absentee ballots for all upcoming federal elections during the year . military and international mail and the u.s. postal service are the primary means for transmitting voting materials , according to servicemembers with whom we spoke . a challenge for military service members in completing the fpca is to know where they will be located when the ballots are mailed by the local election official . if the voter changes locations after submitting the fpca and does not notify the local election official , the ballot will be sent to the address on the fpca and not the voter's new location .