participation . maintaining high levels of auction participation can lead to greater competition which , in turn , can reduce the risk of collusion or other market manipulation . to maximize participation , economists and program officials recommended opening auctions up to as wide of a group of bidders as possible , including financial institutions and other entities that do not have compliance obligations under the program . according to them , limiting participation can increase the risk of market manipulation , making it difficult to ensure that all covered entities have access to allowances . how many rounds of bidding should take place ? in a typical single - round auction , participants place bids once during a predetermined time period . because participants do not see other bids before the outcome is announced , no opportunity is provided to change a bid based on information about others' bids . the single - round auction is thus sometimes referred to as a “sealed - bid” auction . figure 1 presents a simplified version of the rggi software interface that participants use for rggi's single - round auctions . as the figure shows , participants assemble a bid sheet , specifying the quantity of allowances requested at a stated bid price . each participant may submit several bids at several different prices , if desired . according to a rggi program official , when rggi's auction results are tabulated by the auction administrator's automated system , the results appear in a format similar to that shown in table 1 . participants whose bids appear above the line receive allowances , those bidding at the clearing price receive a partial allocation , and those below the line do not receive allowances . auctions with multiple rounds of bidding occur in several formats , among them the “english” auction , in which the auction administrator raises the price of allowances round by round , and the “dutch” auction , in which the auction administrator decreases the price round by round . both the english and dutch auctions are commonly referred to as “clock auctions,” since the price is raised or lowered incrementally , like a clock's hands . participants in multiple - round auctions have the opportunity to change the quantity of allowances for which they bid — or drop out of the bidding — as information is revealed round by round . importantly , economists note that to discourage participants from potentially distorting allowance prices by increasing the quantity for which they bid in later rounds — after competitors have revealed their strategies — a clock auction can include a rule against increasing the bid quantity after the first bidding round . in designing an auction , policymakers may consider selecting a format that is sensitive to the context of the allowance market . previous u.s. federal government experience with auctions has involved different formats in different markets . for example , in 1994 the federal communications commission chose to auction spectrum licenses in a simultaneous multiple - round format . by contrast , environmental protection agency auctions of allowances to emit sulfur dioxide involve a single round where successful bidders pay as they bid , and auctions of government securities held by the u.s. department of the treasury involve uniform pricing .