dhs concurred with our recommendation . further , executive branch requirements provide that prior to issuing a new regulation , agencies are to conduct a regulatory analysis , which is to include an assessment of costs , benefits , and risks . therefore , dhs is required to issue a new regulatory analysis for its proposed regulation on the use of twic with biometric card readers . conducting a regulatory analysis using the information from the internal control and effectiveness assessments could better inform the new regulatory analysis and could help dhs identify and assess the full costs and benefits of implementing the twic program . therefore , in our may 2011 report , we recommended that the secretary of homeland security use the information from the internal control and effectiveness assessments as the basis for evaluating the costs , benefits , security risks , and corrective actions needed to implement the twic program . this should be done in a manner that will meet stated mission needs and mitigate existing security risks as part of the regulatory analysis being completed for the new twic biometric card reader regulation . dhs concurred with our recommendation . finally , the coast guard's approach for monitoring and enforcing twic compliance nationwide could be improved by enhancing its collection and assessment of related maritime security information . for example , the coast guard tracks twic program compliance , but the processes involved in the collection , cataloguing , and querying of information cannot be relied on to produce the management information needed to assess trends in compliance with the twic program or associated vulnerabilities . the coast guard uses its marine information for safety and law enforcement ( misle ) database to monitor activities related to mtsa - regulated facility and vessel oversight , including observations of twic - related deficiencies . coast guard officials reported that they are making enhancements to the misle database and plan to distribute updated guidance on how to collect and input information . however , as of may 2011 , the coast guard had not yet set a date for implementing these changes . further , these enhancements do not address all weaknesses identified in our report that hamper the coast guard's efforts to conduct trend analysis of the deficiencies as part of its compliance reviews . therefore , in our may 2011 report , we recommended that the secretary of homeland security direct the commandant of the coast guard to design effective methods for collecting , cataloguing , and querying twic - related compliance issues to provide the coast guard with the enforcement information needed to assess trends in compliance with the twic program and identify associated vulnerabilities . dhs concurred with our recommendation . as the twic program continues on the path to full implementation — with potentially billions of dollars needed to install twic card readers in thousands of the nation's ports , facilities , and vessels at stake — it is important that congress , program officials , and maritime industry stakeholders fully understand the program's potential benefits and vulnerabilities , as well as the likely costs of addressing these potential vulnerabilities . the report we are releasing today aims to help inform stakeholder views on these issues .