dod concurred with our recommendations . dod's november 2011 plan and december 2011 guidance represent steps in the right direction to meet the legislative requirements and implement our recommendation , but neither document contains milestones or time frames for the development and implementation of a common software and hardware data system to collect and house contractor manpower data . further , while these efforts address the collection of contractor manpower data , they do not specify how dod will obtain the remaining required data , such as identifying the requiring activity and all functions and missions performed by the contractor , to meet the legislative inventory requirements . military departments' required reviews of their fiscal year 2009 inventories were incomplete . navy headquarters officials had no assurance that their commands conducted the required reviews , and we found no evidence at the navy commands we contacted that the required reviews were conducted . army and air force reviews of their contracted services identified 2,026 instances in which contractors were performing inherently governmental functions . we found that contractors continued to perform functions that were identified as inherently governmental in 8 of the 12 army and air force cases we reviewed . in some of these cases , the army took steps in response to the inventory review process , such as transferring responsibility to military personnel . in contrast , we also found that some contractors continued to perform inherently governmental functions . for example , army officials cited difficulty in hiring dod civilians caused by dod's decision to freeze civilian fte levels at the fiscal year 2010 level as hindering their ability to resolve instances identified during the inventory review process . moreover , contracting and program officials were unaware that the inventory review process had identified functions under their contracts as inherently governmental . the absence of guidance that provided for clear lines of responsibility and accountability for conducting , documenting , and addressing the results of the reviews contributed to these outcomes . the military departments' reviews of the fiscal year 2009 inventories were incomplete as the navy did not conduct a review . the army and air force identified 1,935 and 91 instances , respectively , in which contractors were performing inherently governmental functions . the variation in the number of cases reported by the army and the air force may reflect differences in their approaches to conducting the inventory reviews . table 1 summarizes the number of inherently governmental functions identified by the military departments through their fiscal year 2009 inventory reviews . the navy issued guidance in september 2010 requiring its commands to conduct a fiscal year 2009 inventory review . the commands were to provide a letter within 45 days that certified that they had completed a review , identified the number of contracts with inherently governmental functions , and provided a corrective action plan . we found no evidence at the commands we contacted that the required reviews were conducted . for example , fleet forces command officials were not aware of a required inventory review and did not recall guidance being issued .