noise . noise problems are directly related to the degree that there are people , wildlife , and noise - sensitive land uses ( national parks , wilderness , primitive areas , etc. ) near military lands and low - level flying routes . expanding population near military installations , increased use of public lands adjacent to military installations , training with more powerful weapons , and increased night operations could all contribute to a growing number of restrictions on dod's operations . air quality . the clean air act requires federal agencies to analyze the potential effect of proposed projects or activities on air quality . according to dod officials , installations located in areas that have not met , or have only recently met , the national ambient air quality standards must work with state or local regulatory agencies to offset any potential emission increases from training activities . this ensures that the air quality of the entire area is not significantly degraded . this may create conflicts with commercial development and could constitute a major impact as competition for air emissions budgets and offsets increases . frequency spectrum . dod officials told us that the commercial communications industry has been pressing for access to frequency spectrum currently allocated for federal use , but has stayed its request due to the current national security situation . however , reallocation of some of that spectrum is still under review . an interagency working group , with dod participation , has been formed and is examining options , including sharing the spectrum and moving dod operations to other bands . the outcome of these efforts could affect dod missions , including combat training and satellite operations . airspace congestion . commercial air traffic growth is expected to result in an increase in passengers from 600 million to an estimated one billion by 2010 , increasing the overall demand for airspace volume . unexploded ordnance and munitions constituents . the application of environmental laws to unexploded munitions and munitions constituents has , to date , affected only one training installation in the continental u.s. , the massachusetts military reservation , used primarily by national guard forces . it remains uncertain whether and to what extent the environmental protection agency will apply the laws to other installations . marine corps officials also said that camp pendleton units are increasingly using the marine corps air ground combat center , twentynine palms , california , to work around training restrictions , and the officials provided estimates of additional travel costs . but again , they could not provide us with aggregate data showing how much their costs had increased . we are also reviewing for your committee how the u.s . fish and wildlife service budgets and allocates its endangered and threatened species ( referred to as endangered from here on in the report ) program funds and what program activities were emphasized in fiscal year 2001 . in conducting our work , we toured four installations and visited two major commands . we discussed encroachment with officials at each location to hear and observe , first hand , how encroachment had affected their training range capabilities . commanders may also include narrative comments in their readiness assessments .