gao - 14-49 . dod's submissions did not include detailed quantitative analysis regarding the sources of its cost - savings estimates or provide a basis for or an explanation of key assumptions and rationales used in estimating such savings . dod concurred with our recommendation . in our november 2013 report , we noted that dod officials told us that they planned to conduct a baseline assessment of headquarters staffing levels and submit a revised estimate of its staffing needs in the department's third and final implementation plan submission . in the final submission which we reviewed for this statement , dod did not include a baseline assessment of the number of personnel currently working in the mhs headquarters across the services and the office of the secretary of defense , nor did it include an estimate of the staffing needs once the dha is fully operational in 2015 . instead , dod reported that the dha would include 1,941 military and civilian personnel as of its initial operating capability on october 1 , 2013 . additionally , the plan's estimate of staffing in october 2013 does not account for any contractor positions currently associated with the mhs's headquarters functions . as the dha moves toward full operating capability , accurate baseline staffing data is critical for senior leadership to make informed decisions about the resources required to manage the mhs . such data have become even more critical since the deputy secretary of defense announced a 20 percent reduction in dod management headquarters spending over 5 fiscal years beginning in fiscal year 2014 . dod has not provided discrete cost savings estimates for the various functions it has identified as part of its 10 shared service projects it is planning as part of the mhs reform . in addition , dod has not clarified its plan to monitor implementation costs . according to gao's business process reengineering assessment guide , an initial business case is a high - level document aimed at convincing customers and stakeholders that reengineering the selected business process is the appropriate means for achieving performance and cost - savings goals . the guide identifies that as the reengineering process matures , the business case should include detailed qualitative and quantitative analysis in support of selecting and implementing the new process that includes a statement regarding benefits , costs , and risks . in addition , business - case analyses should demonstrate the sensitivity of the outcome to changes in assumptions , with a focus on the dominant benefit and cost elements and the areas of greatest uncertainty . in the context of major business - process reengineering efforts , such as dod's shared services , implementation costs can be the dominant cost element and the area of greatest uncertainty . for example , dod identified the consolidation of medical logistics functions and a resulting aggregated cost - savings range of between $132 million and $353 million from fiscal years 2014 through 2019 . however , the plan did not explain which function within this area ( eg , equipment or housekeeping ) would be the larger source of those savings .