gao - 03-645t . washington , d.c.: april 11 , 2003 . we have modified our recommendation to clarify our intent . to determine changes in the f / a - 22 program since its inception , we analyzed cost information from selected acquisition reports and obtained information from the air force on its plans to modernize the f / a - 22 to include enhanced air - to - ground capabilities . we compared prior cost information with the air force's current estimates to complete development and production of the f / a - 22 . to determine the impact of development and testing on program outcomes , we examined the extent to which the development program is meeting planned flight test goals for 2003 and the air force's planned entry criterion for starting initial operational testing . in examining sufficiency of the business case dod provided to a congressional oversight committee , we obtained a copy of the business plan and analyzed the various dod assumptions and approaches used to make the assessment conclusions . in making these determinations , assessments , and identifications , we required access to current information about test results , performance estimates , schedule achievements and revisions , costs being incurred , aircraft modifications , and the program's plans for continued development and initial production . the air force and the contractors gave us access to sufficient information to make informed judgments on the matters covered in this report . in performing our work , we obtained information or interviewed officials from the office of the secretary of defense , washington d.c. ; the f / a - 22 system program office , wright - patterson air force base , ohio ; lockheed - martin , marietta , georgia ; the defense contract management agency , marietta , georgia ; the air force operational test and evaluation center , kirkland air force base , new mexico ; and the combined flight test center , edwards air force base , california . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the air force ; and the director , office of management and budget . copies will also be made available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or michael j . hazard at ( 937 ) 258-7917 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . marvin e. bonner , edward browning , roger corrado , steve hunter , gary middleton , and robert ackley made key contributions to this report . best practices: better acquisition outcomes are possible if dod can apply lessons from f / a - 22 program . tactical aircraft: status of the f / a - 22 program . gao - 03-603t . washington , d.c.: april 2 , 2003 . tactical aircraft: dod should reconsider decision to increase f / a - 22 production rates while development risks continue . gao - 03-431 . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2003 .