reorganization . in may 2010 , the secretary of the interior announced plans to reorganize mms — its bureau responsible for overseeing offshore oil and gas activities and collecting royalties — into three separate bureaus . the secretary of the interior stated that dividing mms's responsibilities among three separate bureaus will help ensure that each of the three newly established bureaus have a distinct and independent mission . while this reorganization may eventually lead to more effective operations , gao has reported that organizational transformations are not simple endeavors and require the concentrated efforts of both leaders and employees to realize intended synergies and accomplish new organizational goals . one key practice that gao has identified for effective organizational transformation is to balance continued delivery of services with transformational activities . however , we are concerned about interior's capacity to find the proper balance given its history of management problems and challenges in the human capital area . specifically , gao is concerned about interior's ability to undertake this reorganization while providing reasonable assurance that billions of dollars of revenues owed the public are being properly assessed and collected and that oversight of oil and gas exploration and production on federal lands and waters maintains an appropriate balance between efficiency and timeliness on one hand , and protection of the environment and operational safety on the other . in addition , interior's reorganization efforts do not address blm's ongoing challenges with its permitting and inspections programs and human capital challenges . interior must successfully address the challenges gao has identified , implement open recommendations , and meet its routine responsibilities to manage federal oil and gas resources in the public interest , while managing a major reorganization that has the potential to distract agency management from other important tasks and put additional strain on interior staff . while interior recently began implementing a number of gao recommendations , including those intended to improve the reliability of data necessary for determining royalties , the agency has yet to fully implement a number of recommendations , including those intended to ( 1 ) provide reasonable assurance that oil and gas produced from federal leases is accurately measured and that the public is getting an appropriate share of oil and gas revenues , and ( 2 ) address its long - standing human capital issues . while there has been some progress on nearly all of the issues that remain on the high - risk list , the nation cannot afford to allow problems to persist . addressing high - risk problems can save billions of dollars each year . several areas on gao's list illustrate both the challenges of addressing difficult and tenacious high - risk problems and the opportunities for savings that can accrue if progress is made to address high - risk problems . medicare and medicaid . gao designated medicare as a high - risk program because its complexity and susceptibility to improper payments , added to its size , have led to serious management challenges . in 2010 , medicare covered 47 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries and had estimated outlays of $509 billion .