insurance . in the case of buyer or seller liability , private insurance markets may help address the risk of offset reversals . for example , offset owners could insure themselves through private insurance or bonds issued by a bank , and if a reversal occurs , the insurer pays for the cost of replacing the offsets . according to one expert , one advantage of this option is that some private insurance companies may be better equipped to assess risk than the federal government . however , another expert noted that , because offsets are a relatively new commodity , there may not yet be sufficient information to identify risks . this expert therefore recommended against using this option until sufficient data exist to allow a private market system to work at reasonable cost . programwide buffer pools . a program could establish a “buffer” pool by setting aside a portion of all offsets from new projects to cover possible future reversals . for example , the vcs requires land - use projects to undergo a risk assessment for non - permanence , which encompasses risks of natural disaster , technical failure , and political instability , among others . on the basis of this assessment , a percentage of the credits is withheld and put into a buffer pool for use in the event of reversal . according to literature we reviewed , a programwide buffer pool can serve as a type of insurance against unanticipated reversals . however , determining the appropriate size of the buffer pool may be difficult , according to some experts . a smaller buffer pool may not provide enough protection against reversals , whereas a large buffer pool may require applicants to withhold a larger share of their offsets , potentially dampening participation in the program . there are three basic ways to verify offset projects . first , offset projects can be verified by independent third - party organizations . nearly all of the programs we examined use this approach . verifiers are generally chosen and paid by project developers , presenting a potential conflict of interest . because of this , the programs we reviewed have various requirements governing the relationship between the verifier and the developer . for example , all require conflict of interest reviews , and some have additional requirements governing the relationship between the verifier and the developer . in rggi , for example , verifiers may not have any other direct or indirect financial relationship with project developers . under some programs , such as the cdm , third - party verifiers may also be liable for failing to adequately verify that emissions reductions have occurred as a result of the offset project . according to many stakeholders , these and other requirements generally prevent potential conflicts of interest from affecting the quality of third - party verifications , although two experts suggested that such policies may not be sufficient . second , some experts suggested that a program could itself verify offset projects , either directly or by contracting with third parties . this could eliminate many potential conflicts of interest by eliminating the relationship between project developer and verifier , although this is not done in any of the programs we examined .