( see app . i for more information about our scope and methodology. ) the social security act of 1935 authorized the social security administration ( ssa ) to establish a record - keeping system to help manage the social security program , and this resulted in the creation of the ssn . through a process known as enumeration , unique numbers are created for every person as a work and retirement benefit record for the social security program . ssa generally issues ssns to most u.s. citizens , and ssns are also available to noncitizens lawfully admitted to the united states with permission to work . ssa estimates that approximately 277 million individuals currently have ssns . because of the number's uniqueness and broad applicability , the ssn has become the identifier of choice for government agencies and private businesses , and thus it is used for a myriad of non – social security purposes . with the enhancement of computer technologies in recent years , private sector businesses are increasingly computerizing their records ; as a result , these enhancements have spawned new business activities involving the aggregation of personal information . such entities aggregate large numbers of both public and private data , including ssns , from record - keeping systems throughout the country into centralized databases and use those databases , in many cases , for the purpose of providing consumer services . businesses and others rely on entities such as information resellers and cras to use ssns to build credit reports , extract or retrieve data from consumers' credit histories , verify individuals' identities , market their products , and prevent financial fraud . information resellers , sometimes referred to as information brokers , are businesses that specialize in amassing consumer information that includes ssns for informational services . they may provide their services to a variety of customers , either to specific business clients or through the internet to anyone willing to pay a fee . dppa was enacted to prohibit the release and use of certain personal information from state motor vehicle records . we were unable to determine the extent to which some of their responses were representative of associations with similar memberships . large information resellers limit their services to businesses that establish accounts with them . law firms , private businesses , law enforcement agencies , and others are usually their clients . for example , lawyers , debt collectors , and private investigators may request information on an individual's bank accounts and real estate holdings for use in civil proceedings such as divorce ; automobile insurers may want information on whether insurance applicants have been involved in accidents or have been issued traffic citations ; employers may want background checks on new hires ; pension plan administrators may want information to locate pension beneficiaries ; and individuals may ask for information to help locate birth parents . officials from one entity told us they conduct an internet “secret shopper” program whereby they police certain internet web sites that sell ssns to make sure that their customers are not supplying these sites .