omb did not implement this recommendation . in february 2008 , we reported that much work had been accomplished to lay the foundations for implementation of hspd - 12 but that agencies had made limited progress in implementing and using piv cards . in addition , we noted that a key factor contributing to agencies' limited progress was that omb had at the time emphasized the issuance of cards and not the full use of the cards' capabilities . we noted in the report when this was the case . we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for providing an overview of agency progress . we also interviewed program officials from these agencies , as well as general services administration ( gsa ) and omb officials who have been involved in supporting implementation of hspd - 12 across the government . we performed our work at commerce , dhs , gsa , hud , interior , labor , nasa , nrc , omb , and usda in the washington , d.c. , area from october 2010 to september 2011 . we conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . additional details of our objectives , scope , and methodology are provided in appendix i . traditionally , the federal government has used a variety of access control techniques to protect its facilities and computer systems . visual authentication of id cards has typically been used as a way to control access to physical facilities . however , smart card technology can help authenticate the identity of an individual in a substantially more rigorous way than is possible with traditional id cards . such cards can provide higher levels of assurance for controlling access to facilities as well as computer systems and networks . access control is the process of determining the permissible activities of users and authorizing or prohibiting activities by each user . controlling a user's access to facilities and computer systems includes setting rights and permissions that grant access only to authorized users . there are two types of access control: physical access and logical access . physical access control focuses on restricting the entry and exit of users into or out of a physical area , such as a building or a room in a building . physical access control techniques include devices such as locks that require a key to open doors or id cards that establish an individual's authorization to enter a building . logical access control is used to determine what electronic information and systems users and other systems may access and what may be done to the information that is accessed . methods for controlling logical access include requiring a user to enter a password to access information stored on a computer . access control techniques vary in the extent to which they can provide assurance that only authorized individuals and systems have been granted access .