comments were due in august 2016 . stb staff said that measures such as standardizing evidence submissions would expedite sac cases for purposes of fairness to litigants and improving overall agency efficiency . they also said that since the current proceeding on expediting sac rate cases had just begun , it was too soon to know how changes might affect the sac process . we provided a draft of this product to stb for comment prior to finalizing this report . we received technical comments from stb which we incorporated as appropriate . we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees . in addition , we will make copies available to others upon request , and the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . some of these shippers stated that they or their members have no views on these issues . however , we interviewed representatives from nine shipper associations and companies and reviewed documents they provided . as a result , we are reporting aggregate statements from the nine shippers across commodities . further , these interviews are not generalizable to all shippers or all railroads . to identify the views of selected stakeholders on the implications of shipping freight under a tariff versus a contract , we analyzed relevant economic literature on freight rail contracts and shipping rates to provide additional context for evaluating what we heard in interviews with railroads and shippers . we also interviewed representatives of the four class i railroads and shippers selected as described above about their views . finally , we reviewed documents filed in the 2011 stb proceeding that discuss terms and rates of contracts as compared to tariffs . we also interviewed stb staff about the agency's rate - relief process for addressing unreasonable rates in tariffs and their efforts to improve it . in addition , to provide contextual information on shippers using contracts and tariffs , we analyzed stb's carload waybill sample , from 2005 to 2014 ( the most recent year available ) to determine the total volume and trends of freight moved under contract and tariff , by commodity , in ton - miles , which is a measurement of weight and distance . stb requires the railroads to compile a random sample of their waybills ( a document that accompanies a shipment and describes its characteristics ) . the carload waybill sample consists of over 600,000 records and contains information on various characteristics of the freight being shipped , including tonnage , revenue , and miles , among others . the sample is statistically weighted to be nationally representative of all rail freight movements that occur in the united states each year . we used agency technical documentation for the carload waybill sample and guidance from stb to estimate the sampling error associated with our estimates derived from the waybill data . we express our confidence in the precision of estimates derived from the carload waybill sample as 95 percent confidence intervals . the national rail network accounts for the movement of about 40 percent of u.s. freight . u.s. railroads reported over $73 billion in revenue in 2013 .