improve communication . officials from four of the six agencies we spoke with described a need to open lines of communication between omb , agencies , and congress . for example , consumer product safety commission officials told us it would be helpful if omb were to provide agencies with updates regarding the status of their proposals . going forward , omb staff told us they plan to foster an environment of open communication by involving agencies in communities of practice and integrating the process more closely with agencies' budget submission routines . gprama provides omb and agencies a mechanism to identify unnecessary reporting requirements and propose they be eliminated or modified , as appropriate . in 2014 , congress acted on agencies' report modification proposals by eliminating more than 30 reporting requirements that agencies' determined were unnecessary . despite the progress made in updating and modernizing reporting requirements across the government , more can be done to fully implement gprama requirements and improve the report modification process . specifically , we found that omb did not implement the report modification process on an annual basis as required by gprama . omb staff told us that they initiate the report modification process every other year because reporting requirements are relatively static and do not change as frequently as other information used in the annual budget process . however , by implementing the report modification process on an annual basis , omb would be positioned to include new report modification proposals in the president's annual budgets , and agencies would be given additional opportunities to propose eliminating or modifying reports that may be unnecessary . omb has also published agencies' proposals on performance.gov , rather than in the president's annual budget as gprama requires . omb staff told us that they decided to publish the proposals online rather than in the budget because the website hosts many related gprama resources , and omb staff determined it would be the most appropriate location for this content . however , publishing or referencing the proposals in the president's annual budget may increase their visibility and usefulness to congressional decision makers and other stakeholders involved in developing and using reports for congress . omb provided email instructions to agencies in 2015 instructing them to update their list of proposed reports for modification or elimination , which agencies generally followed . however , omb's instruction did not fully reflect gprama and circular a - 11 requirements . for example , the email instructed agencies to update their previous list of report modification proposals , rather than analyzing their complete list of reports , as required by gprama . although omb staff told us the email instructions were not a substitute for circular a - 11 guidance , agencies may have missed opportunities to identify new proposals by following omb's email instructions . we recommend that the director of omb take the following two actions: 1 . submit or reference agencies' report modification proposals in the president's annual budget as required by gprama . ensure email instructions and other correspondence to agencies align with gprama and a - 11 requirements regarding the identification and elimination of unnecessary plans and reports .