( see fig . federal costs would be highest under the tax credit bond alternative , under which the federal government pays the equivalent of 30 years of interest on the bonds . grants are the next most costly alternative for the federal government . federal costs for the tax - exempt bond and tifia loan alternatives are significantly lower than for tax credit bonds and grants . in some past and current proposals for using tax credit bonds to finance transportation investments , the issuers of the bonds would be allowed to place the proceeds from the sales of some bonds into a “sinking fund” and , thereby , earn investment income that could be used to redeem bond principal . this added feature would reduce ( or eliminate ) the costs of the bond financing to the issuers , but this would come at a significant additional cost to the federal government . for example , in our example where states issue $8 billion of tax credit bonds to finance highway projects , if the states were allowed to issue an additional $ 2.4 billion of bonds to start a sinking fund , they would be able to earn enough investment income to pay back all of the bonds without raising any of their own money . however , this added benefit for the states could increase costs to the federal government by about 30 percent — an additional $2.7 billion ( in present value ) , raising the total federal cost to $11.7 billion . in some cases private investors participate in highway projects , either by purchasing “nonrecourse” state bonds that will be repaid out of project revenues ( such as tolls ) or by making equity investments in exchange for a share of future toll revenues . by making these investments the investors are taking the risk that project revenues will be sufficient to pay back their principal , plus an adequate return on their investment . in the case where the nonrecourse bond is a tax - exempt bond , the state must pay an interest rate that provides an adequate after - tax rate of return , including compensation for the risk assumed by the investors . by exempting this interest payment from income tax , the federal government is effectively sharing the cost of compensating investors for risk . nevertheless , the state still bears some of the risk - related cost and , therefore has an incentive to either select investment projects that have lower risks , or select riskier projects only if the expected benefits from those projects are large enough to warrant taking on the additional risk . in the case of a tax credit bond where project revenues would be the only source of financing to redeem the bonds and the federal government would be committed to paying whatever rate of credit investors would demand to purchase bonds at par value , the federal government would bear all of the cost of compensating the investors for risk . states would no longer have a financial incentive to balance higher project risks with higher expected project benefits .