comments on this anprm varied . for example , the american trucking associations stated that it believed nhtsa underestimated the costs associated with installing crashworthy rear guards for single - unit trucks . in contrast , iihs , in its comments on the anprm , questioned nhtsa's assumptions and stated that the agency was undervaluing the benefits and overestimating the costs . specifically , iihs noted that nhtsa overestimated the additional weight of the rear guards , thereby overestimating the cost by about 35 to 40 percent . iihs also stated that due to concerns with the underlying data , nhtsa underestimated the number of crashes into the rear of single - unit trucks with passenger compartment intrusion . nhtsa officials told us that they disagreed with iihs's assessment and stated that the data nhtsa used in the anprm were valid and appropriate . the anprm also considered requiring single - unit trucks to install red and white retroreflective tape meant to increase the visibility of these trucks , especially in the dark . nhtsa found that this requirement would be cost - effective at preventing or mitigating crashes involving single - unit trucks . however , nhtsa has since withdrawn the anprm , stating that — based on the comments received as well as analysis of the petitions — the changes being considered were not justified . the likely underreporting of underride crashes and fatalities due to variability in the data collection process limits nhtsa's ability to accurately determine the frequency of such crashes . an underride field in mmucc and additional information from nhtsa on how to identify and record these crashes would provide greater assurance that state and local police officers are accurately reporting data on underride crashes . such reporting would , in turn , enable nhtsa to better identify and support measures — such as rulemakings and research efforts — to help address this issue . while the stronger rear guards being voluntarily implemented by the largest trailer manufacturers show promise in mitigating the potentially devastating effects of rear underride crashes , rear guards will only be effective if they are properly maintained and replaced when damaged . the lack of specific requirements that rear guards be inspected annually for defects or damage potentially affects the safety of the traveling public and fmcsa's ability to achieve its safety mission . finally , designs of crashworthy side underride guards show promise at mitigating underride crashes , but manufacturers may be reluctant to move forward with further development of these types of guards without information from nhtsa on the effectiveness , cost , and implementation standards for these devices . with additional research on resolving the challenges associated with side underride guards , these guards may be closer to being a feasible solution than automated driver assistance technologies designed to prevent or mitigate side impacts that could lead to an underride crash . we are making the following four recommendations to dot: the administrator of the national highway traffic safety administration should recommend to the expert panel of the model minimum uniform crash criteria to update the criteria to provide a standardized definition of underride crashes and to include underride as a recommended data field .