proc . 2007- 40 ; irs publication 3112 , irs e - file application and participation ; and irs publication 1345 , handbook for authorized irs e - file providers of individual income tax returns . we reviewed the irm section related to monitoring the irs e - file program , monitoring checklists , and related job aides to determine the extent to which monitoring practices address security requirements in irs publication 1345 . we assessed irs's monitoring efforts against our fraud risk framework's principles to combat fraud in a strategic , risk - based manner . we also interviewed the irs officials responsible for overseeing the monitoring program . to assess irs's requirements for third - party provider reporting of security incidents and how irs uses that information , we reviewed irs guidance about security incident reporting requirements . we analyzed irs data on the number and type of security incidents tracked in the rics incident management database from 2017 and 2018 , the only data available following its creation in december 2016 . we interviewed rics officials about the quality of data in this database and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable to describe a minimum count of security incidents . specifically , we asked about the responsibilities of officials collecting and using the data , the procedures in place to capture all reported data , and controls for ensuring the accuracy of the data and resolving any errors , among other things . we reviewed irs guidance and program user agreements to determine security incident reporting requirements for third - party providers . we reviewed irs process documentation and interviewed irs officials from epss , rics , ci , return preparer office , cybersecurity , and stakeholder liaison to determine the collection , routing , and storage processes for security incident information . we assessed irs's processes and documentation practices against leading practices outlined in nist special publication 800-53 and internal control standards . we interviewed irs officials to identify ways that irs uses this security incident information . we conducted semistructured interviews with the 10 industry groups and related organizations listed above to determine their knowledge about existing security incident reporting requirements . we conducted this performance audit from november 2017 to may 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the internal revenue service ( irs ) mandated that online providers adhere to six privacy , security , and business standards as part of the authorized e - file provider program , as listed in table 6 . these standards have not been updated since they were developed in 2010 . in addition to the contact named above , jeff arkin ( assistant director ) , robyn trotter ( analyst - in - charge ) , christina bixby , alyssia borsella , mark canter , jehan chase , larry crosland , ann czapiewski , james andrew howard , michele fejfar , and robert gebhart made key contributions to this report .