some of these states limited these requests . for example , some states restricted the number of hours a physician could practice in a nonprimary care specialty . further , two states reported that they accepted applications from , and requested waivers for , primary care physicians only . regarding practice settings , more than three - fourths of the waivers requested by states in fiscal year 2005 were for physicians to practice in hospitals and private practices , including group practices . in addition , 16 percent were for physicians to practice in federally qualified health centers — facilities that provide primary care services in underserved areas — or rural health clinics — facilities that provide outpatient primary care services in rural areas ( see fig . more than 80 percent of the states requesting waivers in fiscal year 2005 reported requiring facilities where the physicians worked — regardless of practice setting — to accept some patients who were uninsured or covered by medicaid . although states do not have explicit responsibility for monitoring physicians' compliance with the terms and conditions of their waivers , in fiscal year 2005 , more than 85 percent of the states reported conducting at least one monitoring activity . the most common activity — reported by 40 states — was to require periodic reports by the physician or the employer ( see table 1 ) . some states required these reports to specify the number of hours the physician worked or the types of patients — for example , whether they were uninsured — whom the physician treated . not all states that requested waivers conducted monitoring activities . six states , which collectively accounted for about 13 percent of all state waiver requests in fiscal year 2005 , reported that they conducted no monitoring activities in that year . the majority of the states reported that the annual limit of 30 waivers per state was at least adequate to meet their needs for j - 1 visa waiver physicians . when asked about their needs for additional waiver physicians , however , 11 states reported needing more . furthermore , of the 44 states that did not request their 30-waiver limit in each of fiscal years 2003 through 2005 , more than half were willing , at least under certain circumstances , to have their unused waiver allotments redistributed to other states in a given year . such redistribution would require legislation . fourteen states reported that they would not be willing to have their states' unused waiver allotments redistributed . about 80 percent of the states reported that the annual limit of 30 waivers per state was adequate or more than adequate to meet their needs for j - 1 visa waiver physicians . however , 13 percent of the states reported that the 30-waiver limit was less than adequate ( see fig . ( see fig . every state except puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands reported requesting waivers for physicians in fiscal year 2005 , for a total of 956 waiver requests . in 1995 — the first full year that states had authority to request waivers — nearly half of the states made a total of 89 waiver requests .