i would be pleased to respond to any questions . if you or your staff have any questions about this statement , please contact michele mackin at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include katherine trimble , assistant director ; laurier r. fish ; john crawford ; and peter w. anderson . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we discussed these observations with coast guard budget officials and incorporated their views as appropriate . for other past work cited in this statement , specifically our 2014 comprehensive portfolio review of the overall coast guard acquisition portfolio , we assessed the coast guard's acquisition program baselines , the cost of the coast guard's portfolio , and steps taken to address affordability concerns , including the need for long - term planning . for example , the cutter is experiencing problems operating in warm climates , including cooling system failures , excessive condensation forming puddles on the deck of the ship , and limited redundancy in its air conditioning system affecting use of information technology systems . according to operational reports from a 2013 deployment , the commanding officer of an nsc had to impose speed restrictions on the vessel because of engine overheating when the seawater temperature was greater than 68 degrees . in addition , cold climate issues on the cutter include a lack of heaters to keep oil and other fluids warm during operations in cold climates , such as the arctic . further , coast guard operators state that operating near ice must be done with extreme caution since the ice can move quickly and the nsc could sustain significant damage if it comes in contact with the ice . in june 2014 we reported that while senior coast guard officials acknowledged that there were issues to address , they stated that the coast guard has not yet determined what , if any , fixes are necessary and that it depends on where the cutter ultimately operates . in april 2015 , the coast guard accepted delivery of the 13th of 58 frcs and now has 32 of the cutters on contract . as we reported in april 2015 , the coast guard is introducing additional competition into this purchase by recompeting the construction contract for the remaining 26 vessels ; this contract is planned to be awarded in fiscal year 2016 . according to the coast guard , the frc has already been used to rescue over 400 undocumented immigrants , seize nearly $20 million in contraband , and apprehend several suspected drug smugglers .