( see fig . 2 for a status of military family housing units for each service. ) the dod inspector general and gao have previously reported that the services use inaccurate housing market analyses when determining the need for military housing . according to a july 1996 inspector general report , the requirements for seven military family housing projects at a marine corps base were unsupported because the number of needed family housing units was unknown . the report recommended that all of these construction projects be placed on hold and that the marine corps perform a new housing analysis to justify the family housing construction projects . although management concurred with the recommendations , the marine corps proceeded with two of the projects . during the 5-year transition period , the housing officials said the department would avoid investments in surplus housing units , but admitted that this would be difficult to do without firm requirements . demand for military housing — evidenced by long waiting lists and high occupancy rates — could be seen as evidence that military housing is needed and that dod does not have surplus family housing . however , as we have previously reported , waiting lists can be misleading because many personnel on them do not accept military housing when offered because they have already found suitable civilian housing while waiting . one service's policy is to use occupancy rates to adjust the requirements - setting process: for example , if an installation's family housing is filled to capacity , all of it must be needed . this rationale is not consistent with dod's stated policy of relying on the private sector first . the services — through their referral offices — guide military families to find housing and thus control occupancy . essentially , the referral offices offer military families a choice between free military housing or an allowance for private sector housing that generally does not cover the total cost of rent and utilities . however , the planned increases in the housing allowance will gradually remove the financial disincentive associated with civilian housing and should make living off base more attractive . we reported in 1996 that according to army and air force information , many military installations in the united states had not maximized the use of private sector housing to meet military family housing needs . for example , the army's housing requirements model estimated that 844 of fort eustis' 1,330 family housing units were surplus . if the model had matched housing requirements against adequate private sector housing before matching them against government housing , the model would have estimated that 1,170 of these units were surplus . the department still does not maximize the use of private sector housing . as part of its effort to develop a standard requirements - setting process , dod asked a contractor to perform housing market analyses at selected installations . we reviewed the results of three of these market analyses . two of the three installations were projected to have substantial surpluses once the private sector's ability to provide housing was factored in . based on these analyses , over half ( 1,599 of 3,039 ) of the military houses at these installations would be surplus .